Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-25-1996 as Ord. No. 1012-96]
§ 1-1. Adoption.
" The General Laws of the City of Coatesville, Pennsylvania," as prepared
and published for the said City of Coatesville, is hereby adopted as a
consolidation, codification and revision of the ordinances of the City of
Coatesville. Chapters 1 through 225 thereof contain the text of the body
of all general administrative and regulatory ordinances of the City of
Coatesville organized as follows:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1 General Provisions
Chapter 2 Charter
Chapter 5 Administration of Government
Chapter 9 Assessments
Chapter 12 Authorities
Chapter 24 Health Administration
Chapter 27 Historical Commission
Chapter 35 Personnel Policies
Chapter 38 Pensions
Chapter 41 Planning Commission
Chapter 44 Police Department
Chapter 47 Procurement and Purchasing
Chapter 51 Salaries and Compensation
Chapter 55 Social Security
Chapter 66 Alcoholic Beverages
Chapter 69 Alarm Devices
Chapter 72 Animals
Chapter 76 Bicycles
Chapter 79 Brush, Grass and Weeds
Chapter 82 Building Construction
Chapter 84 Building Contractors, Licensing of
Chapter 86 Buildings, Numbering of
Chapter 92 Curfew
Chapter 97 Drugs
Chapter 102 Electrical Standards
Chapter 108 Fees
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
Chapter 112 Firearms, Weapons and Fireworks
Chapter 115 Fire Protection and Prevention
Chapter 119 Flag, Colors and Seal
Chapter 124 Graffiti
Chapter 132 Hazardous Material Spills
Chapter 142 Improvement Policies
Chapter 145 Insurance
Chapter 151 Lifesafety Standards
Chapter 156 Mechanical Standards
Chapter 161 Noise
Chapter 164 Nuisances
Chapter 169 Parks
Chapter 172 Peddling and Soliciting
Chapter 176 Plumbing
Chapter 180 Property Maintenance
Chapter 185 Sewers
Chapter 187 Shopping Carts
Chapter 190 Solid Waste
Chapter 193 Streets and Sidewalks
Chapter 197 Subdivision and Land Development
Chapter 198 Subdivision and Land Development
(continued)
Chapter 203 Taxation
Chapter 207 Television, Cable
Chapter 210 Towing Services
Chapter 214 Use Registration
Chapter 218 Vehicles and Traffic
Chapter 224 Zoning
Chapter 225 Zoning (continued)
Appendix
Disposition
List
Index
§ 1-2. Citation and effective date.
The codification referred to in Section 1 of this ordinance shall be known
and cited officially as "The General Laws of the City of Coatesville,
Pennsylvania," and all future ordinances shall make reference thereto. This
§ 1-1 COATESVILLE CODE § 1-2
1:4
ordinance shall become effective immediately upon publication of notice of
final enactment as required by law.
§ 1-3. Saving clause.
The provisions of The General Laws of the City of Coatesville, Pennsylvania,
so far as they are the same as those ordinances and regulations in force
immediately prior to the adoption of said Code, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and regulations and not as a new
enactment. The provisions of The General Laws of the City of Coatesville,
Pennsylvania,shall not affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any of the prior ordinances or regulations. Ordinances
and regulations in force immediately prior to the adoption of said Code,
and which have not been repealed, but which, further, through inadvertent
omission or other reason do not appear in the Code, as adopted, shall
nevertheless remain in full force and effect and adoption of the Code shall
not constitute a repeal thereof.
§ 1-4. Consolidations, revisions, amendments and repeals.
§ 1-5. Procedural changes.
The following minor procedural changes have been made to existing City of
Coatesville ordinances:
A. As a necessary part of codification, several consolidations, revisions,
amendments and repeals have been made to the codification of The
General Laws of the City of Coatesville, Pennsylvania. These changes
are included in the attachment to this ordinance labeled
"Consolidations, Revisions, Amendments and Repeals."1
B. As a further and necessary part of codification, additional
consolidations, revisions, amendments and repeals are herewith made
to the codification of the General Laws of the City of Coatesville,
Pennsylvania. These additional changes are included in the attachment
to this ordinance labeled "Additional Consolidations, Revisions,
Amendments and Repeals."2 [Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
A. Grammatical and spelling errors have been corrected where necessary.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-4A, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96." The attachment, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file
in the city offices.
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-4B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96." The attachment which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file
in the city offices.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:5
§ 1-6. Amending the Code of Ordinances.
The procedure for amending the Code of Ordinances shall include the
citation of the chapter, part, section and subsection to be amended, revised,
repealed or added.
§ 1-7. Responsibility for Code of Ordinances.
It shall be the responsibility of the City of Coatesville City Manager to
maintain an up-to-date certified copy of the Code of Ordinances. This copy
shall be the official copy of The General Laws of the City of Coatesville,
Pennsylvania, and shall be available for public inspection.
§ 1-8. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to change, alter or tamper with the Code
of Ordinances in any manner which will intentionally misrepresent the laws
of the City of Coatesville. Whosoever shall violate this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than six hundred
dollars ($600.) and costs or, in default of payment thereof, may be subject
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days.
§ 1-9. Severability of parts of codification.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council of the City of
Coatesville that the chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this codification are severable. If any section,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is declared
unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid by the judgment or decree
of a court of competent jurisdiction, that invalidity shall not affect any of
the remaining chapters, parts, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or
phrases of this codification.
§ 1-10. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 1-11. When effective.
This ordinance shall be effective thirty (30) days after publication following
final adoption.
B. Minor changes have been made to correct obsolete terms and usages.
C. The penalty provisions have been revised where necessary to comply
with the Pennsylvania Third Class City Code, Vehicle Code,
Municipalities Planning Code and the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 1-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 1-11
1:6
Chapter 2
CHARTER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Assessments — See Ch. 9.
Authorities — See Ch. 12.
Health Administration — See Ch. 24.
Historical Commission — See Ch. 27.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 35.
Pensions — See Ch. 38.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 41.
Police Department — See Ch. 44.
Procurement and purchasing — See Ch. 47.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 51.
Social security — See Ch. 55.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:7

ARTICLE I
Name, Powers and Form of Government
§ 2-101. Name and boundaries.
The City of Coatesville shall continue as a municipal corporation under the
name of the "City of Coatesville," with the actual boundaries at the time this
Charter takes effect and as may be lawfully changed thereafter. As used in
this Charter, the words "Coatesville" and "city" shall mean the Home Rule
Municipality City of Coatesville, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
§ 2-102. General powers.
Coatesville shall have and may exercise any powers and perform any
function not denied by the Constitution of Pennsylvania, the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the Charter.
§ 2-103. Interpretation.
The powers of Coatesville shall be liberally construed in favor of the city
in order to provide Coatesville with the greatest possible power of selfgovernment
under the Pennsylvania Constitution. Any specific mention of
the powers in the Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the
general powers of the city as stated in this Article.
§ 2-104. Powers vested in City Council.
The legislative powers of Coatesville shall be exclusively vested in the City
Council as set forth and limited in this Charter.
§ 2-105. Continuation.
All powers and functions contained in any and all ordinances and
resolutions of the City of Coatesville prior to the effective date of this
Charter which are in force on the effective date of this Charter and not
inconsistent herewith shall continue in force until amended, repealed,
superseded or expired by their own terms.
§ 2-106. Form of government.
The form of government as set forth in this Charter shall be a Council-
Manager form.
§ 2-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-106
1:9

ARTICLE II
City Council
§ 2-201. Name and compensation.
The legislative body of Coatesville shall be known as the "City Council,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Council." The Council shall be composed
of seven members, two members elected at large and five members, each
being elected from a ward in which he or she resides.
§ 2-202. Qualifications for office.
A member of the City Council, hereinafter referred to as a "Council
member," shall be a citizen of the United States, a qualified voter of the city
and a resident for at least one year preceding nomination; must retain such
status during the term of office for which elected; should not have been
convicted of any crime classified as a misdemeanor of the second class or
higher; and must not otherwise be disqualified from office by the terms of
this Charter or by laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 2-203. Prohibitions.
No Council member shall, during the term of office of the Council member,
hold any other elected public office nor any other compensated position in
the City of Coatesville government.
§ 2-204. Forfeiture of office.
The office of Council member shall be forfeited if the Council member is
declared by any court in this commonwealth to:
§ 2-205. Term of office.
Commencing in the general municipal election of 1987 the Council
members to represent the First, Third and Fifth wards shall be elected
to serve four-year terms. In the general municipal elections of 1989, the
Council members representing the Second and Fourth wards and the two
at-large Council members shall be elected to serve four-year terms. Council
members shall serve four-year staggered terms beginning at 3:00 p.m. of
the first Monday of January following the year in which they are elected
except for Council members appointed or elected to fill a vacancy, who shall
A. Lack any qualifications for the office prescribed by this Charter or laws
of the General Assembly.
B. Have willfully violated any express prohibition of this Charter.
C. Be convicted of any crime classified as a misdemeanor of the second
class or higher, under the laws of the commonwealth or of the United
States, or be convicted of any comparable crime under the laws of any
other state in the United States.
§ 2-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-205
1:11
serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of the member succeeded or
as otherwise provided in § 2-208 of this Charter.
§ 2-206. Elections.
The procedure for the nomination and election of Council members shall be
as provided in the election laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 2-207. Vacancies.
The office of Council members shall become vacant upon death, resignation,
removal of place of residence from the city, legal certification of mental and/
or physical disability or forfeiture of office as directed by this Charter or as
otherwise provided by law.
§ 2-208. Filling of vacancies.
Whenever a vacancy exists in the office of Council member, the vacancy
shall be filled under the following procedures:
§ 2-209. Compensation.
A. The Council, by a majority vote of its total membership, shall, within 30
days from the time the office becomes vacant, make an interim
appointment of a qualified person per § 2-202 to fill the vacancy.
B. Should sufficient vacancies exist so that the Council lacks the necessary
majority to make the appointment, the Court of Common Pleas, upon
petition of any Council member or any five registered voters of the city,
shall make the interim appointments to fill the vacancies.
C. Should the Council, for any reason, fail to fill a vacancy within 30 days
after the vacancy occurs, the Court of Common Pleas, upon petition of
any Council member or any five registered voters of the city, shall make
the interim appointments to fill the vacancies which may exist.
D. The person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve until the first
regularly scheduled meeting of the Council at which a successor
assumes the office following a municipal, general or primary election at
which the successor shall have been elected.
E. At the next regularly scheduled election, municipal, general or primary,
which occurs at least 60 days after a vacancy occurs, a qualified person
shall be elected by special election to fill the vacancy. A person elected
to fill a vacancy shall assume office at the start of the first regularly
scheduled meeting of the Council following certification of election and
shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.
A. The compensation of the Council members to first serve under this
Charter shall be and is hereby set at $600 per annum. The Council may
establish, by ordinance, the annual compensation of succeeding Council
members, but no ordinance changing compensation shall become
§ 2-205 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-209
1:12
§ 2-210. Organization of Council.
The Council shall organize at a meeting at 3:00 p.m. on the first Monday of
January of each year. If the first Monday is a legal holiday, the organizational
meeting will be held on the first day following which is not a legal holiday.
At the organizational meeting, the Council shall elect from its membership
a President and a Vice President, who shall hold such offices at the pleasure
of the Council. The President or, in the President's absence, the Vice
President shall preside at Council meetings, shall serve as the city's
representative at ceremonial occasions and shall carry out such duties as
prescribed elsewhere in this Charter or in the Administrative Code or other
ordinance.
§ 2-211. Council meetings and procedures.
effective until the expiration of the term of all Council members in office
at the time the ordinance is enacted. It is the intent of this Charter
that all Council members in office at the same time shall be paid at
the same rate and that no Council shall change the compensation of
Council members then in office during the term for which any of them
were elected. Ordinances affecting the compensation of future Council
members shall be enacted prior to the first day of February in municipal
election years in order to apply to Council members elected in such
years and to other Council members serving at the same time. They
shall be authorized to receive reimbursement of reasonable expenses
actually incurred in the performance of their duties in accordance with
regulations which shall be set forth in the Administrative Code or other
ordinance.
B. Effective on the date of the reorganization meeting for 2002, all Council
Members in office for Calendar Year 2002, and thereafter until further
amended, shall be compensated in accordance with maximum
permitted under the Optional Third Class City Charter Law, § 607(c),
currently established at an annual rate of $1,800 for Councilpersons
and $2,100 for Council President. [Added 1-25-1999 by Ord. No.
1095-99; amended 9-23-2002 by Ord. No. 1201-2002]
A. The Council shall meet regularly at least once in every month at such
time and place within the city as the Council may prescribe by
ordinance or resolution.
B. At its first meeting each year, the Council shall designate and advertise
the calendar of regular monthly meetings for the remainder of the year.
Special meetings may be held on the call of the presiding officer by
providing notice to each Council member at least 24 hours in advance
of such special meeting, which meeting notice shall be prominently
posted at the City Hall. In the event of an emergency which makes it
necessary to convene a meeting with less than 24 hours' advance
notice, this requirement may be waived. The Council shall, in the
Administrative Code or other ordinance, adopt rules and regulations for
§ 2-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-211
1:13
§ 2-212. Agenda.
The Council shall cause to be prepared for each regular meeting an agenda
of matters to be considered by the Council at such meeting, including
pertinent background information, which agenda shall be distributed to
the public in attendance at the start of the meeting. The agenda shall be
available prior to the start of the meeting. No official action may be taken on
any matters not included in the announced agenda for the meeting except
by an affirmative vote of a majority of the total number of the members of
the Council. The agenda shall include opportunity and reasonable time for
public participation in the meeting.
§ 2-213. Quorum and majority action.
A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum. The
Council shall conduct no business except in the presence of a quorum. The
action of a majority of Council members present and entitled to vote shall
be binding upon and constitute the action of the Council, provided that a
quorum is present, except as otherwise stated in the Charter. The phrase
"majority of the total membership of the Council" or similar language is
used elsewhere in this Charter to indicate actions which must be taken by a
majority of the total membership rather than by a majority of a quorum.
§ 2-214. Official action.
All actions of the Council shall be taken by the adoption of an ordinance,
resolution or motion. All legislation shall be enacted by the adoption of
an ordinance. All ordinances and resolutions shall be in written form and
enacted only after reasonable notice, except as otherwise provided in this
Charter. All final action in adopting ordinances and resolutions shall be by
roll call vote, and the vote of each Council member shall be entered in the
record of the meeting.
§ 2-215. Records and reports.
The City Manager shall maintain a written record of the minutes and
proceedings of all meetings of the Council. All ordinances and resolutions
shall be entered, as approved, in the record books of the city. All records
and reports shall be open and available for public inspection at City Hall
throughout normal office hours. No citizen of Coatesville shall be denied
reasonable access to all public records of the city. Copies of the minutes,
ordinances, resolutions and other official reports and actions of the Council
its meeting which shall be designed to assure full and equal
participation in the deliberations of the Council by all of its members
and shall not be inconsistent with specific provisions of this Charter.
All regular meetings of the Council and any special meetings at which
official actions are taken shall be open to the public, and public notice
of such meetings shall be given.
§ 2-211 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-215
1:14
shall be available to the public without charge or at a reasonable fee
established by the Council.
§ 2-216. Legislative powers and duties.
All legislative powers and duties of the city shall be exclusively vested in
and exercised by the Council. The Council shall provide for the exercise of
and performance of all legislative powers and duties imposed on the city by
law or this Charter and, specifically, but not limited to, the following:
A. To adopt the budget, make appropriations for expenditures for all
lawful purposes and levy taxes authorized by law and limitations
thereon imposed by this Charter or general law.
B. To adopt, amend and repeal an Administrative Code to create, alter,
combine and/or abolish municipal departments, bureaus, boards and
commissions and prescribe procedures not inconsistent with this
Charter or general law.
C. To make or cause to be made such studies or postaudits and
investigations as it deems to be in the best interest of the city.
D. To adopt ordinances and resolutions not inconsistent with or restrained
by the Constitution and laws of the commonwealth or by this Charter
and prescribe fines and penalties consistent with general law for the
violation of city ordinances.
E. To make provision for any matter of the city government not otherwise
provided for in this Charter or general law and inconsistent therewith.
§ 2-215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-216
1:15

ARTICLE III
Ordinances
§ 2-301. Action requiring ordinances.
In addition to any other power or duty required by law or by this Charter to
be exercised by ordinance, those powers and duties of the Council shall be
exercised by ordinance which:
§ 2-302. Form of ordinance.
No ordinance shall contain more than one subject, which shall be clearly
expressed in its title. Any ordinance which repeals or amends an existing
ordinance shall clearly indicate matter to be repealed, omitted or added.
§ 2-303. Standard codes of technical regulations.
The Council may adopt any standard code of technical regulation by
adopting an ordinance incorporating said code by reference. The details
of such standard codes need not be advertised, but copies of such codes
shall be available at City Hall for public inspection and for purchase at a
reasonable fee fixed by the Council.
§ 2-304. Procedure for enactment.
A. Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for
violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed.
B. Establish, levy and collect taxes and decrease or increase the rates of
existing taxes.
C. Establish, alter or abolish rates or charges for any utility or other
service supplied by the city.
D. Authorize the borrowing of money, except for revenue anticipation
loans or emergency loans as provided elsewhere in this Charter.
E. Grant, renew or extend a franchise.
F. Exercise the power of eminent domain.
G. Purchase, convey, lease or authorize the purchase, conveyance or lease
of real property.
H. Establish, alter or amend any Zoning Ordinance, subdivision procedure,
land development, land use or building regulation.
I. Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted.
A. An ordinance may be introduced by any Council member at any regular
or special public meeting. Except where specifically provided otherwise
in this Charter, an ordinance shall be processed in the following
manner:
§ 2-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-304
1:17
§ 2-305. Effective date.
Except as specifically provided otherwise in this Charter, an ordinance
shall take effect 30 days after publication following final adoption or such
later date as the Council may prescribe. Traffic ordinances may take effect
immediately upon final adoption.
§ 2-306. Publication.
Within 10 days after final approval of an ordinance, the City Manager shall
cause to be advertised in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the city the full text or summation thereof of any ordinance.
§ 2-307. Recording.
The City Manager shall cause the full text of any ordinance, with proof of
publication, to be recorded in a permanent record book within one month
after its final adoption. The permanent record book shall be open and
available for public inspection throughout normal office hours.
(1) Introduction. The proposed ordinance shall be given to the City
Manager and placed on the agenda of the Council for introduction
and first consideration at the next meeting of the Council. A
proposed ordinance not included in the agenda shall be given first
consideration only with the consent of a majority of the total
membership of the Council.
(2) Advance advertisement. If approved at first consideration by the
Council, the City Manager shall cause a concise summary of the
proposed ordinance to be advertised at least once in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the city, appearing at least
seven days before the meeting at which the ordinance will receive
further consideration by the Council. The summary shall contain
sufficient information to identify the geographical area and/or
nature of the ordinance as it would affect the residents or property
owners in the city and shall specify the date at which the Council
proposes to act further on the ordinance.
(3) Adoption by the Council. Provided that the preceding procedures
have been followed and persons interested have been given an
opportunity to express their views at a meeting, the Council may
adopt the ordinance as proposed or may postpone action until a
later meeting, the date of which shall be stated at the advertised
meeting. The Council may amend a proposed ordinance before final
adoption, but if an amendment makes any significant substantive
change from the ordinance originally advertised, no final action
may be taken until the amended ordinance has again been
advertised in accordance with § 2-304.
B. Action on final adoption of an ordinance shall be taken only by an
affirmative vote of a majority of the total membership of the Council.
§ 2-304 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-308
1:18
§ 2-308. Codification.
The Council shall provide for the maintenance of a general codification of all
city ordinances having the force and effect of law. The general codification
shall be published in loose-leaf form and include this Charter and the
Administrative Code required by this Charter. The compilation shall be
known and cited as the "General Laws of the City of Coatesville," and copies
shall be furnished to city officials, placed in Coatesville libraries and City
Hall for free public reference, and shall be made available for purchase by
the public at a reasonable price set by the Council. All amendments to the
General Laws and all new ordinances shall be integrated in said compilation
and distributed as aforesaid.
§ 2-309. Emergency ordinances.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article, the Council may, in the
event of substantial public emergency affecting the life, health, property
and peace of the citizens of Coatesville, adopt one or more emergency
ordinances. Emergency ordinances shall be introduced in the form required
for ordinances and shall be so designated and shall clearly state the nature
of the emergency in specific terms. No prior publication of an emergency
ordinance shall be required, and an emergency ordinance may be
introduced, adopted and take effect immediately at any public meeting in
which it is introduced. An emergency ordinance shall require the approval
of a majority of the total members of the council, except for emergencies
at which it is impossible for the total membership to be present, in which
case an emergency ordinance may be adopted by a two-thirds vote of the
members present, provided that there is a quorum. Emergency ordinances
shall not levy taxes or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided
elsewhere in this Charter. An emergency ordinance shall become effective
immediately upon adoption and shall automatically stand repealed as of
the 31st day following the date of its adoption but may be reenacted
as provided herein if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance
may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same
manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances.
An emergency ordinance shall be advertised as soon as possible after the
date at which it is enacted, as shall any ordinance repealing an emergency
ordinance.
§ 2-308 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-309
1:19

ARTICLE IV
City Manager
§ 2-401. Appointment and compensation.
The Council, by a majority vote of its total membership, shall appoint a
City Manager, hereinafter referred to as "Manager," who shall be a fulltime
employee to serve under terms established by the Council. The Council
shall, in the Administrative Code or other ordinance, set the compensation
of the Manager.
§ 2-402. Qualifications of Manager.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive and
administrative training or experience with respect to the duties of the office
set forth in the Charter. The Manager need not be a resident of the city
nor of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of appointment but
as soon as possible thereafter and within one year shall become and during
tenure shall remain a resident of the city unless otherwise specifically
authorized by the Council.
§ 2-403. Removal from office.
The Manager may be removed from office at any time by a majority vote of
the total membership of the Council. Action to remove the Manager may be
taken only by a resolution adopted at a public meeting of the Council, which
shall set forth the effective date of such removal. The Council shall notify
the Manager in writing of its intention to remove the Manager at least five
days prior to the date on which such action shall be considered. When a
vacancy occurs in the office of Manager by reason of death, resignation or
removal, the Council shall appoint a qualified successor in accordance with
§ 2-401.
§ 2-404. Powers and duties.
The City Manager shall be the chief executive officer and Secretary of
the city and shall be responsible to the Council for executing all policies
established by the Council and for the proper administration of all affairs
of the city placed under the charge of the Manager. In addition, the powers
and duties of the Manager shall include but not be limited to the following:
A. Supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments and all city employees except as otherwise provided by
this Charter.
B. Appoint, with the approval of the majority of the total membership of
the Council, all officers and department heads except the Solicitor and
members of boards and commissions.
C. Approve the hiring and, when necessary, suspend or discharge any or
all employees under the supervision of the Manager except for
§ 2-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-404
1:21
§ 2-405. Relationship to Council.
No Council member shall publicly or privately seek individually to interfere
with the official acts of city officers and employees. However, nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Council from establishing committees of its
members to review operations and legislative needs of the city departments
or from assigning individual members to liaison relationships with boards,
commissions and authorities. It is the intent of this Charter that the Council
act as a body in relation to all administrative matters.
§ 2-406. Temporary absence or disability.
The Manager shall designate, in writing, a qualified member of the
administrative staff of the city to serve as Acting Manager during the
temporary absence or disability of the Manager. The Council, by a majority
vote of its total membership, may at any time revoke such designation and
appoint a qualified employee of the city to serve as Acting Manager during
such temporary absence or disability of the Manager.
department heads or other officers which are appointed by or with the
approval of the Council. Department heads and other officers appointed
by the Manager may be suspended or discharged with the approval of
a majority of the total members of the Council.
D. Prepare and submit to the Council the proposed budgets of the city as
required by this Charter and be responsible for administration of the
budgets and all other ordinances and resolutions adopted by the
Council.
E. Keep the Council fully informed as to the conduct of city affairs; submit
monthly reports on the city finances and administrative matters and
such other report as the Council may prescribe; prepare an annual
report to the Council, which shall be available to the public; and make
such recommendations to the Council as the Manager deems necessary
on matters affecting the health, safety, welfare and administration of
the city.
F. Exercise any additional powers and duties conferred upon the Manager
by this Charter, general laws or by ordinance or resolution of the
Council.
§ 2-404 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-406
1:22
ARTICLE V
City Administration
§ 2-501. General provisions.
The Council shall, by ordinance, create, alter or abolish and prescribe the
functions of the city departments, agencies and offices not inconsistent with
general law or this Charter.
§ 2-502. Administrative Code.
The Council shall, by ordinance, adopt an Administrative Code, which shall
provide for the administrative organization of the city government, the
assignment of duties and responsibilities to officers and employees and the
procedural requirements set forth in the general laws or in the Charter.
All changes in organization and procedures set forth in the Administrative
Code shall be effected by amendment to the Administrative Code in the
same manner as other ordinances are enacted and amended.
§ 2-503. Department heads and other officers.
The heads of all departments and all other officers not otherwise provided
for in this Charter shall be appointed by the Manager with the approval of
a majority of the total membership of the Council. Department heads shall
appoint the subordinate employees with the approval of the Manager under
the personnel rules and regulations established by the Administrative Code
or other ordinances in accordance with the Charter.
§ 2-504. Boards and commissions.
The Council may create, modify or abolish boards, commissions, authorities
or other agencies and special committees of the city government if not
inconsistent with general laws or this Charter. The Council shall appoint by
a majority vote of its total membership, subject to § 2-203, the members of
such agencies if not otherwise provided by this Charter or general law.
§ 2-505. Personnel administration.
The Council shall adopt in the Administrative Code or other ordinance
a comprehensive system of personnel administration based on merit
principles, which shall include, but not be limited to, provisions for:
A. The classification of all city positions, based on duties, authority or
responsibility of each position, with provision for reclassification of any
position whenever circumstances require.
B. A pay plan for all city positions.
C. Methods for determining merit and fitness of candidates for
appointment or promotion.
§ 2-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-505
1:23
§ 2-506. Temporary absence and/or disability.
Each department head may designate, with the approval of the Manager,
an employee of the department to serve as acting head of the department
during the temporary absence or disability of the department head. In
the absence of such a designation, the Manager shall designate an acting
department head.
§ 2-507. Compensation.
The compensation of all officers and department heads, if not otherwise
provided for in this Charter, shall be set by the Council in the Administrative
Code or other ordinance and may be changed from time to time by
amendment of the same at the discretion of the Council. Compensation of
employees other than officers and department heads shall be in accordance
with the pay plan established under § 2-505 of this Charter.
§ 2-508. City Solicitor.
The Council, by a majority vote of its total membership, shall appoint a City
Solicitor, who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council, with compensation
to be set by the Council. The Solicitor shall be a member of the Bar of
the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania and experienced in municipal law. The
Solicitor shall serve as the legal counsel for the city government, including
the Council, the Manager and other officers and departments and agencies
of the city government except as may otherwise be required by law. The
Solicitor shall represent the city in all legal proceedings and shall perform
such duties as prescribed by law, by this Charter or action of the Council. It
is the intent of this Charter that only one person shall be the legal advisor
of the city except as may be otherwise required by law. The Council may
authorize temporary assistants for special purposes from time to time.
§ 2-509. City Engineer.
The Manager, with the approval of the majority of the total membership of
the Council, shall appoint and fix the compensation of the City Engineer,
who shall be a professional civil engineer registered in Pennsylvania or an
engineering firm similarly registered. The City Engineer or engineering firm
shall perform the duties required by the Council through the Administrative
D. Policies and procedures regulating reductions in force, disciplinary
actions and suspension and removal of employees.
E. Hours of work and provisions for sick and vacation leave and holidays,
overtime, compensatory time off and/or compensation for same.
F. Grievance procedures, including those for hearing of grievances.
G. Other practices and procedures necessary to the administration of the
city personnel system.
§ 2-505 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-509
1:24
Code or other action or as may be required of the City Engineer by general
law.
§ 2-510. Director of Finance.
The Manager, with the approval of the majority vote of the total membership
of the Council, shall appoint a Director of Finance, who shall be qualified,
by education and/or experience in accounting or financial management, to
supervise, in cooperation with the Manager, the financial administration
of the city and perform such duties as prescribed for such officer in this
Charter and as the Council may require in the Administrative Code or other
ordinance.
§ 2-509 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-510
1:25

ARTICLE VI
Financial Administration
§ 2-601. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the city shall be the calendar year. However, after 1980, if
not prohibited by law, the Council may, by ordinance, adopt a different fiscal
year, specifying an orderly procedure for financial and budgetary controls
in making such transition.
§ 2-602. Classification of accounts.
The Council shall adopt in the Administrative Code a uniform classification
of accounts and codes to be used and followed in all financial plans, budgets
and financial reports.
§ 2-603. Financial projections.
The Manager shall, at the time of submitting the proposed annual budgets
to the Council, submit as an annex to the budget tentative financial
projections for a period of at least four additional years, such projections
beyond the year budgeted to be advisory only for the purpose of long-range
planning. The projections shall deal with operations, capital programs and
a schedule for the amortization of all existing debt through a time period
covering the latest final maturity of any issue and the amortization schedule
for any proposed new debt to finance capital improvements, showing both
separately and inclusively for each item of debt the payments for principal
and interest.
§ 2-604. Operating budget.
At least 45 days before the end of the fiscal year, the Manager shall
prepare and submit to the Council a proposed operating budget for the
ensuing fiscal year. The following procedures shall govern the presentation,
adoption and execution of the operating budget:
A. Budget form. The operating budget shall be submitted in the form
required by the Council, which shall include, in addition to the major
classifications of appropriations by which expenditures are to be
allocated and controlled, a detailed analysis of the various items of
revenue and expense. All appropriations shall be made in lump sum
amounts and according to the following classes of expenditure for each
office, department, major operating unit, board or commission:
(1) Personal services.
(2) Contractual services.
(3) Materials, supplies and equipment.
(4) Debt service.
§ 2-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-604
1:27
(5) Capital expenditures.
(6) Such additional classes as the Board may prescribe.
B. Budget content. The operating budget shall show, individually for each
fund and in total, netting out interfund transfers, the anticipated
revenues and expenditures of the city government. In addition to
anticipated revenues and expenditures, the budget document shall
include for each item the estimated revenues and expenditures of the
fiscal year currently ending and the actual receipts and expenditures of
the last completed year. The budget shall also show the estimated
balance of each fund at the close of the fiscal year currently ending and
any surplus or deficit to be included in financing the proposed budget.
C. Budget message. The Manager shall include with the proposed budget
a statement explaining the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of
work to be done, outlining the proposed fiscal policies for the ensuing
fiscal year, any changes in policies and programs and reasons for
changes which affect the level of revenues and expenditures.
D. Balanced budget. The budget proposed by the Manager and the budget
subsequently adopted by the Council shall be balanced so that
appropriations shall not exceed the estimated revenues and available
surplus. In making revenue estimates, the Manager shall show the
amounts anticipated from existing taxes and service charges at existing
rates and, separately, the increase or decrease to result from any
proposed changes in rates.
E. Council review. On or before 30 days prior to the end of the fiscal year,
the Council shall complete its review of the proposed budget, make
such adjustments as it deems necessary and adopt a preliminary
budget.
F. Advertising and public hearing. No later than 10 days following the
adoption of the preliminary budget by the Council, the Manager shall
cause to be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation
in the city a summary of the budget and notice of the date, time and
place at which the Council shall hold a public meeting on the proposed
budget, which shall take place at any regular or special meeting of the
Council at least seven days after advertisement and at least 20 days
prior to the end of the fiscal year. The preliminary budget shall be
available for public inspection at City Hall, and copies, including the
financial projections required by § 2-603, shall be available for the
public to have without charge or at a reasonable fee to be set by the
Council.
G. Budget adoption. Following advertising and public hearing, at which
interested citizens shall have the right to express their views on the
budget, the Council, by a majority vote of its total membership, shall
adopt a final budget with such amendments as the Council considers
advisable. The budget shall be adopted by ordinance, which shall be
effective as of the start of the fiscal year. The provisions of Article III of
§ 2-604 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-604
1:28
this Charter shall not apply to ordinances adopting and amending
proposed budgets. Should the Council, for any reason, fail to adopt
a budget before the start of the fiscal year, the appropriations of the
preceding year, prorated on a month-to-month basis, shall be
considered to be adopted temporarily pending adoption of a final
budget.
H. Levy of taxes. At the time of adopting the annual budget, the Council
shall simultaneously, by ordinance, levy sufficient taxes from authorized
sources which, with other revenues and available receipts and balance,
will provide for a balanced budget.
I. Revised budget. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article,
when the fiscal year of the city is the calendar year, in any year
following a municipal election year, the Council may, within 45 days
after the start of the fiscal year, revise the budget and tax levies
adopted by the previous Council. The procedures for adopting a revised
budget shall be in accordance with Subsection F, G and H above, with
the time period adjusted to 45 days after the start of the fiscal year.
Ordinances adopting a revised budget shall be effective as of the start
of the fiscal year and shall rescind and replace the budget ordinance of
the previous Council. It is the intent of this Charter that a new Council,
in the year following a municipal election, shall have the power to
revise budget and tax levies adopted by the previous Council.
J. Budget execution. The Director of Finance shall cause the
appropriations voted by the Council to be entered in the accounting
records of the city and shall approve no contract or expenditure which
would exceed the unencumbered balance of appropriations in any
account. The Council may at any time amend the operating budget, but
changes in appropriations, either increases or decreases, shall be made
only pursuant to an ordinance authorizing such changes. Supplemental
appropriations may be made by the Council in the event that revenues
are found and certified by the Manager to exceed estimates in the
budget. If revenues are found and certified by the Manager to fall short
of estimates in the budget, the Manager shall recommend reductions in
appropriations to offset the deficiency in revenues, and the Council
shall make necessary adjustments in appropriations to maintain a
balanced budget. All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal
year.
K. Emergency appropriations. In the event of a genuine emergency
unanticipated at the time the operating budget was adopted, the
Council may make appropriations to meet the emergency. To the extent
that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet the
emergency, the Council may authorize the issuance of a temporary
note, which shall constitute unfunded debt to be funded and repair in
accordance with the Local Government Unit Debt Act (Act 182 of
§ 2-604 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-604
1:29
§ 2-605. Capital program and capital budget.
§ 2-606. Receipts.
The Council shall, in the Administrative Code, provide procedures for the
receipt, deposit and accounting for all moneys due and received by the city.
Such procedures shall be assigned to the Director of Finance or employees
under the supervision of the Director of Finance. The Manager, with the
approval of the Council, shall designate the depositories for city receipts.
§ 2-607. Contracts.
The Manager may make contracts for all lawful purposes, subject to general
law or this Charter. No contract shall be made or obligation incurred unless
the Director of Finance shall certify that there is a sufficient unencumbered
balance in an appropriation and that sufficient moneys therefrom are or will
be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due
and payable. Any officer authorizing any contract to be made in violation of
this provision shall be subject to removal from office and liable to the city or
its surety for any loss incurred as a result of such action. The Council shall
1972).3 Operating expenses shall neither be appropriated nor paid out
of loan funds except to meet genuine emergencies.
A. At or before the time of submitting the proposed operating budget to
the Council, the Manager shall also submit to the Council a proposed
capital program incorporating a listing of the capital projects and the
amounts required to be appropriated for each, covering a period of five
years or more, the first year of which shall be in detail and constitute
the capital budget for the next fiscal year. The capital program shall set
forth all proposed capital improvements, identified by project, the year
at which the capital program is to be financed, the effect of any
proposed capital expenditures on future operating expenses and the
effect of any proposed new indebtedness on the amortization schedule
of existing debt and debt limits.
B. The capital program and the capital budget shall be adopted by the
Council only after advertisement and public hearing as provided for the
adoption of the operating budget. The capital budget may be financed
from appropriations of current revenues or moneys borrowed as
authorized by law or by this Charter. The Director of Finance shall
control expenditures in the capital budget in the same manner as
provided for the operating budget. The Council may amend the capital
budget at any time but before doing so must amend the capital
program.
C. All appropriations for the capital budget shall lapse at the end of the
fiscal year, but sufficient amounts to complete projects in progress may
be appropriated in the budget for the year following.
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6780-1 et seq.
§ 2-604 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-607
1:30
provide in the Administrative Code the procedures for letting contracts,
which shall not be inconsistent with general law or this Charter and shall
include as a minimum the following provisions:
A. Written contracts. All contracts of the city involving sums in excess of
an amount specified by the Council by ordinance shall be in writing. The
Manager shall execute all contracts on behalf of the city. Authorization
for contracts for purchase, sale, lease or use of real estate or for the
construction of public capital improvements shall be given by
ordinance, and such contracts shall be signed by the President of the
Council as well as the Manager. Any officer authorized to execute a
written contract shall submit the form of the contract to the City
Solicitor for approval before executing the contract.
B. Competitive bidding. The Council shall, by ordinance, establish a
procedure for competitive bidding to include definitions of amounts,
publication and notice requirements, deposit and bond requirements,
conditions, terms, rules, regulations, waiver and exceptions, as it shall
from time to time deem advisable and in accordance with general law
and this Charter. Both single-contract and separate-contract
procedures may be used at the discretion of the Council when not
constrained by uniform state law. Competitive bidding shall not be
required for:
(1) Labor or services rendered by any city officer or employee;
(2) Contracts for labor, material, supplies or services aggregating less
than the amount specified by the Council, by ordinance, for the
item in the year supplied;
(3) Contracts relating to the acquisition or use of real property;
(4) Contracts for professional or unique services or supplies;
(5) Contracts for insurance and surety company bonds, except that the
use of competitive bidding for such items shall be encouraged
where practicable;
(6) Contracts for emergency repairs; and
(7) Contracts with other governmental entities, authorities, agencies
or political subdivisions.
C. Lowest bidder. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, no
contract for materials, supplies, labor, franchise or other valuable
consideration, to be furnished to or by the city, shall be authorized on
behalf of the city except with the lowest responsible bidder after
competitive bidding.
D. Piecemeal evasion prohibited. No person shall evade the provisions of
this section of the Charter by purchasing or contracting for materials,
supplies or services piecemeal, which transaction would, in the exercise
of reasonable discretion and prudence, be considered as one
§ 2-607 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-607
1:31
§ 2-608. Disbursements.
The Director of Finance shall authorize disbursement of city moneys only
after determining that all goods and services contracted for have actually
been received or performed. The Council shall provide in the Administrative
Code for the procedures for the signing and countersigning of all checks,
drafts or other orders of payment by two persons, one of whom shall be the
Director of Finance or other employee under the direction of the Director of
Finance as shall be prescribed in the Administrative Code.
§ 2-609. Records and reports.
The Director of Finance shall:
§ 2-610. Independent audit.
The Council shall provide for an annual independent audit of city receipts,
expenditures, accounts and reports by a Pennsylvania certified public
accountant or a certified public accounting firm, experienced in municipal
finance, having no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs
of the city or any of its elected or appointed personnel. The Council may
provide for more frequent audits at its discretion. The results of the annual
audit and a financial statement of the fiscal affairs of the city, with the
results of the independent auditor's survey of internal control and any
recommendations thereon, shall be included in the annual report of the
Manager. A summary of the annual audit of the independent auditor,
including any recommendations made with respect to the survey of internal
control, shall be published at least once in one or more newspapers of
transaction amounting to more than the amount specified by the
Council.
E. Limit on terms. The terms of contracts for the purchase of materials and
supplies shall not exceed two years.
A. Provide for the recording of all financial transactions and related
activities of the city in terms of dollars and other appropriate units of
measurement, in accordance with the form and procedures prescribed
by Council in the Administrative Code and as shall be directed by the
Manager, in order that the required reports and analysis may be
produced for the proper management and control of such activities.
B. Prepare periodic financial reports, at least monthly, and at such other
times as the Manager may direct, and at the end of each fiscal year
prepare an annual financial report. The monthly reports to the Manager
shall be submitted to the Council at its regular meetings and made
available to the public.
C. Provide for the preservation of official financial records, which shall be
kept at City Hall and shall be available for public inspection during
regular office hours.
§ 2-607 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-610
1:32
general circulation in the city within 60 days after the close of the fiscal
year. The annual audit shall be conducted in accordance with generally
accepted auditing standards. The financial report shall be prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and shall include
a balance sheet for each fund and on a consolidated-fund basis, reflecting
all current assets, current liabilities and fund balances.
§ 2-611. Bonding of officers and employees.
The Council shall provide in the Administrative Code for the bonding of
all officers and employees who are responsible for the handling and/or
authorization of receipts, disbursements, materials and supplies. All such
bonding shall be approved by the City Solicitor for form and sufficiency. The
premium for such bonding shall be paid for by the city.
§ 2-612. Limitations on taxes. [Amended 1-26-1981 by Ord. No.
619-81]
The Home Rule Charter shall not give any power or authority to the City
Council contrary to or in limitation or enlargement of powers granted by
Acts of the General Assembly to third-class cities generally with respect to
the fixing of the rates of property taxes.
§ 2-613. Limitations on debt.
The borrowing of money by the city shall continue to be limited in amounts
and governed by procedures in the Local Government Unit Debt Act (Act
185 of 1972), as amended,4 or other laws of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
4. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 6780-1 et seq.
§ 2-610 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-613
1:33

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions and Conflict of Interest
§ 2-701. Prohibited activities.
The following activities shall be prohibited in the operation of the city
government:
§ 2-702. Conflict of interest.
The following shall constitute a conflict of interest and be prohibited and
punishable as provided herein:
A. Discrimination. No person shall be favored or discriminated against in
employment by the city in any capacity, appointment to any board,
commission or agency or removal therefrom because of race, sex, age,
political or religious opinions or affiliations.
B. Improper gifts. No person who seeks appointment to any city office,
board, commission or agency shall, directly or indirectly, give or pay
any money, service or other consideration to any person in connection
with such appointment.
C. Gifts to the city. No gift of real estate or any interest in real estate to the
city may be accepted without specific approval of Council.
A. Improper advantage. No elected or appointed official of city
government shall:
(1) Engage in any activity or take any action by virtue of the elected or
appointed position from which activity or action the official or any
other person or entity in whose welfare the official is interested
shall benefit or realize a gain or advantage. Such benefit, gain or
advantage shall not be construed to be prohibited if the action in
question is in behalf of a group of citizens of the city and such
benefit and relationship is generally known and acknowledged.
(2) Solicit or accept, directly or indirectly, any gift, favor, service,
commission or other compensation or consideration that might
reasonably tend to influence that official in the discharge of the
duties of the office.
(3) Seek to influence, directly or indirectly, the awarding of any
contract where such official or other person or entity in whose
welfare the official is interested would benefit directly, financially
or otherwise, from said contract. Such action is not intended to
apply to actions of a Council member on behalf of a group or class
of citizens of the city who would benefit from the contract and such
benefit is generally known and acknowledged.
B. Disqualification from action. Any elected or appointed official of the city
or employee thereof, having any direct or indirect financial interest
§ 2-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-702
1:35
§ 2-703. Violation.
Any person who violates §§ 2-701 and 2-702 of this Article shall not be
qualified to hold appointed office or employment in the city government
and, upon conviction, may be subject to such fine as may be provided by
the Council or by general law. Willful violation of the provisions of §§ 2-701
and 2-702 of this Article shall constitute malfeasance in office, which,
except as otherwise may be provided by general law, shall be a summary
offense punishable by the maximum fine and/or imprisonment established
by general law. Conviction shall result in forfeiture of office or termination
of employment, and any person so convicted shall thereafter be ineligible to
hold office or be employed in the city government.
with any person or other entity proposing to contract with the city
for the purchase or sale of land, materials, supplies or services of
any kind, whether that interest be as an employee, a party, a partner
or a stockholder, shall fully disclose such interest and, except where
stockholdings in a public corporation shall be minimal, shall not
participate in the discussion of said contract or vote on the same.
Violation of this section shall render the contract voidable.
§ 2-702 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-703
1:36
ARTICLE VIII
Citizen Participation
§ 2-801. General provisions.
The Council shall protect and promote the right of the citizens of the City
of Coatesville to participate in a positive and constructive manner in the
government of the city. Any qualified citizen of the city may participate in
the government of the city by:
§ 2-802. Participation encouraged.
The Council shall make every effort to appoint qualified citizens of the
city to boards, commissions, authorities or other agencies of the city
government in order that the greatest possible use be made of the talents
and interests of city citizens in promoting public interest and welfare of the
City of Coatesville.
§ 2-803. Initiative and referendum.
The qualified voters of the city shall have the power, subject to the
procedures and limitations set forth herein, to propose the initiation of
ordinances or the repeal of ordinances previously enacted by the Council.
The Council shall give consideration to any matters brought to its attention
by the process of initiative; and, if the Council should fail to act affirmatively
in response to such petition, the action desired by the petitioners shall be
submitted to referendum of the qualified voters of the city under procedures
set forth below:
A. Seeking elective office of the city as prescribed by this Charter and
voting for candidates for elective office.
B. Serving on boards, commissions, authorities or other agencies of the
city government when requested by the appropriate officials.
C. Attending and being heard at public meetings of the Council and other
boards, commissions, authorities and other agencies of the city
government.
D. Addressing suggestions to the Council and others to provide guidance
for their actions.
E. Exercising the right of initiative, referendum and recall of elected
officials as provided in this Charter or as otherwise may be provided by
law.
A. Limitations on initiative and referendum. The following limitations shall
apply to the use of initiative and referendum:
(1) Initiative and referendum may not be used to:
(a) Alter ordinances enacting or amending the annual operating
and capital budgets of the city; however, such action may be
§ 2-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-803
1:37
taken with respect to any ordinance authorizing the
establishment of specific programs or projects.
(b) Alter the salaries of city officials and employees unless
specifically authorized by law or by the Council.
(c) Alter or rescind any ordinance providing for the levy and
collection of taxes, special assessments, service charges, fees,
rates or other charges for city services.
(2) No ordinance enacted by referendum which would affect the
revenues or expenditures of the city in the fiscal year in which the
ordinance is adopted shall take effect prior to the start of the
succeeding fiscal year.
(3) No ordinance proposed by initiative shall contain more than one
subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title.
B. Petition. All petition papers for the purpose of initiating or repealing an
ordinance shall:
(1) Bear, in ink, the signatures, addresses and date of signing of the
fewer of 500 or 20% of the number of registered voters of
Coatesville who voted in the most recent presidential election.
(2) Contain the names and addresses of five voters designated as the
Committee of Petitioners and the person designated as
Chairperson of the Committee.
(3) In the case of initiating an ordinance, contain the full text of the
ordinance proposed, and in the case of repealing an ordinance,
identify the title, date and a summation of the significant substance
of the ordinance proposed for repeal.
(4) Contain on each page an affidavit executed by the circulator of the
petition that all signatures thereon are genuine and were affixed in
the presence of the circulator on the date indicated only after the
signer had an opportunity to read the full text prior to signing.
(5) Be circulated and signed within a period of 30 days between the
date of the first signature and the date at which the petition papers
are submitted to the Manager as provided herein.
(6) Be submitted to the City Manager, who shall immediately take
further action as set forth below.
C. Effect of petition. If the petition calls for the repeal of an ordinance
which was not in effect at the time the petition was filed with the City
Manager, the effective date of the ordinance will be suspended until
final decision has been made under this Article. If the ordinance was in
effect at the time the petition was filed with the City Manager, the
ordinance will remain in effect until repealed by the Council or by
referendum.
§ 2-803 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-803
1:38
D. Action by the City Manager. Upon receipt of a petition to initiate or
repeal an ordinance, the City Manager shall take the following action:
(1) Within 20 days of receiving the petition, the Manager shall examine
the petition for compliance with the provisions of this section with
respect to the form and sufficiency of signatures and shall advise
the Chairperson of the Committee of Petitioners by registered mail
of the results of such examination.
(2) If the purpose of the petition is to initiate an ordinance, the
Manager shall immediately refer a copy of the ordinance to the City
Solicitor, who shall within five days certify to the Manager whether
or not the proposed ordinance is lawful under general law or this
Charter and whether or not the proposed ordinance is in proper
form or can be so written without changing the substance. If the
Solicitor considers the proposed ordinance to be lawful but
defective in form, the Solicitor shall provide a draft in proper form.
The Manager shall report the findings of the Solicitor in the report
to the Chairperson of the Committee of Petitioners.
(3) Within 10 days of receiving the response of the Manager, the
Chairperson of the Committee of Petitioners may notify the
Manager of the Committee's acceptance of the report and the
revised draft, if any, of the ordinance and shall remedy any minor
procedural deficiencies, if any, cited by the Manager in the report
to the Committee. Otherwise, the matter will be considered to be
abandoned, and any further action must be initiated by a new
petition.
(4) If the Manager finds the petition to be sufficient, the Manager shall,
within 20 days after receipt, place the proposed ordinance on the
agenda for consideration at the next regularly scheduled meeting
of the Council, which shall occur at least seven days after
advertisement as provided herein.
(5) The Manager shall advertise the proposed ordinance in the same
manner as an ordinance initially approved by the Council under
§ 2-304 of this Charter.
E. Action by the Council. Unless the petition is rescinded by action of the
Committee of Petitioners as provided below, the Council must accept or
reject the proposed ordinance or repeal of an ordinance at the
advertised meeting. No amendments may be made which materially
change the substance or effect of the proposed ordinance.
F. Failure to act. If, within 60 days of submission of the petition to the
Manager, the Council shall fail to adopt the proposed ordinance or
repeal of an ordinance without any change in substance, the Manager
shall, within 10 days thereafter, file the petition with the election
officers of Chester County and request that the proposed ordinance or
repeal of an ordinance be submitted for referendum to the voters of
Coatesville at the next election, municipal, general or primary, which
§ 2-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-803
1:39
§ 2-804. Recall of elected officials.
Any person holding an elective office in the government of the City of
Coatesville, whether by election, succession or appointment to fill a
vacancy, shall be subject to removal from office at a recall election in the
shall occur not less than 60 days from the date of certification of
the petition to the county election officers. Prior to the election, the
proposed ordinance or description of the ordinance to be repealed
shall be published as required by the Pennsylvania Election Code. No
referendum shall be taken under this Article at a special election other
than at the time of a regularly scheduled election.
G. Results of election.
(1) If a proposed ordinance or repeal of an ordinance is rejected in the
referendum, no further action may be initiated by petition on the
same subject within two years from the date of the election at
which the proposal was defeated. However, the Council will retain
the option of adopting a similar ordinance or repealing previous
ordinances at its discretion.
(2) If a majority of the qualified electors voting on the question favor
the adoption of a proposed ordinance or repeal of an ordinance
previously enacted, the new ordinance shall become effective or
the repealed ordinance shall become void upon certification of the
election results. The Manager shall add new ordinances to or
delete repealed ordinances from the record book and the Code of
ordinances. The Council shall take no action to repeal or
significantly modify an ordinance adopted by initiative and
referendum within a period of two years from the date of the
election at which the ordinance was approved.
H. Neglect of duty. Should any city officer fail to carry out the duties of
implementing actions required by this Article or should the Committee
of Petitioners be dissatisfied with any action of the Manager in rejecting
a petition, the Committee of Petitioners may institute action with the
Court of Common Pleas of Chester County to enforce compliance. If the
matter deals with the repeal of an ordinance which was not in effect at
the time the petition was submitted to the Manager, the effective date
of the ordinance shall be suspended until final decision has been made
under this Article.
I. Rescinding petition. Before final action is taken by the Council or by the
county election officers if the matter has been certified to them for
referendum, the Committee of Petitioners may, by majority vote of its
members, elect to rescind the petition and thereupon notify in writing
the Manager and, if necessary, the county election officers of such
decision. If such action is taken, the matter will be closed, and any
further action may be taken only by a new petition.
§ 2-803 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-804
1:40
manner provided in this Charter or as may otherwise be required by general
law.
A. Recall petition.
(1) A recall of an incumbent of an elective office shall be initiated upon
petition signed by 40% of the registered electors voting at the last
gubernatorial election in the city. Every recall petition shall name
the office and officer against whom it is directed. Each elector
signing a recall petition shall add to the signature of the elector the
residence of the elector and the date of signing.
(2) Signatures on a recall petition may be on separate sheets, but each
sheet shall show the name of the person whose recall is sought and
have appended to it the affidavit of some person, not necessarily a
signer of the petition, that to the best of the affiant's knowledge and
belief the persons whose signatures appear on the sheet are
registered electors of the City of Coatesville.
B. Filing of petition. A recall petition shall be tendered for filing to the
election officers of Chester County. No signature shall be counted as
valid which is dated more than 60 days prior to the date the petition is
tendered for filing. Upon tender to the election officers, the petition
shall be available for examination by any interested person. Within 15
days after tender of the petition, the election officers shall have
authority to pass upon the validity of the petition and the validity and
number of signatures required thereon. The decision of the election
officers shall be subject to immediate review on appeal to the Court of
Common Pleas.
C. Notice to incumbent. As soon as the election officers have received a
recall petition for filing and determined its validity and sufficiency, the
appropriate officer shall notify the incumbent named in the petition that
the petition has been filed, upon receipt of such notice the incumbent
may resign from office and thereupon the recall proceedings shall
terminate.
D. Recall election. If the incumbent against whom the recall petition is
directed does not resign from office within 10 days after notice of filing
of such petition shall have been given to the incumbent, the election
officers shall arrange a recall election. The recall election shall be held
at a special election conducted at the first regularly scheduled election,
municipal, general or primary, which shall occur not less than 40 days
after the incumbent has been notified as provided above. The
incumbent against whom a recall petition is directed may resign at any
time prior to a recall election, and thereupon the election for this
purpose shall not be held.
E. Recall question.
(1) The following question shall be presented to each elector entitled
to vote on the recall question:
§ 2-804 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-804
1:41
"Shall (name of officer) be recalled and removed from the office of
(name of office)?"
(2) The above question shall appear as to every officer whose recall is
to be voted upon, and provision shall be made for the elector to
vote "yes" or "no" to the question.
F. Results of election. If a majority of the registered electors who vote on
the question at a recall election shall vote "yes," the incumbent shall be
deemed recalled and removed from office, but if a majority of such
registered electors shall vote "no," the incumbent shall remain in office.
Should the result of such election be affirmative, the date of the
removal and vacancy in the office shall be effective seven days after the
date when the results of the election are certified by the County Board
of Elections, unless such date is further postponed by order of a court.
G. Filling of vacancy. The filling of a vacancy created by the recall of an
elected official shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
Charter with respect to filling vacancies in the office involved.
H. Disqualification for office. No person who has been removed from an
elective office by a recall election or has resigned from such an elective
office after a recall petition directed to such person has been filed shall
be eligible for election or appointment to any office of the city
government within two years after removal from office or resignation.
I. Limitations. No recall petition shall be filed against any incumbent of an
elective office within the first year or the last nine months of the term of
office or within nine months after an unsuccessful recall election
against such officer, and no officer who has been reelected for a
successive term shall be subject to recall during the first year of such
term.
§ 2-804 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-804
1:42
ARTICLE IX
General Provisions
§ 2-901. Effective date.
This Charter shall become effective on January 7, 1980, except for the
transitional provisions of Article X of this Charter, which shall become
effective upon certification of the adoption of the Charter.
§ 2-902. Amendment.
Amendments to this Charter may be made in accordance with the provisions
of Act 62 of 1972 of the General Assembly of Pennsylvania, as amended,5 or
as otherwise provided by law.
§ 2-903. Severability.
If any provision of this Charter is held invalid, the remaining provisions of
the Charter will not be affected thereby. If the application of the Charter
or any of its provisions to any persons or circumstances is held invalid,
the application of the Charter and its provisions to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
§ 2-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-903
1:43

ARTICLE X
Transitional Provisions
§ 2-1001. Council members.
§ 2-1002. Elected Treasurer.
Inasmuch as the term of the elected Treasurer expires in 1979, upon
approval of this Charter, the office of Treasurer is abolished on the effective
date of the Charter, and there will be no candidate for the office elected in
the November elections.
§ 2-1003. Elected Controller.
Inasmuch as the term of the elected Controller expires in 1979, upon
approval of this Charter, the office of the Controller is abolished on the
effective date of the Charter, and there will be no candidate for the office
elected in the November elections.
§ 2-1004. Rights and privileges preserved.
Nothing in this Charter, except as otherwise specifically provided, shall
affect or impair the rights and privileges of persons who are officers and
employees of the city at the time of adoption of this Charter. An employee
holding a position in the city government at the time this Charter takes
effect and who was serving in the same or similar position at the time of
the adoption of this Charter shall not be subject to competitive tests as a
condition of continuation in the same or similar position but in all other
respects shall be subject to the personnel system set forth § 2-505 of this
Charter and the Administrative Code.
A. Council members in office on the day before this Charter becomes
effective shall continue in office for the remainder of the term to which
they were elected. On the effective date of this Charter, they will
assume the functions and duties of Council members as set forth in the
Charter. The title of Mayor will be discontinued on the effective date of
this Charter, and the member of Council who was nominated or elected
under the title of Mayor will assume the role of Council member under
the Charter.
B. At the municipal election in November of 1979, two Council members
will be elected by special election to bring the Council to the number of
seven members in accordance with § 2-201. The additional two
members will serve terms of two years. Their successors will be elected
for four-year terms in accordance with § 2-205.
C. Council members whose terms carry over under the Charter will
continue to be compensated at the rate they received in the year 1979.
The members of Council who are elected in 1979 and all succeeding
Council members will, on the effective date of this Charter and
thereafter, be compensated as provided in § 2-209.
§ 2-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1005
1:45
§ 2-1005. Departments, offices, boards, commissions and agencies.
The organization of the city government under this Charter, after the
seventh day of January 1980, shall be as set forth in the Administrative Code
required by this Charter. However, nothing in this section shall be construed
to abolish the office or terminate the terms of any officer or employee
protected by a tenure of office, law or collective bargaining agreement,
and it is the intent of this Charter that qualified officers and employees
be reappointed to the same or similar positions in the organization to be
set forth in the Administrative Code. All appointed members of boards,
commissions, authorities or other agencies shall continue in office with
the same or similar bodies for the remainder of the term of their original
appointment. However, nothing in this section shall limit the right of the
Council to create, modify or abolish boards, commissions, authorities or
other agencies as provided in § 2-504 of this Charter.
§ 2-1006. Pending matters.
All actions and proceedings of a legislative, executive or judicial character
which are pending upon effective date of this Charter shall be maintained,
carried on or dealt with by the city officer, department or agency
appropriate under this Charter.
§ 2-1007. Transition Committee.
A. In order to establish an orderly procedure for transition to the new form
of government provided by the Charter and to ensure that all necessary
action is taken to make this Charter fully effective on its effective date,
the Council shall, within 50 days after adoption of this Charter, appoint
a Transition Committee comprised of such members of the Council, the
Government Study Commission, administrative staff of the city and
such representatives of civic agencies as the Council shall select to
draft the necessary rules and regulations, ordinances and resolutions as
set forth below.
B. Not less than 45 days prior to the effective date of this Charter, the
Council members shall meet with the Transition Committee to review
and prepare the final draft of the necessary ordinances and any other
appropriate ordinances to implement this Charter.
C. The proposed ordinances shall be advertised at least once in one or
more newspapers of general circulation in the city at least seven days
before organizational meeting of the new Council on the seventh day of
January 1980. At the organizational meeting, the new Council shall
adopt the Administrative Code, personnel rules and regulations,
classification of accounts and provision for bonding of officers and
employees, such provisions to become effective on the effective date of
the Charter, together with such other ordinances, rules and regulations
as proposed by the Transition Committee and accepted by the Council.
§ 2-1005 COATESVILLE CODE § 2-1008
1:46
§ 2-1008. Budgets for calendar year 1980.
The Council in office in 1979 shall cause the budgets for 1980 to be set up
in accordance with the organizational structure and uniform classification
of accounts and accounting codes to be followed under this Charter. The
Transition Committee may assist the Council in 1979 in preparing the
budgets for 1980.
§ 2-1008 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1008
1:47
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Authorities — See Ch. 12.
Fire Department — See Ch. 19.
Health administration — See Ch. 24.
Historical Commission — See Ch. 27.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 35.
Pensions — See Ch. 38.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 41.
Police Department — See Ch. 44.
Procurement and purchasing — See Ch. 47.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 51.
Social Security — See Ch. 55.
§ 5-1. Scope. [Added 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
This chapter shall act as the Administrative Code, as provided for in the
Charter of the City of Coatesville.
§ 5-2. City Manager.
The City Manager shall be the chief executive officer of the city and shall
have those powers and duties prescribed by law, the Home Rule Charter of
the City of Coatesville and ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City
Council.
§ 5-3. Organization.
The administrative service of the city shall be under the City Manager and
shall be comprised of the following departments and heads thereof:
§ 5-4. Department of Municipal Operations.
The Department of Municipal Operations shall be responsible for the
operation and maintenance of all city-owned property and facilities and the
following public operations and services:
A. Department of Municipal Operations; Department head: Director of
Municipal Operations.
B. Department of Police; Department head: Chief of Police.
C. Department of Finance; Department head: Director of Finance.
D. Department of City Management and Administration; Department
head: City Manager.
A. Sewage treatment plant and collection system.
§ 2-1008 COATESVILLE CODE § 5-4
1:48
§ 5-5. Department of Police.
The Department of Police shall be responsible for law enforcement and
public safety.
§ 5-6. Department of Finance.
B. Streets and streetlighting.
C. Landfill and solid waste collection.
D. Parks, public buildings and property.
E. Storm drainage and snow removal.
A. The Department of Finance shall be responsible for all financial
matters, including the collection, investment and disbursement of all
municipal funds, such as taxes, fees for municipal services, parking
meter receipts, fines and penalties, grants and all other revenue. The
Department shall also be responsible for budget control, purchasing,
accounts payable and payroll.
B. The uniform classification of accounts and codes referred to in § 2-602
of the Charter is on file in the office of the Department of Finance.
[Added 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
C. Director of Finance. The Director of Finance shall have those powers
and duties prescribed by law, the Charter and ordinance, including the
power and duty to: [Added 5-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1352-2011]
(1) Receive, deposit and record all moneys due to the City or
collectible by the City.
(2) Administer uniform purchasing procedures.
(3) Supervise the encumbrance and expenditure of City funds.
(4) Authorize the disbursement of City moneys in accordance with
§ 2-608 of the Charter and ordinance.
(5) Supervise the billing and collection of all garbage and tax
statements and oversee the collection of delinquent tax collection
as well as current earned income tax collections.
(6) Certify that all taxes, fees, and other revenues, as well as
collection, have been properly collected, accounted for, and
deposited into the proper municipal accounts.
(7) Prescribe such administrative rules, practices and procedures as
shall be deemed necessary or expedient for the conduct and
operation of the Department of Finance not inconsistent with the
administrative rules, practices and procedures enacted by the City
Manager and/or City Council.
§ 5-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:49
(8) Appoint, discipline, suspend and remove subordinates serving in
the Department of Finance, with the approval of the City Manager.
(9) Develop and maintain employment records reflecting all aspects of
the service of City employees assigned to work in the Department
of Finance.
(10) Supervise and, if necessary, investigate or inquire into the
operations of the Department of Finance and its employees. The
result of any investigation or inquiry shall be immediately provided
to the City Manager and City Council.
(11) Conduct annual performance evaluations of all Department of
Finance employees. The City Manager and the Human Resources
Department shall be provided copies of all performance
evaluations.
(12) Maintain a uniform accounting system in accordance with
generally accepted principles of accounting and in accordance with
the requirements of law, the Charter and ordinance.
(13) Invest and manage City funds.
(14) Conduct internal reviews, in accordance with generally accepted
principles of auditing, of the fiscal transactions of City
departments.
(15) Prepare and submit to the City Manager and City Council periodic
financial reports, at least monthly, and at such other times as the
City Manager may direct, and at the end of each fiscal year prepare
an annual financial report, as required by the Charter and by
ordinance, and as otherwise requested. The monthly reports to the
City Manager shall be submitted to the Council at its regular
meetings and shall be made available to the public.
(16) Prepare and maintain an inventory of capital assets of the City.
(17) Assist the City Manager and department heads in the preparation
of the proposed City budget and in the presentation of the proposed
budget to the City Council.
(18) Upon the City Council's adoption of a general operating budget and
capital budget, cause the appropriations voted by the Council to be
entered in the accounting records of the City in accordance with
the Charter and ordinance. The Director of Finance shall approve
no contract or expenditure that would exceed the unencumbered
balance of appropriations in any account.
(19) Supervise the City payroll and the maintenance of City payroll
records.
(20) Maintain records of City bonded indebtedness.
§ 5-6 COATESVILLE CODE § 5-6
1:50
§ 5-7. Department of City Management and Administration.
The Department of City Management and Administration shall be
responsible for personnel administration, budget preparation and
projections, planning and community development, engineering and code
enforcement, contract negotiations, recreation, civil defense and
coordination of volunteer fire departments and intergovernmental
cooperation.
Chapter 9
ASSESSMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 203.
§ 9-1. Applicability of County Assessment Law. [Amended 5-28-1996
by Ord. No. 1012-96; 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
The City of Coatesville shall become subject to the provisions of the Fourth
to Eighth Class County Assessment Law pursuant to authority granted to
said city by said Act of Assembly (72 P.S. § 5453.104).
§ 9-2. Predetermined ratio.
The predetermined ratio of one hundred percent (100%) shall be applied to
the market valuation supplied by the Board for the Assessment and Revision
(21) Provide for the preservation of official financial records, which
shall be kept at City Hall and shall be available for public inspection
during regular office hours in accordance with § 2-609 of the
Charter and state law.
(22) Provide for the recording of all financial transactions and related
activities of the City, in terms of dollars and other appropriate units
of measurement, in accordance with the form and procedures
prescribed by Council in the Administrative Code and as shall be
directed by the Manager, in order that the required reports and
analysis may be produced for the proper management and control
of such activities in accordance with § 2-609 of the Charter.
(23) Perform grantsmanship services and expedite funding applications
where appropriate and needed.
(24) Oversee the implementation and operation of a data management
system and LAN, utilizing certified outside contractors, including
the provision of long-term growth plans for the City's technology
needs.
§ 5-6 ASSESSMENTS § 9-2
9:51
of Taxes of Chester County to determine assessed values for tax purposes in
the City of Coatesville for the year 1982 and thereafter.
§ 9-3. Filing of copy.
A copy of this chapter, signed by the President of Council, attested by the
City Secretary, setting forth the names of the members of the Council and
recording their vote, shall be filed with the Secretary of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
§ 9-4. When effective.
The provisions of this chapter shall become effective upon the filing of a
certificate from the Governor of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with
the minutes of this Council and the recording of the same in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Chester County, Pennsylvania.
Chapter 12
AUTHORITIES
§ 9-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 9-4
12:52
ARTICLE I
Industrial Development Authority
[Adopted 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 845-89 as Ch. 33 of the 1989
Code]
§ 12-1. Intent; legislative authority.
The City of Coatesville hereby signifies its intention on its own behalf,
as well as jointly in conjunction with five (5) other Chester County
municipalities, namely Caln Township, the Borough of Parkesburg,
Sadsbury Township, Valley Township and West Sadsbury Township, to
organize the Central and Western Chester County Industrial Development
Authority, under Act No. 102 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
approved August 23, 1967, known as the "Industrial and Commercial
Development Authority Law."6
§ 12-2. Local members designated; terms. [Amended 3-25-1996 by
Ord. No. 1012-96]
The names, addresses and initial terms of office computed from January 1,
1969, of the members of the Board of the Authority designated by the City
of Coatesville are on file in the city offices.
§ 12-3. Articles of Incorporation. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
The City Manager shall execute, the City Secretary shall affix and attest
the Seal and the Solicitor is authorized to advertise and to file, on behalf of
the City of Coatesville, Articles of Incorporation with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in substantially the following form:
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY LAW
DEPARTMENT OF STATE
1967, Aug. 23, P.L.-No. 102
File
Number
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION OF CENTRAL AND WESTERN
CHESTER
COUNTY INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
6. Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 371 et seq.
§ 12-1 AUTHORITIES § 12-3
12:53
In accordance with the requirements of the Industrial and Commercial
Development Authority Law, approved the 23rd day of August 1967,
A.D.(Act No. 102), 73 P.S. § 371 et seq., the undersigned, constituting in
each case the governmental body of the municipality indicated, acting
severally as well as jointly in association with each of the other
governmental bodies for the purposes set forth in the Industrial and
Commercial Development Authority Law, and desiring that they may be
incorporated and that a Certificate of Incorporation may be issued to them
and their and each of their successors according to law, do hereby certify
that:
1. The name of the Authority shall be the "Central and Western Chester
County Industrial Development Authority."
2. The Authority is formed under the Industrial and Commercial
Development Authority Law,"approved the 23rd day of August 1967
(Act No. 102).
3. Caln Township, the City of Coatesville, the Borough of Parkesburg,
Sadsbury Township, Valley Township and West Sadsbury Township,
all in Chester County, Pennsylvania, each acting on its own behalf, as
well as jointly in conjunction with the others, are the incorporating
municipalities. Joinder of additional Chester County municipalities is
encouraged, such joinder to be effected by amendment of these
Articles of Incorporation, with the approval of the then members of
the Authority.
The following are the names, addresses and official positions of the
members of the respective governmental bodies of the incorporating
municipalities.7
4. The governing body of the Authority shall be a Board comprised at
all times of not fewer than six (6) members.
Each governmental body of the incorporating municipalities and the
governmental body of any municipality hereafter becoming a
member of the Authority shall have the right to designate and to be
represented at all times by two (2) members of the Board of the
Authority. The names, addresses and the initial terms of office
computed from January 1, 1969, of the first members of the Board of
the Authority, as designated by the governmental bodies of the
incorporating municipalities, are as follows, all of whom reside in
and are citizens of Pennsylvania.8
5. The Authority shall exist for a term of fifty (50) years, in accordance
with the Industrial and Commercial Development Authority Law,
approved August 23, 1967 (Act No. 102). These Articles of
Incorporation have been executed by the governmental bodies of the
incorporating municipalities, by their proper officers and under their
respective municipal seals.
7. Editor's Note: Such information is on file in the city offices.
8. Editor's Note: Such information is on file in the city offices.
§ 12-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 12-3
12:54
6. All projects approved by the Authority shall provide for annual
payments by the lessee to the Authority, in addition to any other
payments which may be required, of an amount equivalent to the
real estate taxes assessable against the property and improvements
leased for the use of the respective taxing authorities in which said
property and improvements are located in the same proportion to
the real estate taxes levied by each of them.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we hereunto have set our hands and seals this
day of , 19 .
CITY OF COATESVILLE
By __________________
Attest:
..........................
Secretary
§ 12-3 AUTHORITIES § 12-3
12:55

ARTICLE II
Municipal Authority
[Adopted 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 845-89 as Ch. 39 of the 1989
Code]
§ 12-4. Intent; legislative authority.
The Council of the City of Coatesville hereby signifies its intention and
desire to organize an Authority under the provisions of the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented.9
§ 12-5. Articles of Incorporation.10
The President or Vice President and the Secretary of the Council are
directed to execute, on behalf of the City of Coatesville, Articles of
Incorporation for said Authority, in substantially the following form:
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended,11 and
pursuant to an ordinance adopted, the municipal authorities of the City of
Coatesville, Chester County, Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate an
Authority thereunder, hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority is "City of Coatesville Authority."
2. Said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of May 2,
1945, P.L. 382, as amended.
3. No other Authority organized under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, as amended, or under the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, as
amended, is in existence in or for the incorporating municipality, the
City of Coatesville, except Central Chester County Joint Authority
incorporated March 23, 1956, and the Coatesville Sewage Plant
Authority incorporated April 11, 1960.12
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is "City of Coatesville,
Chester County, Pennsylvania."
5. The names and addresses of its municipal authorities are as
follows.13
6. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of the Authority to be formed hereby are as follows.14
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
12.Editor's Note: The Industrial Development Authority was in existence when this Article
was adopted.
13.Editor's Note: Such information is on file in the city offices.
§ 12-4 AUTHORITIES § 12-5
12:57
7. The advertisement of notice of public meeting concerning adoption
of the ordinance to incorporate the Authority and the notice of the
adoption of the ordinance and of filing the Articles of Incorporation
in conformity with the requirements of Section 3, Act of May 2,
1945, P.L. 382, as amended, are submitted herewith.
§ 12-6. Publishing of notice.
The Secretary is hereby directed to cause a notice of the substance of this
Article, including the substance of the above Articles of Incorporation, to
be published once in The Record, Coatesville, Pennsylvania, a newspaper
published and of general circulation in the County of Chester, and in the
Chester County Law Reporter, the legal journal designed by the Rules of
Court for the publication of legal notices in said county, as required by the
Act.15
§ 12-7. Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary are directed to file said Articles of
Incorporation, together with the necessary proofs of publication, with the
Secretary of the Commonwealth and to do all other acts and things
necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of the City of
Coatesville Authority.
§ 12-8. Initial project.
The initial project to be undertaken by said Authority is to acquire, hold,
construct, improve, maintain, operate, own or lease, either in the capacity
of lessor or lessee, waterworks, water supply works and water distribution
systems and all facilities appurtenant thereof in and for the City of
Coatesville and surrounding areas presently served by the water system of
the City of Coatesville and for such other territory as it may choose to serve
from time to time.16
§ 12-9. Membership.17
The following-named persons be and they hereby are appointed as the
first members of the Board of the Authority, whose terms of office shall
commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed from January
1 next succeeding the date of the incorporation.18
14.Editor's Note: Such information is on file in the city offices.
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
16.Editor's Note: This Authority, as of 7-7-1988, shall also act as the Sewer Authority.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
18.Editor's Note: Such information is on file in the city offices.
§ 12-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 12-9
12:58
ARTICLE III
Recycling Authority
[Adopted 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 845-89 as Ch. 131 of the 1989
Code]
§ 12-10. Intent; legislative authority.
The Council of the City of Coatesville hereby signifies its intention and
desire to organize a Joint Regional Recycling Authority under the provisions
of the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and
supplemented.19
§ 12-11. Articles of Incorporation.20
The President or Vice President and the Secretary of the Council are
directed to execute, on behalf of the City of Coatesville, Articles of
Incorporation for said Authority, in substantially the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION FOR THE
CENTRAL CHESTER COUNTY REGIONAL RECYCLING AUTHORITY
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
The Municipal Authority of the City of Coatesville, situate in the County
of Chester, Pennsylvania, submits herewith for appropriate action,
pursuant to the Municipalities Authorities Act of 1945, as amended, the
following:
ARTICLES
1. The name of the Authority shall be "Central Chester County Regional
Recycling Authority."
2. The Authority shall be organized pursuant to the Municipalities
Authorities Act of 1945, Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended, 53
P.S. § 303, for the purposes of undertaking to supply, supervise or
furnish acceptable and sanitary methods for the storage, removal
processing, recycling and disposal of all such refuse materials
originating in any of said municipalities by sanitary landfill methods
or such other means as may said Authority deem appropriate.
3. No other Authority has been organized under said Municipalities
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended, or under the Act approved the
28th day of June 1935, P.L. 463, and which is in existence in or for the
incorporating municipality.21
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
21.Editor's Note: At the time of incorporation of this Authority, the Municipal Authority and
the Industrial Development Authority were in existence.
§ 12-10 AUTHORITIES § 12-11
12:59
4. The name of the incorporating municipalities are the City of
Coatesville, Boroughs of Modena, Parkesburg and South Coatesville
and the Townships of East Fallowfield and Valley, all situate within the
County of Chester, Pennsylvania.
5. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of said Authority as designated by the several incorporating
municipalities are.22
6. Any member of the Authority may, with thirty (30) days' notice,
withdraw from the Authority when membership is no longer in the
best interest of that municipality.
7. In the event that the Authority is dissolved, all assets will be publicly
sold or transferred to a municipal body chosen by this Authority. If
the assets are sold, any remaining funds will be equally distributed to
the Authority members at the time of dissolution.
§ 12-12. Publication of notices.
The Secretary is hereby directed to cause a notice of the substance of this
Article, including the substance of the above Articles of Incorporation, to
be published once in The Record, Coatesville, Pennsylvania, a newspaper
published and of general circulation in the County of Chester, and in the
Chester County Law Reporter, the legal journal designed by the Rules of
Court for the publication of legal notices in said county, as required by the
Act.23
§ 12-13. Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The President and Secretary are directed to file said Articles of
Incorporation, together with the necessary proofs of publication, with the
Secretary of the commonwealth and to do all other acts and things
necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of Central Chester
County Regional Recycling Authority.
§ 12-14. Initial project.
The initial project to be undertaken by said Authority is to supply, supervise
or furnish acceptable and sanitary methods for the storage, removal and
disposal of all such ashes, garbage and refuse materials originating in said
municipality by incineration or landfill or such other methods as may be by
said Authority deemed appropriate.
§ 12-15. First members of Board; terms. [Amended 5-28-1996 by
Ord. No. 1012-96]
The following-named persons be and they hereby are appointed as the
first members of the Board of the Authority, whose terms of office shall
22.Editor's Note: Such information is on file at the city offices.
23.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 12-11 COATESVILLE CODE § 12-15
12:60
commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed from January
1 next succeeding the date of incorporation.24
24.Editor's Note: The names of the first Board members are on file in the city offices.
§ 12-15 AUTHORITIES § 12-15
12:61

ARTICLE IV
Downtown Improvement District Authority
[Adopted 3-12-1990 as Ord. No. 856-90]
§ 12-16. Intent; legislative authority.
The City Council of the City of Coatesville hereby signifies its intention and
desire to organize and form a Municipality Authority under and by virtue of
the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, approved the second day of May
1945, A.D., P.L. 382, as amended.25
§ 12-17. Name.
The name of the authority shall be "Coatesville Downtown Improvement
District Authority."
§ 12-18. Purpose.
The Authority shall have authority and the purpose thereof shall be to
develop and make business improvements and provide administrative
services and to impose an assessment on each benefited property in the
designated district.
§ 12-19. Findings.
The City Council of the City of Coatesville hereby declares that it is
desirable for the preservation and revitalization of the central business
district to have an Authority providing a management process to coordinate
the collective public and private efforts of the commercial district in
providing improvements and services.
§ 12-20. Articles of Incorporation.
The Articles of Incorporation of the Authority, a true and correct copy of
which attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference, are approved
and adopted, and the President and Secretary of City Council are authorized
and directed to execute the same on behalf of the City of Coatesville.26
§ 12-21. First members of Board; terms. [Amended 5-28-1996 by
Ord. No. 1012-96]
The names and original terms of office of the first members of the
Authority's Board are.27
25.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: The Articles of Incorporation are included at the end of this Article.
27.Editor's Note: Such information is on file in the city offices.
§ 12-16 AUTHORITIES § 12-22
12:63
§ 12-22. Publication of notice.
The City Solicitor is directed to cause to be published, as required by and
in accordance with the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,28 a notice
containing a brief statement of the substance of this Article and of the
Articles of Incorporation, which notice shall state that on a day certain,
not less than three (3) days after the complete publication of said notice,
the Articles of Incorporation will be filed with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 12-23. Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The proper officers of the city shall file with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania the Articles of Incorporation, together with
proofs of publication of said notice.
§ 12-24. Plans for services or improvements.
Pursuant to the Act of April 10, 1980, P.L. 105, the City of Coatesville
retains the right to approve any plan of the Authority for the purpose of
making business improvements or providing for administrative services and
levying assessments or charges related thereto. No plan for services or
improvements shall be approved which extends three (3) years from the
date of organization or formation of the Authority unless this Article is
otherwise amended by City Council. The date of formation or organization
shall be the date of the Certificate of Incorporation issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for this Authority.
§ 12-25. Termination. [Amended 5-4-1993 by Ord. No. 922-93;
5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1021-96]
The term of existence of the Downtown Improvement District Authority
shall be extended until May 25, 1999; the Authority shall terminate only
upon official action of the Council of the City of Coatesville.
§ 12-26. Articles of Amendment. [Added 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1021-96]
The City Council hereby authorizes the filing of Articles of Amendment by
DIDA's Board of Directors which shall be filed with the appropriate offices
of the Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Department
of State and the Corporation Bureau of the commonwealth. Said Articles
of Amendment shall extend the term of DIDA three (3) years until May
25, 1999, or until formal action approving termination by City Council.
The Articles of Amendment shall be submitted to the City Council for its
approval prior to filing.
28.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
§ 12-22 COATESVILLE CODE § 12-26
12:64
Chapter 16
COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
§ 16-1. Authorization.
The City Council of the City of Coatesville (the "City") is hereby authorized
pursuant to the Third Class City Code, the City's Home Rule Charter and
other applicable law to enter into an intergovernmental cooperation
agreement with the municipalities which are identified on Exhibit A of the
agreement to form the Western Chester County Council of Governments
("WCCCOG"), in accordance with the terms and conditions authorized by
this chapter and set forth in the agreement, a copy of which is attached
hereto as Exhibit A29 and is incorporated herein by reference. Furthermore,
the appropriate officers of the City are hereby authorized to do whatever is
necessary and appropriate to carry out the provisions of the agreement and
this chapter, and to comply with the purposes and intent of the agreement
and this chapter.
§ 16-2. Conditions of agreement.
The agreement is conditioned upon each Township/Borough/City's
governing body enacting an ordinance which authorizes such municipalities
to participate in the WCCCOG and to execute the agreement.
§ 16-3. Duration and term of agreement.
The WCCCOG shall be created for, and the agreement shall have, an initial
term of five years, which term shall commence on the effective date of
the agreement (as defined in Paragraph 17 of the agreement). At the
expiration of the initial five-year term, the agreement and the WCCCOG
shall automatically renew for successive one-year terms unless a majority
of the municipalities, acting through their delegates, vote to terminate the
agreement.
§ 16-4. Purpose and objectives of agreement.
The purposes and objectives of the WCCCOG include, but are not limited to,
the following:
A. To provide a forum for the discussion of regional issues that affect the
members and their residents;
B. To discuss and study local issues of mutual interest and concern to each
member and its residents and to formulate solutions for common
regional problems;
C. To allow for regional planning and coordination on local government
issues such as, but not limited to, zoning, transportation, emergency
29.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the City offices.
§ 12-26 AUTHORITIES § 16-4
12:65
§ 16-5. Manner and extent of financing for agreement.
services, geographical information systems ("GIS"), cable
communications, technological electronic communication and any
other issues which affect the Western Chester County region;
D. To train municipal officials and employees in various municipal topics
and laws that affect municipalities;
E. To undertake, coordinate and administer programs of regional interest
that benefit some or all of the members;
F. To create an alliance for obtaining more competitive rates on the
purchase of goods and services for the members; and
G. To perform such other activities as the members may mutually agree
may be undertaken through the WCCCOG which are related to the
objectives identified above.
A. The Board of Delegates shall annually prepare a proposed annual
budget.
(1) At the organizational meeting of the Board of Delegates, the Board
shall adopt an annual budget, or authorize the prompt creation of
an annual budget for the WCCCOG.
(2) Thereafter, the Board shall annually prepare the proposed budget
and submit it to the members at least 60 days prior to the end of the
calendar year.
(3) The Board of Delegates shall finally vote to approve or reject the
budget prior to the end of the calendar year.
(4) In the event that the proposed annual budget is not approved by
the majority of the members' governing bodies, the Board of
Delegates shall revise said budget in accordance with the reasons
provided by the governing bodies in support of the rejection.
(5) Following the initial year of the agreement, the process for
preparing, presenting and adopting an annual budget shall be
defined by the adopted bylaws of the WCCCOG.
(6) Until the new annual budget is approved by the majority of the
members' governing bodies, the prior year's budget shall remain in
effect.
B. Within sixty days following the effective date of the agreement, each
member shall be responsible to make an initial contribution to the
WCCCOG of $250, which contribution shall be deposited into an
account established for the WCCCOG by its Secretary/Treasurer.
Thereafter, each member shall contribute an equal share to the
expenses of the WCCCOG, as determined by the annual budget. Each
member shall contribute its share of the WCCCOG's operational
§ 16-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 16-5
12:66
§ 16-6. Organizational structure necessary to implement
agreement.
§ 16-7. Acquiring, managing, licensing or disposing of real or
personal property.
The WCCCOG is not authorized by the agreement to purchase real property.
If the WCCCOG purchases personal property, it shall take title to such
personal property in the name of WCCCOG, unless otherwise agreed to by
the Board of Delegates. Upon termination of the agreement, any personal
property owned by the WCCCOG shall be distributed to the members,
or sold and the proceeds distributed to the members, as determined by
the Board of Delegates. All other matters pertaining to the acquisition,
management, licensing or disposal of personal property by the WCCCOG
shall be decided by a majority vote of the Board of Delegates.
expenses by the end of the first quarter of the calendar year as
otherwise determined by the Board. A member which does not promptly
pay its annual contribution may have its membership in the WCCCOG
terminated by a majority vote of the Board of Delegates. In the event
of such termination, the terminated member's delegate and alternate
delegate shall be precluded from voting on any matter or issue voted
upon by the Board of Delegates.
C. In the event that the WCCCOG undertakes a specific program or
activity that does not involve all of the members, only the members
which participate in such program or activity shall be liable for the
expenses related to such program or activity.
A. The WCCCOG shall be governed by a Board of Delegates which shall
consist of one delegate and an alternate delegate from each member.
The delegates and alternate delegates shall be appointed by the
governing body of each member to serve in such capacity for a one-year
term. Each delegate and alternate delegate shall be an elected official
of the member.
B. Within 60 days after the effective date of the agreement, the Board of
Delegates shall conduct an organizational meeting. At the
organizational meeting, the Board shall elect the officers of President,
Vice-President, and Secretary/Treasurer and adopt bylaws, or authorize
the prompt preparation of bylaws for future adoption, which shall
govern the day-to-day affairs of the WCCCOG.
C. Each member shall be entitled to one vote in the WCCCOG, which vote
shall be cast by the delegate in attendance at the Board of Directors'
meetings.
§ 16-5 AUTHORITIES § 16-8
12:67
§ 16-8. Authority to enter into contracts or policies of group
insurance and employee benefits.
The WCCCOG is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits including social security for any
employees of the WCCCOG. No such employees are anticipated by the
members and a majority of the Board of Delegates must first vote to hire
any such employees and approve any such contracts.
§ 16-9. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this chapter is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts hereof. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the City Council that this chapter would have
been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause,
section or part thereof not been included herein.
§ 16-10. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective 30 days after publication following final
adoption in accordance with the City Charter and the Third-Class City Code.
Chapter 19
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Police Department — See Ch. 44.
Hazardous material spills — See Ch. 132.
§ 19-1. Powers of President of City Council.
The Council of the City of Coatesville hereby empowers the President of
City Council or, in the absence of the President, the Vice President of City
Council, as follows: Upon the request of the City Manager or Emergency
Management Coordinator or their designated representative, to declare a
state of emergency, stating the nature and extent of the emergency; and
to have prepared, within seven (7) days of said declaration, an ordinance
pursuant to Section 2-309 of the Home Rule Charter for ratification by the
City Council.
§ 19-2. Powers of City Manager.
The Council of the City of Coatesville empowers the City Manager or a
designated representative, in a state of emergency declared in accordance
with § 19-1 hereof, to act as follows:
§ 16-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 19-2
19:68
§ 19-3. Emergency Management Coordinator; Emergency Response
Team.
The Council for the City of Coatesville hereby establishes and empowers the
following:
A. To enter into contracts, incur obligations, employ temporary personnel,
rent equipment, purchase supplies and materials and expend public
funds as necessary to disaster emergency management, response and
recovery without regard to the normal procedures and formalities
prescribed by law.
B. To direct, coordinate and supervise all personnel and equipment except
as prescribed by law, for the purpose of emergency management,
response and recovery; and to promulgate procedures, rules and
regulations as necessary to address the disaster emergency response
and recovery.
C. To request outside and higher jurisdiction assistance as needed or
provided by City Council, approved mutual aid agreements or
applicable law.
D. To activate an emergency operations center and the Community
Response Plan, as necessary, to address the emergency.
A. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be a person appointed
by the President of City Council, subject to the approval of the Council
of the City of Coatesville and the Governor of the commonwealth. Said
person shall be considered an employee and official of the City of
Coatesville, knowledgeable in facets of emergency management and
response. Responsibilities shall include planning, administration and
operations of the Community Response Plan, subject to the direction
and control of the City Manager.
B. Emergency Response Team.
(1) An Emergency Response Team shall be formed to provide a broad
authoritative and experienced leadership essential to effective
action in major emergencies. The team shall include the President
of the City Council, the City Manager, the Assistant City Manager,
the Emergency Management Coordinator, Police Chief, Fire Chief,
Finance Director, Public Works Director and other representatives
as determined by the City Council.
(2) The Emergency Response Team shall be chaired by the President of
the City Council and shall provide the base of information and
advice for direction, control and coordination of emergency
management. This team shall formulate, in accordance with 35
Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 et seq., the Commonwealth Response Plan, which
shall delineate and become the formal operations manual for
disaster emergency management, response and recovery.
§ 19-2 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 19-3
19:69
§ 19-4. Powers of designated officials.
The City Council of the City of Coatesville empowers the foregoing
designated officials as follows: to take all necessary steps not prescribed by
law to effectuate an immediate and timely response to a disaster emergency
in order to mitigate or prevent loss of property or life, to protect the health
and safety of the citizens and to permit operation and use of essential
public facilities and services. Said steps shall include but are not limited
to control and authorization of all parties' ingress, egress and regress at
any disaster emergency scene; authorization to move or order to be moved
personal property, including vehicles that impede or prevent emergency
management operations; authorization to remove or order to be removed
property that presents a clear and imminent hazard; and to carry out all
powers and duties as provided and authorized by the Governor of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pursuant to 35 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 et seq.
Chapter 24
HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
§ 24-1. Jurisdiction of County Board of Health.
The City of Coatesville, an exempt municipality under the Local Health
Administration Law,30 does, nevertheless, hereby subject itself to the
jurisdiction of the Chester County Board of Health as provided by the Act
aforesaid.
§ 24-2. City Board of Health dissolved.
The City of Coatesville hereby dissolves the Board of Health of the City
of Coatesville as in such case made and provided by the Local Health
Administration Law.31
(3) The Coatesville Response Team shall establish an emergency
operations center and necessary alternative sites for the
responsibility of coordinating and directing emergency
management, response and recovery. Within the exigencies of
appropriations, the center will be supplied with materials and
supplies, equipment and staff in preparation to address a disaster
emergency situation.
30.Editor's Note: See 16 P.S. § 12015.
31.Editor's Note: See 16 P.S. § 12015.
§ 19-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 24-2
24:70
Chapter 27
HISTORICAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
197.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 27-1. Commission created; purpose.
To protect the portions of the City of Coatesville which recall the
architectural and cultural heritage of our city and state; to awaken in our
people an interest in our historic past; and to promote the general welfare,
education and culture of our city, there is hereby created a commission
to be known and designated as the "Historical Commission of the City of
Coatesville, Pennsylvania."
§ 27-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LANDMARK STRUCTURE — Any structure designated by the Historical
Commission, which has also been approved and registered on the
Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places maintained by the Commonwealth
Historical and Museum Commission and the National Register of Historic
Places maintained by the United States Department of the Interior.
§ 27-3. Membership. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
The Commission shall consist of seven (7) regular members appointed by
the City Council. In addition, the Mayor may serve, ex officio, as a member
of the Commission.
§ 27-4. Terms of office; compensation.
The term of office each of the seven (7) regular members shall be three (3)
years. The initial terms of the first seven (7) members shall be as follows:
Two (2) shall serve until the first Monday of January 1965; two (2) until
the first Monday of January 1966; and three (3) until the first Monday of
January 1967. Their successors shall serve for terms of three (3) years. An
appointment to fill a vacancy in office shall be only for the unexpired portion
of the term. Members shall serve without compensation.
§ 24-2 HEALTH ADMINISTRATION § 27-5
24:71
§ 27-5. Qualifications for appointment and service.
No person shall be eligible to appointment who is not a citizen of the
United States and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. At least four (4)
members of the Commission must reside within the city limits of Coatesville.
Remaining members may reside within the greater Coatesville area. The
position of any member of the Commission who thereafter moves his or
her residence from the City of Coatesville or its surrounding area shall be
automatically considered vacant.
§ 27-6. Meetings; records; quorum.
A. The Commission shall hold meetings regularly, at least once in each
month or as matters before the Commission may require, and shall
designate the time and place thereof. The Commission may adopt and
alter rules and regulations governing its own organization and
procedure, consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the
commonwealth.
B. The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and shall make
annual report of its transactions and activities to the City Council. All
meetings, records and accounts of the Commission shall be public.
C. A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. Action taken at any meeting shall require the
affirmative vote of a majority of the Commission.
D. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Historical Commission absent from three or
more consecutive regular meetings of the Historical Commission
without an approved leave of absence granted by the City Council
after public hearing and prior written notice thereof shall be
removed from the Historical Commission by the City Council of the
City of Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the Historical Commission absent from 20% or
more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Historical
Commission within any one-year period shall be notified in writing
by the City Manager acting on behalf of the City Council of the
attendance requirements of this subsection. Any member of the
Historical Commission who is absent from 20% or more of the
regularly scheduled meetings within a one-year period shall
thereafter be removed for cause from such position by the City
Council with prior written notice after public hearing unless such
member resigns in writing or waives the public hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the Historical Commission may be removed for
cause as determined by the City Council after public hearing and
prior written notice thereof.
§ 27-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 27-6
24:72
§ 27-7. Functions and powers.
§ 27-8. Program of landmark recognition and preservation.
The preservation and continued utilization of districts, buildings or objects
whose general character is important historically or uniquely valuable for
design or location are hereby declared to be a public use, a form of
municipal conservation, essential to the public interest. The Commission
is therefore charged with the responsibility of developing and continuing
an effective program of landmark recognition and preservation. The
Commission shall survey and designate, in a suitable manner, areas, places,
buildings, structures, monuments, works of art and other objects having
special historical, architectural, community or aesthetic interest and value
and worthy of preservation.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Historical Commission without cause by the City
Council when authorized by state law, City Charter or City
ordinance.
A. The functions of the Commission shall be to further the interest of the
people in all matters relating to the history of the City of Coatesville and
its environs. To that end, it may acquire and maintain appropriate
exhibits, issue bulletins and other publications, cooperate in or sponsor
commemorative, educational or research programs and serve in an
advisory capacity to the City Council in all such matters.
B. The Commission may, with the approval of the City Council and in the
name of the City of Coatesville, acquire, take and hold, by purchase,
gift, devise, bequest or otherwise, such real and personal property as
may be proper for carrying out the objects and functions for which it is
established, and any property, real or personal, received in trust shall
be held in the name of the city but in conformity with the terms of the
trust.
C. The Commission may acquire, collect, own and exhibit, in the name of
the City of Coatesville, articles of historical interest and other objects
such as are usually incorporated in historical museums; but any such
articles received on loan or in trust shall be held in conformity with
such loan or trust agreement.
D. When designated by the City Council to do so, the Commission shall
carry out and enforce the powers and duties provided for in the
Coatesville Zoning Ordinance, § 224-39F. [Added 9-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 1033-9632]
E. The Commission shall have such other powers as are herein prescribed
or may be necessary hereunder for the proper discharge of its duties.
32.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection D to
Subsection E.
§ 27-6 HEALTH ADMINISTRATION § 27-9
24:73
§ 27-9. Power of review.
The Commission shall have the power of review and recommendation in
any case involving the demolition of a landmark structure or alteration
that would be in such manner as to change its essential character. The
Commission shall have the opportunity to study and review all plans and
proposals involving the reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition
and razing of properly designated landmarks as herein provided.
§ 27-10. Building permits.
§ 27-11. Review procedure; presumption of approval.
Upon receipt by the Commission of a notice that an application for a
building permit involving a landmark structure has been filed, a report on
said review, together with any recommendations, shall be given to the City
Council, in writing, within fifteen (15) days from the date of said referral.
If the Commission shall fail to file such a report within the specified time
and manner, it shall be conclusively presumed that the Commission has
approved the proposed application.
§ 27-12. Reports of Commission.
In determining the counsel to be presented to the Council of the City of
Coatesville concerning the issuing of a building permit for the erection,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part
A. The Building Inspector shall not issue a permit for any reconstruction,
alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of a landmark structure
until a copy of the application has been referred to the Commission for
its review as hereinafter provided.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a building permit for work to be done
involving or affecting a landmark structure, the Building Inspector shall
act in accordance with the procedures presently being following in that
office, except as those procedures are necessarily modified by the
following requirements:
(1) He or she shall forward to the office of the Commission a copy of
the application for a building permit, together with a copy of the
plot plan and the building plans and specifications filed by the
applicant.
(2) He or she shall maintain in his or her office a record of all such
applications and of his or her handling of the same, which shall be
in addition to and appropriately cross-referenced to his or her other
records.
(3) He or she shall require applicants to submit a sufficient number of
additional copies of material required to be attached to an
application for a building permit to ensure compliance with the
foregoing.
§ 27-9 COATESVILLE CODE § 27-12
24:74
of a landmark structure, the Commission shall consider and incorporate in
its report the following matters:
§ 27-13. Action of City Council upon unfavorable report.
Upon receipt of an unfavorable written report from the Commission, the
Council of the City of Coatesville shall consider the application and make a
final determination thereon.
Chapter 30
HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION
§ 30-1. Commission created.
A Human Services Commission is created for the City of Coatesville,
Chester County, Pennsylvania known as the "Coatesville Human Services
Commission."
§ 30-2. Composition; terms.
The Commission shall be composed of seven members. Two of the members
will be members of City Council. One of the members will be a member
of the professional staff of the City of Coatesville as appointed by the
City Manager of the City of Coatesville, and four of the members will be
citizens of the City of Coatesville chosen by City Council. The Commission
members shall each serve three-year terms. The terms of the members shall
be staggered in such a manner that at least one expires annually.
§ 30-3. Serving of terms.
All persons so appointed to the Human Services Commission shall serve
their full terms, or until their successors are appointed, unless they
A. The exact location of the area in which the work is to be done.
B. The exterior changes to be made or the exterior character of the
structure to be erected (outlining general design, architectural
features, arrangement, texture, material and color) and the relation of
such factors to the original structure and to other structures in the
area.
C. A list of the surrounding structures, with their general characteristics.
D. The opinion of the Commission (including any dissent) as to the
appropriateness of the work proposed as it will preserve and enhance
or damage and destroy the historic or architectural aspect and nature
of the landmark structure in question.
E. The specific counsel of the Commission to the Council of the City of
Coatesville as to the issuance of a building permit for the work as
proposed.
§ 27-12 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 30-3
30:75
voluntarily resign or are removed by the City Council for dereliction or
neglect of duty.
§ 30-4. Vacancies.
Any vacancy in the Human Services Commission occurring otherwise than
by expiration of a term shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment and shall be for the unexpired term.
§ 30-5. Compensation.
All members of the Human Services Commission will serve without pay.
§ 30-6. Officers; rules and regulations; meetings.
The Human Services Commission shall appoint from its membership a
Chairperson and such other officers as it may deem necessary for the
orderly procedure of its business and will adopt bylaws, rules and
regulations covering its procedures. The Human Services Commission shall
hold regular meetings, including two work sessions and at least one public
meeting each quarter. All public meetings shall be held in accordance with
the Sunshine Act.33
§ 30-7. Authority.
The Human Services Commission shall have all the powers conferred upon
it pursuant to the Third Class City Code to act for the good government
and interest of the city. The Human Services Commission shall assist the
city and its citizens in identifying human services which are a benefit to the
city and the citizens of the City of Coatesville and to review information and
services, conduct investigations and make recommendations and reports
relative to this purpose. The Human Services Commission shall also review
the existing systems that allow for residents of the City of Coatesville
to gain full access to all existing and new services. Upon review and
investigation, if the Commission determines that existing systems are not
adequate in their design to allow for full access, the Commission shall
make recommendations and reports relative to improving access. However,
any report or recommendation provided by the Human Service Commission
shall not be binding upon the City Council but shall be advisory only.
§ 30-8. Powers limited.
Nothing in the bylaws, rules and regulations of the Human Services
Commission shall vest in it any powers, responsibilities or duties not herein
authorized.
33.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
§ 30-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 30-8
30:76
Chapter 33
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 169.
§ 33-1. Commission created.
A Parks and Recreation Commission is hereby created for the City of
Coatesville, Chester County, Pennsylvania, known as the "Coatesville Parks
and Recreation Commission."
§ 33-2. Composition; terms.
The Commission shall be composed of seven members. All members shall be
residents of Coatesville, appointed by the Council of the City of Coatesville,
and shall serve four-year terms. Recommendations for members may be
made by the Parks and Recreation Commission. Terms of the members shall
be staggered in such a manner that at least one expires annually. Six will
have two-year terms, with one having a one-year term.
§ 33-3. Creation of Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
A. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of a
representative of the Coatesville Area School District (CASD), YMCA,
CYWA, Art Partners and the Coatesville City Youth Associations. The
Advisory Board's mission is to make recommendations to the Parks and
Recreation Commission for programming objectives. A representative
from the Advisory Board will attend all meetings of the Parks and
Recreation Commission for the purpose of presenting
recommendations and initiatives to the Parks and Recreation
Commission.
B. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board absent
from three or more consecutive regular meetings of the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Board without an approved leave of absence
granted by the City Council after public hearing and prior written
notice thereof shall be removed from the Parks and Recreation
Advisory Board by the City Council of the City of Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board absent
from 20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Parks
and Recreation Advisory Board within any one-year period shall be
notified in writing by the City Manager acting on behalf of the City
Council of the attendance requirements of this subsection. Any
§ 30-8 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 33-3
30:77
§ 33-4. Serving of terms.
All persons so appointed to the Parks and Recreation Commission shall
serve their full term, or until their successors are appointed, unless they
voluntarily resign or are removed by the City Council for dereliction or
neglect of duty.
§ 33-5. Vacancies.
Any vacancy in the Parks and Recreation Commission occurring otherwise
than by expiration of a term shall be filled in the same manner and by
the same appointing body as the original appointment and shall be for the
unexpired term of said member.
§ 33-6. Compensation.
All members of the Parks and Recreation Commission will serve without pay.
§ 33-7. Officers; rules and regulations; meetings.
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall appoint from its membership
a Chairperson and such other officers as it may deem necessary for the
orderly procedure of its business and will adopt bylaws, rules and
regulations covering its procedures. The Commission shall hold regular
meetings, including two work sessions and at least one public meeting each
quarter. All public meetings shall be held in accordance with the Sunshine
Act.34
§ 33-8. Donations; authority to incur obligations.
The Parks and Recreation Commission may, with prior approval of City
Council, accept any grants, gifts, requests or donations of services,
equipment, real estate or money to be used as specified by the donor or by
member of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board who is absent
from 20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings within a
one-year period shall thereafter be removed for cause from such
position by the City Council with prior written notice after public
hearing unless such member resigns in writing or waives the public
hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board may be
removed for cause as determined by the City Council after public
hearing and prior written notice thereof.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board without
cause by the City Council when authorized by state law, City
Charter or City ordinance.
34.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
§ 33-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 33-8
30:78
the terms of acceptance. The Commission shall have no authority to enter
into any contract or incur any obligation binding upon the City of Coatesville
other than current obligations or contracts to be fully executed within the
then-current year and all within the budget appropriations made by the City
Council or to be satisfied by funds received from sources other than the city
budget.
§ 33-9. Parks and Recreation Coordinator.
The City Manager shall appoint the Parks and Recreation Coordinator
in accordance with the Home Rule Charter who possesses the necessary
qualifications and who has demonstrated by actual work experience his
or her ability to organize and direct a community recreation system and
supervise the activities of such other personnel as may be deemed
necessary in carrying out the program. The Parks and Recreation
Coordinator shall report to the City Manager or his designee and be
responsive to the Commission in carrying out the goals and objectives of the
Commission.
§ 33-10. Parks and Recreation Coordinator's responsibilities.
Summary of Parks and Recreation Commission major functions.
§ 33-11. Use of funds; interest.
The funds appropriated by the City Council and budgeted to the Parks and
Recreation program shall be disbursed by the Council, the City Manager or
his designated administrative staff upon vouchers issued by the Parks and
Recreation Commission and within the budget appropriations made. Funds
received by the Commission from sources other than budget appropriations
A. To define the objectives of public recreation services and make plans
harmonizing with them.
B. To maintain the highest quality and standard of recreation service.
C. To interpret the importance and need of recreation services to the
general public.
D. To keep public officials informed of the status and progress of
recreation services.
E. To work collaboratively with public officials to select the recreation and
park executive and define his or her duties and responsibilities.
F. To establish a sound fiscal plan to achieve recreational goals.
G. To provide for an adequate system of recreation areas and facilities.
H. To give stability and continuity to general operations.
I. To evaluate the services of recreation system in relation to its
objectives.
§ 33-8 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 33-11
30:79
shall be deposited by the City Manager and disbursed in accordance with
the budget funds, except that funds received by gift, bequest or otherwise
shall be disbursed in accordance with the terms of the acceptance thereof.
Any interest made by this endeavor will be part of the Parks and Recreation
budget.
§ 33-12. Monthly reports; fiscal year.
The Parks and Recreation Coordinator shall make full and complete monthly
reports to the City Council or at such other times as may be designated or
requested by City Council. The fiscal year of said Commission shall conform
to that of the City of Coatesville.
§ 33-13. Annual program and planning report.
The Parks and Recreation Coordinator shall submit with its annual budget
request a comprehensive report covering the forthcoming year which
outlines its proposed recreation programs for that year and its plans with
respect to the creation, use or modification of the recreational areas and
facilities operated by it. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall obtain
the prior approval of the City Council for any major modifications or
additions to said programs and plans within that year.
§ 33-14. Powers limited.
Nothing in the bylaws, rules and regulations of the Parks and Recreation
Commission shall vest in it any powers, responsibilities or duties not herein
authorized.
Chapter 35
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Pensions — See Ch. 38.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 51.
Social security — See Ch. 55.
§ 35-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the City of Coatesville Personnel Code is to establish a
uniform system of personnel administration by indicating the conditions of
employment in the city service and the construction of procedures to ensure
protection of the city's interests and the employees' rights.
§ 35-2. Applicability.
Except as otherwise provided in contracts with the Police Department or
other recognized bargaining units of municipal employees, all employees of
§ 33-11 COATESVILLE CODE § 35-2
30:80
the City of Coatesville shall be subject to the application of the Personnel
Code, except where the code conflicts with any statute of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 35-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DIVISION OR DEPARTMENT HEAD — The individual appointed by City
Council to oversee each respective department.[Amended 1-24-2011 by
Ord. No. 1345-2011]
SUPERVISOR, IMMEDIATE SUPERVISOR or DEPARTMENT SUPERVISOR
— The Superintendent of Public Works and the Assistant Superintendent
for streets, parks, utility maintenance, water plant and sewage plant,
respectively, and the administrative director in all other departments.
§ 35-4. Rate of pay for employees.
The rate of pay for employees of the City of Coatesville shall be determined
in the Wage and Salary Ordinance of the city budget for the current year.
§ 35-5. Qualifications for permanent employment. [Amended
1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 1345-2011]
The qualifications for all permanent positions shall be established by the
City Manager, with the exception that the qualifications of the City Manager
and Division or Department Heads shall be approved by City Council.
§ 35-6. (Reserved)35
§ 35-7. Part-time and temporary employees.
§ 35-8. Separation from service.
In addition to voluntary retirement, an employee may be separated from the
service of the City of Coatesville by any one of the methods described below:
A. When appropriate and in the interest of the city government,
compensation and other conditions of employment for part-time and
temporary employees may be set by the department supervisor and the
administrative director, subject to approval by City Council.
B. Except as may be otherwise specifically provided, temporary and parttime
hourly employees shall not be entitled to such benefits as annual
leave, sympathy leave, sick leave, health benefits, life insurance,
longevity, personal days or such other benefits which may be provided
to other employees.
35.Editor's Note: Former § 35-6, Transfer of employees, was repealed 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
1345-2011.
§ 35-2 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 35-8
30:81
§ 35-9. Disciplinary actions; appeals.
Except as otherwise provided for by statutes, the following provisions shall
govern disciplinary actions affecting employees in the city service:
A. Resignation. To resign in good standing, an employee must give his or
her department supervisor or department head at least 14 calendar
days' prior notice.
B. Quitting. An employee who fails to report to work for three consecutive
workdays without authorized leave shall be separated from the payroll
and reported as quit.
C. Layoffs.
(1) Any involuntary separation not involving delinquency, misconduct
or inefficiency shall be considered a layoff.
(2) When it becomes necessary to reduce the working force in a
department or division thereof because of lack of funds or other
cause, employees shall be laid off. Prior to a reduction in force, the
names and job titles of any and all permanent employees scheduled
for layoff shall be submitted to the City Council for approval, and
not until the City Council has approved and confirmed the names
submitted for layoff shall any layoff be consummated.
(3) When an employee is unable to continue his or her work because of
a physical or mental disability and has exhausted his or her
accumulated leave, he or she shall be separated by means of a
layoff or given a leave of absence without pay. Disability shall be
determined by a physician authorized by the administrative
director.
D. Dismissals. Dismissals are discharges or separation made for
delinquency, misconduct, inefficiency or inability to perform the work of
the position satisfactorily. All dismissals shall be made in accordance
with the City Charter and applicable state law. The City Manager shall
publish to all City employees a personnel manual, which is approved by
Council, which shall contain procedures governing the separation from
service due to dismissal. [Amended 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
1345-2011]
A. Dismissals. See § 35-8D.
B. Suspensions. A division or department head may, for disciplinary
purposes, suspend without pay an employee in his or her department
for such length of time as he or she considers appropriate. In cases
involving an employee subject to the City's civil service regulations or
an applicable collective bargaining unit, a written statement
specifically setting forth reasons for such suspension shall be furnished
to the affected employee by his or her division or department head and
a copy filed with the Administrative Director. Except for cases involving
§ 35-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 35-9
30:82
§ 35-10. Personnel manual. [Added 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
1345-201137]
The City Manager shall publish to all City employees a personnel manual,
which shall be approved by Council, which describes the hours of work,
a division or department head, the City Manager may approve a
suspension of an employee for a longer period, pending the
investigation or criminal trial of any charges against him or her. In
cases involving a division or department head, the City Manager may
suspend the division or department head with the approval of City
Council. [Amended 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 1345-2011]
C. Reasons for disciplinary actions. Listed below are some of the reasons
which might be causes of disciplinary action, but disciplinary action is
not limited to the offenses listed:
(1) Being convicted of a crime.
(2) Insubordination (disobedience).
(3) Too much lost time.
(4) Being absent without leave.
(5) Excessive tardiness.
(6) Inefficiency.
(7) Abuse of city property.
(8) Giving false statements to supervisors or the public.
(9) Use of alcoholic beverages on city property, including vehicles, or
during duty.
(10) Violation of city ordinances, administrative regulations or
departmental rules.
(11) Any disgraceful conduct which reflects unfavorably on the city as
an employer.
(12) Membership in any organization which advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States by force or violence.
(13) Discovery of a false statement in an application which had not been
detected previously.
(14) Repeated failure to pay acknowledged debts.36
36.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Appeals; employee rights, which immediately followed
this subsection, was repealed 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 1345-2011.
37.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former § 35-11, Sick leave; § 35-12, Health
benefits; § 35-13, Insurance; § 35-14, Longevity; § 35-15, Personal days; and § 35-17,
Continuation of benefits; and renumbered former § 35-16 as § 35-11.
§ 35-9 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 35-10
30:83
sick and vacation leave, holidays, overtime, compensatory time off and/
or compensation for same and other benefits provided by the City to its
employees. Terms of collective bargaining agreements that are inconsistent
with the personnel manual shall apply to the subject bargaining unit
members.
§ 35-11. Retirement. [Amended 11-28-1994 by Ord. No. 981-94]
Chapter 38
PENSIONS
A. Employees may retire under the provisions of the City of Coatesville
Pension Plan in effect at the time and as amended.38
B. Normal retirement date. The normal retirement date will be the first
day of the month on or following the employee's 65th birthday.
C. Early retirement. An employee may retire up to 10 years before his or
her normal retirement date if he or she has completed 10 years of
service.
D. Late retirement. With the approval of the City Manager, an employee
may continue to work after his or her normal retirement date. In such
cases, retirement income will begin on the first day of the month
following his or her or her retirement.
E. Termination of employment. If an employee terminates employment
with the city before his or her normal retirement date and has
completed five years of service with the city, he or she will be eligible
for a retirement income. This retirement income, referred to as "vested
benefit," will begin on his or her normal retirement date.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 38, Pensions.
§ 35-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 35-11
30:84
ARTICLE I
Police Pension Fund
[Adopted 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 845-89 as Ch. 48 of the 1989
Code]
§ 38-1. Creation of fund; composition.
Under the provisions of the Act of June 23, 1931, as amended, of the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, there is hereby created
a Police Pension Fund. Said fund shall consist of the dues paid by the
members of the Department of Police as hereinafter provided; all fines and
forfeitures imposed by the Department of Police from time to time upon
or against any member or members of such Department; all rewards, fees,
gifts, testimonials and emoluments that may be presented, paid or given
to any member of such Department on account of police services, except
such as may under the law be payable to the City of Coatesville and except
compensation received for special detail work and except rewards offered
for the arrest of persons accused of crime committed outside of the said City
of Coatesville; all bequests, legacies, gifts or donations made to said fund
or to the City of Coatesville, in trust, for the benefit of said fund; all funds
subscribed by the public; all lost, abandoned, unclaimed or stolen money or
property in the possession of said Department for a space of one year and
for which there shall be no lawful claimant; and interest on investments.
§ 38-2. Annual contributions. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96; 4-30-2012 by Ord. No. 1382-2012]
The City shall make annual appropriations to the fund in accordance with
the Third Class City Code and Act 205, which sum in no year shall be less
than 1/2 of 1% nor more than 3% of all City taxes levied by the City, other
than taxes levied to pay interest on or extinguish the debt of the City or any
part thereof. Council may exceed the limitations imposed by this section if
an additional amount is deemed necessary to provide sufficient funds for
payments to surviving spouses of members retired on pension or killed or
who die in the service; provided, however, that the City may annually pay
into said fund not less than 1/2 of 1% of all City taxes levied by the City,
other than taxes levied to pay interest on or extinguish the debt of the City
or any part thereof.
§ 38-3. Control; Police Pension Commission; Police Pension Fund
investment account.
A. The Police Pension Fund shall, at all times, be under the direction and
control of the Council and shall be committed to the custody and
management of a Police Pension Commission, consisting of the
President of Council, City Manager, Director of Finance and Chief of
Police, whose membership on said Commission shall be concurrent with
their tenure in office, one member of the police force, which member
shall be selected by a majority of police on active duty at an election to
be held on the second Monday of January of each year at a time to be
§ 38-1 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-3
30:85
fixed by the Chief of Police, who shall preside at such election, one
retired police officer and one resident of the City, who shall serve for
two-year terms and be appointed by the Council pursuant to § 2-504 of
the Coatesville Home Rule Charter.
B. The members of said Commission shall receive no additional
compensation for the services thus performed. The President of Council
shall be the President, the Chief of Police the Vice President, the City
Manager the Secretary and the Director of Finance the Treasurer of
said Commission, respectively. The Commission shall keep full and
accurate accounts of all its transactions. It shall have full power to
make rules for the transaction of its business and application of its
funds, its time and place of meeting and all other matters necessary for
the conduct of business, subject to the special provisions and
regulations contained in this chapter or such ordinances as may
hereafter be passed relating thereto. The Commission shall meet at
least once every three months at a stated time or at such times as it may
by resolution designate or upon the call of the President, for the
transaction of such business as may properly come before it. A quorum
shall consist of three members for the transaction of business. All
incidental expenditures necessary to the transaction of the business of
the Commission shall be separately provided for by the City. No money
shall be paid out of the pension fund except for the purpose of pensions
as contemplated in this chapter. The Treasurer, if required by the
Commission, shall give a surety bond to the City, in a sum not less than
double the probable amount of money that shall come into his or her
hands, for the faithful performance of his or her duties, the premium on
which bond shall be paid by the City. The Commission shall make an
annual report to the City Council on the first Monday of January in each
year of all receipts and disbursements of the fund and such other
matters as should be properly embodied in such report.
C. The Police Pension Commission shall appoint a qualified and reputable
banking or investment institution to serve as custodian of the Police
Pension Fund investment account. The Police Pension Fund investment
account shall consist of all moneys in the hands of the Commission not
needed for the payment of pensions, plus a reasonable amount to be
retained by the Commission for withdrawals. Said custodian shall invest
and reinvest said funds and the accruals thereon in such investments as
are commonly called "legal investments for trust funds" as said
Commission may direct. All custodial fees shall be paid by the Police
Pension Fund. All warrants on said fund shall be drawn by the
individuals authorized to sign checks for said fund. [Amended
9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
D. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Police Pension Commission absent from three
or more consecutive regular meetings of the Police Pension
Commission without an approved leave of absence granted by the
City Council after public hearing and prior written notice thereof
§ 38-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-3
30:86
§ 38-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all of the members of the Department of Police
of the City of Coatesville who are under civil service.
§ 38-5. Payment schedule. [Amended 10-8-2007 by Ord. No.
1290-2007]
Payments from the pension fund shall be uniform and shall be made
according to the following schedule:
shall be removed from the Police Pension Commission by the City
Council of the City of Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the Police Pension Commission absent from 20% or
more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Police Pension
Commission within any one-year period shall be notified in writing
by the City Manager acting on behalf of the City Council of the
attendance requirements of this subsection. Any member of the
Police Pension Commission who is absent from 20% or more of the
regularly scheduled meetings within a one-year period shall
thereafter be removed for cause from such position by the City
Council with prior written notice after public hearing unless such
member resigns in writing or waives the public hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the Police Pension Commission may be removed for
cause as determined by the City Council after public hearing and
prior written notice thereof.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Police Pension Commission without cause by the
City Council when authorized by state law, City Charter or City
ordinance.
A. To all officers or employees who are retired, annual pensions shall be
paid in monthly installments from and after the allowance thereof until
the death of the pensioner, as follows:
(1) The basis for the apportionment of the pension shall be at the rate
of 50% of the employee's average monthly salary, which is the
greater of the highest average annual salary received during any
five years of service preceding retirement, or the rate of monthly
pay at retirement, computed at each six-month rate, except as to
service increments provided for in Subsection A(2) of this section.
(2) Such person shall also receive a service increment in accordance
with the provisions of Section 4303(b)(1) through (5) of the Third
Class City Code, which shall consist of an additional monthly
payment equal to 1/40 times the monthly benefit for each year of
service over the minimum service requirement that is rendered
before the member reaches age 65, up to a cap of $300 per month,
with an employee contribution of $3 per month.
§ 38-3 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-5
30:87
(3) The surviving spouse of a member of the police force or a member
who retires on pension dying on or after January 1, 1960, or if there
is no surviving spouse or, if such surviving spouse subsequently
dies then the child or children under the age of 18 years of a
member of the police force or a member who retires on pension
dying on or after August 1, 1963, shall, during the lifetime of such
surviving spouse or, in the case of a child or children, until reaching
the age of 18 years, be entitled to receive 50% of the normal
pension benefit the member was receiving or would have been
receiving had he or she been retired at the time of his or her death.
[Amended 4-30-2012 by Ord. No. 1382-2012]
(4) Disability pension entitlement.
(a) Any officer retired due to a total and permanent disability that
renders him or her unable to perform his or her duties, which
disability is incurred as a direct result of his or her work as a
police officer, shall be entitled to receive a monthly benefit of
50% of average monthly salary earned at the time such
disability was incurred. The Police Pension Fund shall be
subrogated to the right of the disabled member to extent of
payments made under the Pennsylvania Workers'
Compensation Act39 or the Enforcement Officer Disability
Benefits Law.40
(b) Any officer retired for total and permanent disability that
renders the officer unable to perform his or her duties, which
disability is not incurred as a direct result of his or her work,
shall be entitled to receive disability pension benefits
according to the following schedule: [Amended 3-28-2011 by
Ord. No. 1347-2011; 4-30-2012 by Ord. No. 1382-2012]
[1] Any officer with less than 10 years of continuous service
retired, for total and permanent disability not incurred in
the line of duty as a police officer, shall be entitled to
receive a pension of 25% of his or her annual salary.
[2] Any officer with 10 or more years of continuous service,
retired for total and permanent disability not incurred in
the line of duty as a police officer, shall be entitled to
receive a pension of 50% of his or her annual salary.
(c) Nonservice disability pension benefits shall be offset by
benefits received pursuant to the City's long-term disability
plan.
(5) A member of the force who shall have retired on pension prior to
January 1, 1960, shall receive a pension increase of 50%, effective
January 1, 1967, but such increased pension shall not exceed, in
39.Editor's Note: See 77 P.S. § 1 et seq.
40.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 637.
§ 38-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-5
30:88
§ 38-6. Eligibility of employees for payment. [Amended 3-25-1996
by Ord. No. 1012-96; 1-24-2000 by Ord. No. 1118-2000; 10-8-2007
by Ord. No. 1290-2007]
the aggregate, the pension of a member of the force currently
retiring with the same grade and years of service.
A. Service requirement. Every officer or employee of the Department of
Police who shall have served continuously for a period of 20 years shall
be entitled to be honorably discharged and retired upon the officer's
own request on a pension, the pension to date from the time of approval
thereof by the Commission. An officer may purchase retirement credit
for up to five years of active military service, which service occurred
before his or her employment with the Department of Police. But in
order to have such time credited toward his or her service for
retirement purposes, the officer will be required to make all employee
and City contributions for such purchased service time.
B. Cost-of-living adjustment.
(1) Upon retirement, officers who were hired prior to January 1, 2002,
shall receive an adjustment in their pension annually equal to 3% of
their annual pay in their retirement year until they reach a
retirement annual benefit equal to 70% of their annual pay in their
year of retirement.
(2) Upon retirement, officers who were hired on or after January 1,
2002, shall receive an annual COLA adjustment to their pension
effective January 1 of each year, equal to the CPI-W change from
December to December 1 of the prior year, but in no event will such
COLA adjustment cause the monthly benefit to exceed 50% of the
current salary for a patrolman of the highest pay grade.
(3) Vesting and early retirement. All officers shall be fully vested upon
completion of 12 years of continuous service. Such officers will be
entitled to receive partial, pro-rated pension benefits, to commence
when the member would have become eligible for normal
retirement.
(4) Miscellaneous. Every such officer or employee retired according to
the provisions hereinbefore referred to shall be subject to service
from time to time as a police reserve until unfitted for such service.
Such reserve officer shall not be required to serve more than four
hours per day unless compensation for the excess time at the usual
hourly rate as paid to extra police is paid to said reserve officer.
Every officer or employee of the Department of Police shall be
honorably discharged and retired when he or she shall reach the
age of 65 years, provided that this clause requiring compulsory
retirement shall not become effective until August 1, 1966. The
Commission may have the right, with the approval of Council, on
application received, to retire on pension any officer or employee of
§ 38-5 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-6
30:89
§ 38-7. Monthly deductions from salaries and compensation;
termination of employment; death. [Amended 1-24-2000 by Ord. No.
1118-2000; 10-8-2007 by Ord. No. 1290-2007]
the Department of Police who shall have served continuously for
a period of at least 15 years if (in its opinion and in the opinions
of two reputable physicians of the City of Coatesville, one to be
selected by the Commission and the other by the applicant, and,
in the case of a dispute, a third physician to be selected by the
Commission, who shall make a physical examination and file their
opinions in writing with the Commission and whose fees shall be
paid by the officer or employee asking to be retired) the officer
or employee is physically or mentally incapacitated, through injury
received or disease contracted while in the actual performance of
duty and by reason of the performance of such duty and without
fault or misconduct on his or her part, from performing his or
her duty in the Department of Police; provided, however, that the
Commission shall, on application received or on its own initiative,
have the authority to order another examination after the
expiration of six months from the date of retirement; and if (in its
opinion and in the opinion of two reputable physicians of the City
of Coatesville, one to be selected by the Commission and the other
by the pensioner, and, in the case of a dispute, a third physician
to be selected by the Commission, who shall make the aforesaid
examination and file their opinions in writing with the Commission
and whose fees shall be paid by the officer or employee seeking to
be reinstated or by the Commission if it orders the examination on
its own initiative) the disability of the pensioner has been removed,
said Commission shall terminate the pension, and the pensioner
shall be reinstated as an active member of the Department of
Police with the same rank and rating which he or she had upon
retirement; provided, however, that the pensioner shall, if
reinstated, file with the Commission in a release, duly executed
and acknowledged, of any right or claim to the pension during
the period which he or she shall serve after such retirement.
Suspension from duty for cause (other than misconduct), military
or naval service in time of war or in a national or state emergency
on behalf of the United States of America or Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania shall not affect the continuity of the service.
Suspension from duty for misconduct shall not break the continuity
of the service, but in such case, the time such officer or employee
is suspended shall not be included in the computation of the time of
service necessary before a pension can be secured. Service-related
and non-service-related injuries shall be compensated as provided
in the Third Class City Code.
A. Each member shall contribute, by way of a monthly payroll deduction,
beginning as of the first day of the member's employment as a police
officer, a retirement contribution to the fund equal to 5% of the
member's annual salary. From time to time, the amount of required
§ 38-6 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-7
30:90
§ 38-8. Death benefits; pension not subject to attachment,
assignment or transfer. [Amended 3-24-2003 by Ord. No.
1216-2004; 10-8-2007 by Ord. No. 1290-2007]
contributions may be changed by a resolution of the City Council in
accordance with the collective bargaining agreement, which revision
shall be based upon actuarial recommendations and shall be a result
of collective bargaining negotiations. In addition thereto, each member
shall contribute a service increment contribution, by way of a monthly
payroll deduction beginning as of the first day of the member's
employment and ending as of the month that the member attains
age 65, equal to 1/2 of 1% of the member's salary or $3 per month,
whichever is less. [Amended 4-30-2012 by Ord. No. 1382-2012]
B. If, for any cause, the officer or employee contributing to the pension
fund shall cease to be an officer or employee of the Department of
Police before he or she becomes entitled to the pension conferred by
this chapter or for any other reason shall not be entitled to a pension,
then the total amount of his or her contributions shall be refunded in
full without interest; provided, however, that if any such officer or
employee shall have returned to him or her the amount contributed as
aforesaid and shall afterward reenter the employment of such
Department, such officer or employee shall not be entitled to the
pension designated until 15 or 20 years' service, as the case may be, as
set forth in § 38-6 hereof, after said reemployment. In the event of the
death of an officer or employee before he or she becomes entitled to the
pension aforesaid, the total amount of his or her contribution, without
interest, shall be paid, unless otherwise directed by the officer in
writing, to the surviving spouse, children, grandchildren or parents, in
order, respectively, or if there are no survivors in any of the aforesaid
classes, then to the estate of such deceased officer or employee. In the
event of the death of a pensioner before he or she has received as much
as he or she had contributed, the surplus, without interest, shall be
paid, unless otherwise directed by the officer in writing, to the surviving
spouse, children, grandchildren or parents, in order, respectively, or if
there are no survivors in any of the aforesaid classes, then to the estate
of such deceased officer or employee. No officer or employee shall be
entitled to a pension who does not make the monthly payment herein
required.
A. The surviving spouse of a member of the police force eligible for
retirement or a member who retires on pension dying on or after
January 1, 1960, or if there is no surviving spouse or if such surviving
spouse subsequently dies, then the child or children under the age of 18
years of a member of the police force eligible for retirement or a
member who retires on pension, dying on or after August 1, 1963, shall
during the lifetime of such surviving spouse, or in the case of a child or
children, until reaching the age of 18 years, be entitled to receive 50%
of the normal pension the member was receiving or would have been
receiving had he been retired at the time of his death.
§ 38-7 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-8
30:91
§ 38-8.1. One-time postretirement adjustment. [Added 8-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 1199-2002]
A one-time postretirement adjustment shall be provided to the eligible
retired members of the Police Pension Plan, the eligibility and amount of
such adjustment to be as provided in Act 64 of 2002,41 and such adjustment
shall be effective with the first monthly pension benefit paid after June 30,
2002.
§ 38-8.2. Killed-in-service benefit. [Added 3-28-2011 by Ord. No.
1347-2011]
In the event that any officer shall die as a result of the performance of his or
her duties, which such event is specifically identified and defined in Act 51
of 2009, 53 P.S. § 891 et seq. (hereinafter the "Act"), the City of Coatesville,
acting through its City Manager or other authorized representative, shall,
within 90 days from the date of death, submit certification of the death to
the commonwealth for payment of a killed-in-service benefit as provided in
the Act, and benefits shall thereafter be provided by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in accordance with the terms of the Act.
§ 38-8.3. Adoption of City of Coatesville Police Pension Plan. [Added
4-30-2012 by Ord. No. 1382-2012]
The City of Coatesville after collective bargaining and approval by its
Pension Commission and City Council has adopted the attached City of
Coatesville Police Pension Plan which is incorporated herein by reference as
though set forth at length.42 The provisions of this City of Coatesville Police
Pension Plan, shall, to the extent of any conflict with any other provisions in
the Code be controlling.
B. The pension herein mentioned shall not be subject to attachment or
execution and shall be payable only to the beneficiary or beneficiaries
as designated in this chapter and shall not be subject to assignment or
transfer.
A. These benefits identified under the Act include monthly payments to
survivors equal to the monthly salary, adjusted pursuant to the Act, less
any workers' compensation or pension or retirement benefits paid to
such survivors, until there is no eligible beneficiary to survive them.
"Eligible beneficiary" is defined under the Act to mean the surviving
spouse or the child or children under the age of 18 years or, if attending
college, under the age of 23 years.
B. A single-sum death benefit is also provided under the Act in the amount
of $100,000, adjusted pursuant to the Act, to the parent or parents of
the deceased when no spouse or minor children survive.
41.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 896.401.
42.Editor’s Note: Said plan is on file in the City offices.
§ 38-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-8.4
30:92
§ 38-8.4. Early retirement window for May 2012. [Added 4-30-2012
by Ord. No. 1383-2012]
A. Early retirement pension eligibility. The City will offer an early
retirement window period from May 1, 2012, to May 31, 2012, with
terms as follows:
(1) Members at superannuation. Active members who have reached
superannuation requirements as of May 1, 2012, will be permitted
to retire immediately at 70% of their final average salary.
(2) Members with 15 years of service. Active members with at least 15
years of pensionable service time as of May 1, 2012, will be
permitted to retire immediately at 50% of their final average salary
and will thereafter be eligible for annual COLA adjustments at
amounts specified in the CBA.
(3) Pensionable earnings. Pensionable earnings for purposes of
calculating the final average earnings of a participant's accrued
benefits under the early retirement window is defined as the
greater of the participant's current base wage or the five-year
consecutive average of the participant's base rate of pay times the
number of actual hours worked in each calendar year (divided by
five). [Added 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 1384-2012]
B. Post-retirement health care. Members who retire between May 1, 2012,
and May 31, 2012, and qualify for the early retirement window shall be
entitled to post-retirement health care benefits as follows: The City
shall increase its contribution for post-retirement medical benefits from
33.3% or 50% (depending on their eligibility) to 100% for 18 months or
until the member is eligible for other health care benefits, whichever
occurs first.
C. Severance and cashout benefits. The following individuals shall be
entitled to receive additional severance and leave cashout incentives as
described below:43
(1) Severance. Severance pay in the amount of $1,750 for each
completed year of service at the time of retirement, payable by
June 30, 2012.
(2) Leave cashout. One-hundred-percent cashout of all accrued but
unused vacation, sick and personal leave at the rate of pay at the
time of retirement, payable by December 31, 2012.
(3) Part-time police officers' hourly rate. Part-time police officers shall
be paid an hourly rate determined by the City, but in no event shall
a part-time officer be paid more per hour than the hourly rate of a
full-time officer in the Patrol 1 pay grade.
43.Editor’s Note: A complete copy of the ordinance with the list of names is on file in the City
offices.
§ 38-8.4 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-8.4
30:93
(4) Part-time officers' rights. Part-time officers shall not be entitled to
any benefits or grievance rights in the collective bargaining
agreement, unless expressly set forth therein.
(5) Twenty-five full-time officers to be retained. Full-time sworn
officers shall not be reduced below 25 full-time positions.
§ 38-8.4 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-8.4
30:94
ARTICLE II
Nonuniformed Pension Plan44
[Adopted 1-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1063-98]
§ 38-9. Payment of costs.
The City of Coatesville shall pay the full cost of the plan. Employee
contributions shall not be required.
§ 38-10. Annual appropriations.
The City Council of the City of Coatesville shall annually set aside, apportion
and appropriate to the plan such amount as by law and actuarial standards
and recommendations shall be proper.
§ 38-11. Applicability.
All employees (excluding police officers) of the City of Coatesville who work
1,000 or more hours per year in the City's employ shall become participants
of the plan on the date of employment.
§ 38-12. Retirement benefits.
A. Normal retirement.
(1) An employee shall be eligible for normal retirement after the
employee attains the age of 65.
(2) Normal retirement pension is payable monthly during lifetime with
payments ceasing upon death; however, if the retired employee
dies before receiving 60 monthly payments from the plan,
payments will continue to the employee's named beneficiary until
the end of the sixty-month period.
(3) Monthly pension. [Amended 2-28-2000 by Ord. No. 1126-2000]
(a) The amount of the monthly pension originally equal to $25 per
year of the retirement employee's accredited service shall be
modified as follows:
[1] Effective January 1, 2000, the City shall increase the
pension benefit by $5 per month to $30 per month per year
of service as a City employee.
[2] Effective January 1, 2001, the City shall increase the
pension benefit by $5 per month to $35 per month per year
of service as a City employee.
44.Editor's Note: The title of this plan was changed from "Retirement Income Plan" to
"Nonuniformed Pension Plan" 10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 1438-2014.
§ 38-9 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-12
30:95
[3] Effective January 1, 2002, the City shall increase the
pension benefit by $5 per month to $40 per month per year
of service as a City employee.
[4] Effective January 1, 2003, the City shall increase the
pension benefit by $5 per month to $45 per month per year
of service as a City employee.
[5] Effective January 1, 2004, the City shall increase the
pension benefit by $5 per month to $50 per month per year
of service as a City employee.
[6] Effective January 1, 2014, the City shall increase the
pension benefit for nonuniformed members of the
bargaining unit represented by the union hired prior to
January 1, 2001 (and all nonunion, nonuniform employees
of the City) by $5 per month to $55 per month per year of
service as a City employee. [Added 10-27-2014 by Ord.
No. 1439-2014]
[7] Effective January 1, 2015, the City shall increase the
pension benefit for nonuniformed members hired prior to
January 1, 2001 (and all nonunion, nonuniformed
employees of the City) by $5 per month to $60 per month
per year of service as a City employee. [Added
10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 1439-2014]
[8] Effective January 1, 2016, the City shall increase the
pension benefit for nonuniformed members of the
bargaining unit represented by the union hired prior to
January 1, 2001 (and all nonunion, nonuniformed
employees of the City) by $5 per month to $65 per month
per year of service as a City employee. [Added
10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 1439-2014]
[9] Effective January 1, 2017, the City shall increase the
pension benefit for nonuniformed members of the
bargaining unit represented by the union hired prior to
January 1, 2001 (and all nonunion, nonuniformed
employees of the City) by $5 per month to $70 per month
per year of service as a City employee. [Added
10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 1439-2014]
(b) Each employee shall vest, for purposes of qualifying for the
pension, after five years of service with the City of Coatesville.
(c) Credited service is calculated in whole years and in completed
months.
B. Late retirement. If an employee continues working after the normal
retirement date, the employee's pension will not start until the
employee actually retires from active employment. Such late retirement
§ 38-12 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-12
30:96
§ 38-13. Death benefits. [Amended 1-24-2000 by Ord. No.
1118-2000; 3-24-2003 by Ord. No. 1216-2003]
If any employee dies prior to retirement but after meeting the eligibility
requirements for early retirement, a death benefit shall be payable to said
employee's surviving spouse, provided said deceased employee has been
married for at least one year as of the date of the employee's death. The
death benefit shall be a monthly pension equal to 50% of the pension the
deceased employee would have been entitled to receive if the employee had
retired on the date of death.
§ 38-14. Vesting.
If an employee terminates employment prior to meeting the eligibility
requirements for normal retirement but after the employee has completed
five years of service, the employee shall be entitled to a vested deferred
monthly pension beginning on the employee's normal retirement date equal
to the employee's accrued pension at the date of the employee's
termination.
§ 38-15. Accrued pension.
The pension accrued at any date other than the employee's normal
retirement date is equal to the pension determined according to the normal
retirement benefit formula, but based upon the employee's credited service
at the date of determination.
§ 38-16. Pension options.
pension shall be equal to the pension accrued to the employee's late
retirement date, based upon the employee's credited service
determined at the employee's late retirement date.
C. Early retirement. An employee is eligible to retire prior to the normal
retirement date after such employee attains age 55 and completes 10
years of service. Such early retirement pension shall be equal to the
pension accrued to the employee's early retirement date, reduced to
reflect payments made to the employee over a longer period of time.
A. An employee's monthly pension may be payable under one of the
options listed in Subsection A(1) through (3) below. The amount of
pension will be actuarially adjusted for each option:
(1) Lifetime pension: a monthly pension payable as long as the retired
employee lives, with payments ceasing upon the retired employee's
death.
(2) Joint and survivor pension: a monthly pension payable as long as
the retired employee lives. If the employee's named survivor is still
living upon the retired employee's death, payments shall continue
during the survivor's lifetime. Pension payments to the survivor
§ 38-12 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-16
30:97
§ 38-17. Administration. [Amended 10-27-2014 by Ord. No.
1438-2014]
The Pension Plan Administrator, designated by the Council of the City, shall
administer the plan.
§ 38-18. Control; Pension Commission; Nonuniform Pension Fund
investment account. [Added 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1097-99]
could be 100%, 75%, 66 2/3% or 50%, in accordance with the
percentage election made at the time of this pension option
election.
(3) Lifetime pension with certain period: a monthly pension payable as
long as the retired employee lives. Upon the retired employee's
death, payments shall continue to the employee's designated
beneficiary for the remainder of the certain period if the retired
employee dies before a specified number of monthly payments (120
or 180) have been made. If the retired employee lives beyond the
certain period, payments shall continue as long as the retired
employee lives.
B. The employee's choice of a pension option shall be made before
payments begin and cannot be changed thereafter.
A. The Nonuniform Pension Fund shall, at all times, be under the direction
and control of the Council and shall be committed to the custody and
management of a Nonuniform Pension Commission, consisting of the
President of Council, City Manager and the Director of Finance, whose
membership on said Commission shall be concurrent with their tenure
in office, one member of the Public Works Department, which member
shall be selected by a majority of Public Works Department at an
election to be held on the second Monday of January of each year at a
time to be fixed by the Director of Public Works, who shall preside at
such election, one member of the Administrative staff to be selected at
an election to be held on the second Monday of January of each year at a
time to be fixed by the Director of Finance, who shall preside at such
election, and one resident of the City, who shall serve for two-year
terms and be appointed by the Council pursuant to § 2-504 of the
Coatesville Home Rule Charter.
B. The members of said Commission shall receive no additional
compensation for the services thus performed. The President of Council
or his or her designee on Council shall be the President, the City
Manager the Secretary, and the Director of Finance the Treasurer of
said Commission, respectively. The Commission shall keep full and
accurate accounts of all its transactions. It shall have full power to
make rules for the transaction of its business and application of its
funds, its time and place of meeting and all other matters necessary for
the conduct of business, subject to the special provisions and
regulations contained in this chapter or such ordinances as may
§ 38-16 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-18
30:98
hereafter be passed relating thereto. The Commission shall meet at
least once every three months at a stated time or at such times as
it may by resolution designate or upon the call of the President for
the transaction of such business as may properly come before it. A
quorum shall consist of three members for the transaction of business.
All incidental expenditures necessary to the transaction of the business
of the Commission shall be separately provided for by the City. No
money shall be paid out of the pension fund except for the purpose
of pensions as contemplated in this chapter. The Treasurer, if required
by the Commission, shall give a surety bond to the City, in a sum not
less than double the probable amount of money that shall come into
his or her hands, for the faithful performance of his or her duties, the
premium on which bond shall be paid by the City. The Commission
shall make an annual report to the City Council on the first Monday of
January in each year of all receipts and disbursements of the fund and
such other matters as should be properly embodied in such report.
C. The Nonuniform Pension Commission shall appoint a qualified and
reputable banking or investment institution to serve as custodian of the
Nonuniform Pension Fund investment account. The Nonuniform
Pension Fund investment account shall consist of all moneys in the
hands of the Commission not needed for the payment of pensions, plus
a reasonable amount to be retained by the Commission for withdrawals.
Said custodian shall invest and reinvest said funds and the accruals
thereon in such investments as are commonly called "legal investments
for trust funds" as said Commission may direct. All custodial fees shall
be paid by the Nonuniform Pension Fund. All warrants on said fund
shall be drawn by the individuals authorized to sign checks for said
fund.
D. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Nonuniform Pension Commission absent from
three or more consecutive regular meetings of the Nonuniform
Pension Commission without an approved leave of absence granted
by the City Council after public hearing and prior written notice
thereof shall be removed from the Nonuniform Pension
Commission by the City Council of the City of Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the Nonuniform Pension Commission absent from
20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the
Nonuniform Pension Commission within any one-year period shall
be notified in writing by the City Manager acting on behalf of the
City Council of the attendance requirements of this subsection. Any
member of the Nonuniform Pension Commission who is absent
from 20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings within a
one-year period shall thereafter be removed for cause from such
position by the City Council with prior written notice after public
hearing unless such member resigns in writing or waives the public
hearing in writing.
§ 38-18 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-18
30:99
§ 38-18.1. Local 1821: members hired as employees by the City on
or after January 1, 2001. [Added 10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 1438-2014]
(3) Any member of the Nonuniform Pension Commission may be
removed for cause as determined by the City Council after public
hearing and prior written notice thereof.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Nonuniform Pension Commission without cause
by the City Council when authorized by state law, City Charter or
City ordinance.
A. Applicability.
(1) As of the effective date of this section, the provisions of this
§ 38-18.1 shall apply to any member of the bargaining unit
represented by the union hired as a full-time employee by the City
on or after January 1, 2001, who is regularly scheduled to work and
actually works 1,000 or more hours per year, and shall supersede
any otherwise contradictory or contrary provision of this Article II
(each, a "covered employee").
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this Article II shall
remain in full force and effect, unless otherwise contrary to the
provisions of this § 38-18.1, in which case the provisions of this
§ 38-18.1 shall control. Any period of "service" referred in this
section with respect to employment by the City shall be computed
from the first date of employment with the City and need not be
continuous; periods of layoff, suspension or leave of absence do not
interrupt service. A "year of service," for purposes of this section,
means a full year during which a covered employee was an
employee of the City and/or made required contributions to the
Nonuniformed Pension Plan for military service time prior to
participating in the Nonuniformed Pension Plan or for uniformed
service after initial participation in the Nonuniformed Pension Plan.
B. Retirement benefits; amount of pension. Every covered employee who
shall have attained the age of 60 years and upwards and who shall have
served as an employee for a period of 20 years or more shall, upon the
date of his or her retirement and upon application to the Pension Plan
Administrator, during the remainder of his or her life, receive the
pension fixed by the provisions of the Nonuniformed Pension Plan, as
applicable, Act 317, approved June 23, 1931 (P.L. 932), as amended, and
this § 38-18.1.
(1) Full pension. During the lifetime of any covered employee, he or
she shall be entitled to receive a pension annually from the fund set
aside for such purpose under the Nonuniformed Pension Plan (the
"fund"), of 50% of the amount which would constitute the highest
average annual salary or wages which he or she earned during any
five years of service for the City or which would be determined by
§ 38-18 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-18.1
30:100
the rate of the monthly pay of such person at his or her date of
retirement, whichever is higher, reduced by an amount equal to
40% of the primary insurance amount of social security paid or
payable to the covered employee (the "full pension"). Such pension
shall be paid in monthly payments.
(2) Entitlement to full pension. A covered employee is entitled to his or
her full pension when:
(a) Such covered employee has served the City for 20 years of
service and is terminated on or after the date on which such
covered employee has attained the age of 60 years. In such
case, the covered employee is entitled to his or her full pension
during the remainder of his or her life after the later of:
[1] His or her termination; and
[2] His or her attainment of age 60;
(b) Such covered employee has served the City for 20 years of
service and is terminated before the date on which such
covered employee has attained the age of 60 years, provided
that he or she continues his or her contributions into the fund
at the same rate as when he or she left employment until he or
she attains the age of 60 years. In such case, the covered
employee is entitled to his or her full pension during the
remainder of his or her life after his or her attainment of age
60; or
(c) Such covered employee is permanently disabled in accordance
with the provisions of Subsection E.
(3) Entitlement to reduced pension. A covered employee is entitled to a
reduced pension when such covered employee has served the City
for at least 12 years and is terminated before reaching age 60 with
20 years of service. Such covered employee shall be entitled to
receive such portion of the full pension as the period of his or her
service up to the date of his or her termination with the City bears
to the total period of service (including the period of service up to
the date of his or her termination with the City) necessary to reach
age 60 with 20 years of service (the "reduced pension"). In such
case, the covered employee is entitled to the portion of his or her
full pension calculated pursuant to the preceding sentence during
the remainder of his or her life after the later of:
(a) His or her termination; and
(b) His or her attainment of age 60.
(4) Refund of contributions.
(a) A covered employee who has contributed to the fund shall be
entitled to a refund of the total amount of contributions,
§ 38-18.1 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-18.1
30:101
including any military service buy-back payment(s) paid into
the fund by him or her and any payments for intervening
military service, without interest, if such covered employee is
not entitled to a full pension pursuant to Subsection B(2) of
this section or a reduced pension pursuant to Subsection B(3)
of this section and such covered employee has served less than
12 years and ceases to be in the employ of the City.
(b) If any such covered employee has had returned to him or her
the amount contributed, as aforesaid, and shall afterwards
reenter the service of the City, he or she shall not be entitled to
any pension under the terms of the Nonuniformed Pension
Plan, unless he or she shall return to the fund the amount
withdrawn, including any prior military service time buy-back
payment(s), in which event the required period of service
under this § 38-18.1 shall be computed from the date he or she
first entered the service of the City. Otherwise, the date of his
or her period of service shall commence upon reentry to City
service. In the event of the death of any covered employee after
he or she becomes entitled to a pension under this § 38-18.1
and has not elected to retire, the total amount of contributions,
including any military service buy-back payment(s) paid into
the fund by him or her, shall be paid over to his or her estate,
without interest. In the event of the death of a covered
employee before he or she becomes entitled to a pension under
this § 38-18.1, the total amount of contributions, including any
military service buy-back payment(s) paid into the fund by him
or her, shall be paid over to his or her estate, without interest.
In the event of the death of a covered employee before he or
she receives in pension an amount equal to the covered
employee's own contributions to the fund, then the balance of
the covered employee's own contributions, including any
military service buy-back payment(s), shall be paid over to his
or her estate, without interest.
(5) Forfeitures. To the extent applicable, upon the forfeiture of any
nonvested portion of a covered employee's accrued pension, or of
any other amount payable hereunder, the amount of such forfeiture
shall be credited against the future contribution obligations of the
City with respect to the Nonuniformed Pension Plan.
C. Pension options.
(1) A covered employee's monthly pension may be payable under one
of the options listed in Subsection C(1)(a) through (c) of this
section. The amount of pension will be actuarially adjusted for each
option:
(a) Lifetime pension: a monthly pension payable as long as the
covered employee lives, with payments ceasing upon the
covered employee's death.
§ 38-18.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-18.1
30:102
(b) Joint and survivor pension: a monthly pension payable as long
as the covered employee lives. If the covered employee's
named survivor is still living upon the covered employee's
death, payments shall continue during the survivor's lifetime.
Pension payments to the survivor may be 100%, 75%, 66 2/3%
or 50%, in accordance with the percentage election made at
the time of the pension option election.
(c) Lifetime pension with certain period: a monthly pension
payable as long as the covered employee lives. Upon the
covered employee's death, payments shall continue to the
covered employee's designated beneficiary for the remainder
of the certain period if the covered employee dies before a
specified number of monthly payments (120 or 180) have been
made. If the covered employee lives beyond the certain period,
payments shall continue as long as the covered employee lives.
(2) The covered employee's choice of a pension option shall be made
before payments begin and cannot be changed thereafter.
(3) The normal form of retirement benefit for each covered employee
shall be a lifetime pension in accordance with Subsection C(1)(a) of
this section.
(4) For purposes of this § 38-18.1, "actuarial equivalence" and
"actuarial adjustment" mean any aggregate amounts, all equal in
value, which are expected to be received under different forms of
payment computed using the actuarial assumptions certified to the
Public Employee Retirement Commission on its most-recent Act
205 Actuarial Valuation Report.
D. Intervening military service.
(1) Upon reemployment of a covered employee following the
completion of a period of active-duty military service in the
uniformed services of the United States, within the meaning of the
Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Act of 1994
(Pub. L. 103-353) ("USERRA"), such covered employee shall have
the right to: repay any amount previously paid to him from the
Nonuniformed Pension Plan; and make up any missed required
contributions with respect to such covered employee. The rate of
pay and required covered employee contributions shall be
determined using such rates that would have been in effect had
such covered employee not been absent due to active duty military
service. For purposes of the immediately preceding sentence,
"active duty military service" shall include any report-back period
applicable under USERRA.
(2) The maximum repayment period and other rights regarding a
pension not otherwise set forth in detail herein with respect to any
covered employee shall be determined in accordance with USERRA
and 51 Pa. C.S.A. § 7306(a)-(c), to the extent applicable.
§ 38-18.1 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-18.1
30:103
(3) To the extent a covered employee makes the repayments required
under this Subsection D, he or she shall receive the same pension
as if he or she had remained continuously employed by the City
during any such period of active-duty military service.
E. Retirement due to illness or disability. Should a covered employee
become so permanently disabled as to render him or her unable to
perform the duties of his or her position after 20 years of service with
the City, he or she shall be entitled to a full pension calculated under
this § 38-18.1 during such period of disability. Should a covered
employee become so permanently disabled as to render he or she
unable to perform the duties of his or her position after 10 years of
service with the City but before the expiration of 20 years of service,
such covered employee shall be entitled to a reduced pension, which
shall equal such portion of the full pension as the period of his or her
service up to the date of his or her permanent disability bears to the full
twenty-year period of service. Such full pension or reduced pension
shall begin as of the date of permanent disability. Proof of such
disability shall consist of the sworn statement of three practicing
physicians, designated by the Pension Plan Administrator, that the
employee is in a condition of health which would permanently disable
him from performing the duties of his or her position.
F. Amount of contributions. All the aforesaid covered employees shall pay
into the fund monthly an amount equal to 5% of his or her gross
earnings in excess of the social security taxable wage base then in
effect and 3 1/2% of earnings equal to or less than the social security
taxable wage base then in effect.
G. Missed contributions. While in City service, to the extent any covered
employee who would otherwise have been obligated to make employee
contributions pursuant to this § 38-18.1 fails to do so, he or she may
purchase "past service credit" to cover the period of time during which
no such contributions were made with respect to this § 38-18.1. Such
past service credit may be purchased by making a payment to the City
of Coatesville in a check delivered to the City Finance Department in an
amount equal to the aggregate amount of each missed contribution plus
interest calculated from the date such person became a covered
employee until the date on which he or she submits an application to
the Pension Plan Administrator, on the form it provides, to purchase
such past service credit. For purposes of the preceding sentence,
"interest" shall be based upon the aggregate investment experience of
the Nonuniformed Pension Plan during the period of missed
contributions.
H. Method of payment. Any pensioner under this § 38-18.1 shall have the
right to choose whether he or she wants to receive payment by check,
mailed to him or her, or direct deposit. If direct deposit is elected by the
pensioner, the pensioner is required to provide information about his or
her bank account on a form provided by the Pension Plan Administrator.
Any change to a direct deposit instruction must be provided to the
§ 38-18.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-18.1
30:104
Pension Plan Administrator at least 15 business days in advance of the
effective date of such change on a form provided by the Pension Plan
Administrator.
I. Conflicts with statutory provisions. In all matters that are regulated by
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by regulations of
departments or agencies of the commonwealth promulgated by
authority of law, such laws or regulations shall control.
J. Continuation of existing regulations. The provisions of this § 38-18.1, as
far as they are the same as those of ordinances and/or codes in force
immediately prior to the enactment of this section, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and codes and not as new enactments.
The provisions of this § 38-18.1 shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under
the authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
K. Any portion of section found to be unconstitutional, illegal or
unenforceable is severed. If any portion of this section shall be
determined to be unconstitutional, illegal or unenforceable, then the
portion and only that portion of this section which is deemed to be
unconstitutional, illegal or unenforceable shall be severed from the
remainder of this section, and all other terms thereof shall remain in
full force and effect.
L. Effective date of section. This section shall be effective 30 days after
publication following final adoption in accordance with the City Home
Rule Charter and the Third-Class City Code.
M. Savings clause. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
this section, the provisions of this section shall be construed in
accordance with 53 P.S. §§ 39340 — 39353 and those provisions of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and the Treasury
regulations and other Internal Revenue Service and Treasury
Department guidance promulgated thereunder that relate to taxqualified
governmental pension plans, including, but not limited to, the
provisions of Sections 401(a)(2), 401(a)(9), 401(a)(31), 401(a)(37),
402(c)(11), 414(u) and 415(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended.
§ 38-18.1 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-18.1
30:105

ARTICLE III
Fire Fighters' Pension Fund
[Adopted 5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 1304-200845]
§ 38-19. Creation of fund; source; definitions.
§ 38-20. Control; Fire Fighters' Pension Fund Commission.
A. By virtue of the authority vested in the Council by the Third Class City
Code and the Coatesville Home Rule Charter, as amended, there is
hereby created a fund to be known as the "Fire Fighters' Pension Fund
of Coatesville," out of moneys received from fire fighters, from Council
appropriation, from the state tax on foreign fire insurance companies or
from any other source, for the use and benefit of its fire fighters.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FIRE FIGHTER — Includes any full-time fire fighter, and any regularly
appointed fire fighter who has satisfactorily passed his probationary
period.
SALARY — The fixed amount of compensation paid at regular, periodic
intervals by the City to the member and from which pension
contributions have been deducted in accordance with applicable law.
A. The Fire Fighters' Pension Fund shall, at all times, be under the
direction and control of the Council and shall be committed to the care,
control and supervision of a Board of Managers known as the "Fire
Fighters' Pension Fund Commission," which shall consist of seven
persons, consisting of the President of City Council; the City Manager,
or a City employee designated by the City Manager from time to time to
serve in his place and stead; the Director of Accounts and Finance; two
members of the Fire Department, as chosen by the members of the Fire
Department; one resident of the City, who shall serve for a two-year
term and be appointed by the Council pursuant to § 2-504 of the
Coatesville Home Rule Charter; and the Chief of the Bureau of Fire, as
an ex officio member.
B. Term. The term of the initial members selected by the Fire Department
shall be one for a term of two years and one for a term of four years.
Biennially thereafter, one manager shall be chosen for a term of four
years to take the place of the one whose term expires. In case of a
vacancy among the managers chosen by the Fire Department, a
successor shall be chosen for the unexpired term.
C. The members of said Commission shall receive no additional
compensation for the services thus performed. The President of Council
shall be the President, the Fire Chief the Vice President, the City
45.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Fire Fighters' Pension Fund,
adopted 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1268-2005.
§ 38-19 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-20
30:107
Manager or his designee the Secretary and the Director of Finance the
Treasurer of said Commission, respectively. The Commission shall keep
full and accurate accounts of all its transactions. It shall have full power
to make rules for the transaction of its business and application of its
funds, its time and place of meeting and all other matters necessary
for the conduct of business, subject to the special provisions and
regulations contained in this chapter or such ordinances as may
hereafter be passed relating thereto. The Commission shall meet at
least once every three months at a stated time or at such times as
it may by resolution designate or upon the call of the President, for
the transaction of such business as may properly come before it. A
quorum shall consist of three members for the transaction of business.
All incidental expenditures necessary to the transaction of the business
of the Commission shall be separately provided for by the City. No
money shall be paid out of the pension fund except for the purpose
of pensions as contemplated in this chapter. The Treasurer, if required
by the Commission, shall give a surety bond to the City, in a sum not
less than double the probable amount of money that shall come into
his or her hands, for the faithful performance of his or her duties, the
premium on which bond shall be paid by the City. The Commission
shall make an annual report to the City Council on the first Monday of
January in each year of all receipts and disbursements of the fund and
such other matters as should be properly embodied in such report.
D. The Fire Fighters' Pension Commission shall appoint a qualified and
reputable banking or investment institution to serve as custodian of the
Fire Fighters' Pension Fund investment account. The Fire Fighters'
Pension Fund investment account shall consist of all moneys in the
hands of the Commission not needed for the payment of pensions, plus
a reasonable amount to be retained by the Commission for withdrawals.
Said custodian shall invest and reinvest said funds and the accruals
thereon in such investments as are commonly called "legal investments
for trust funds" as said Commission may direct. All custodial fees shall
be paid by the Fire Fighters' Pension Fund. All warrants on said fund
shall be drawn by the individuals authorized to sign checks for said
fund.
E. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Fire Fighters’ Pension Fund Commission absent
from three or more consecutive regular meetings of the Fire
Fighters’ Pension Fund Commission without an approved leave of
absence granted by the City Council after public hearing and prior
written notice thereof shall be removed from the Fire Fighters’
Pension Fund Commission by the City Council of the City of
Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the Fire Fighters’ Pension Fund Commission absent
from 20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Fire
Fighters’ Pension Fund Commission within any one-year period
shall be notified in writing by the City Manager acting on behalf of
§ 38-20 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-20
30:108
§ 38-21. Investment of funds; incidental expenditures.
The Fire Fighters' Pension Fund Commission shall hold, manage, invest and
reinvest any funds received by it for the Fire Fighters' Pension Fund and
may invest any moneys accumulating in the fund in legal investments, as the
same are or may be defined by statute, and shall make such payments out of
such fund as may be required for the purpose of pensions and contemplated
by this article. All incidental expenditures, including the compensation of
the Fund's corporate custodian, necessary to the transaction of the business
of the Commission, shall be provided for by appropriation by Council.
§ 38-22. Signatures for withdrawal of funds.
No moneys shall be drawn out of the funds of the Fire Fighters' Pension
Fund or on deposit to the account of the Fire Fighters' Pension Fund, except
upon order, warrant or check signed by both the President of the fund and
an officer of the corporate custodian of the fund.
§ 38-23. Account of transactions; report copies.
On or before March 1 of every year, it shall be the duty of the corporate
custodian of the Fire Fighters' Pension Fund Commission to render a full
and complete account to Council of all transactions of the past year,
showing all receipts and disbursements. A copy of such account shall be
filed with the City Director of Finance, who shall audit the same and
render to Council a detailed report of his examination. Council shall not
appropriate any moneys to the fund until such report has been filed and
approved by Council by resolution. Copies of such report shall be made
available to all members of the Bureau of Fire and the Fire Fighters' Pension
Fund Commission.
the City Council of the attendance requirements of this subsection.
Any member of the Fire Fighters’ Pension Fund Commission who
is absent from 20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings
within a one-year period shall thereafter be removed for cause from
such position by the City Council with prior written notice after
public hearing unless such member resigns in writing or waives the
public hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the Fire Fighters’ Pension Fund Commission may
be removed for cause as determined by the City Council after
public hearing and prior written notice thereof.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Fire Fighters’ Pension Fund Commission
without cause by the City Council when authorized by state law,
City Charter or City ordinance.
§ 38-20 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-24
30:109
§ 38-24. Contribution by City.
The City shall annually contribute a sum of money not less than 1/2 of 1%
nor more than 3% of all City taxes levied by the City, other than taxes levied
to pay interest or to extinguish the debt of the City or any part thereof.
§ 38-25. Contribution by firemen.
Each fireman shall pay into the Fire Fighters' Pension Fund a sum equal to
5% of his salary plus $1 per month.
§ 38-26. Membership in fund required.
Upon appointment as a regular full-time fireman, each person so appointed
shall be and become a member of the Fire Fighters' Pension Fund and shall
be obligated for contributions thereto. The Commission shall certify the
acceptance of the new regular fireman to membership in the Fire Fighters'
Pension Fund to the City Director of Finance, who shall thereafter make all
necessary deductions for pension payments from such fireman.
§ 38-27. Payment of pension benefits.
The moneys accumulating in the Fire Fighters' Pension Fund shall be
applied to the payment of pensions as herein set forth. The payment of
pension benefits shall be authorized by the Fire Fighters' Pension Fund
Commission only after the separate and careful consideration of each
application.
§ 38-28. Payments upon death and survivor benefit. [Amended
12-12-2016 by Ord. No. 1486-2016]
A. In-service death. When any member of the Fire Fighters' Pension Fund
shall die in active service, there shall be paid from the fund a sum of
money equal to the amount payable to the member or which would have
been payable had he been retired at the time of his death, to his
surviving spouse; to the extent there is no surviving spouse, the
dependent child or children of such deceased member shall be paid
from the fund a sum equal to 100% of the amount payable to the
member or which would have been payable had he been retired at the
time of his death, until the dependent child or each of the dependent
children reach age 18, and, in the case of multiple dependent children,
in equal shares to each such dependent child, to be reallocated upon a
dependent child's attainment of age 18.
B. Death of a retired member or a member eligible for retirement. The
surviving spouse of a member of the Fire Fighters' Pension Fund
eligible for retirement or a member who retires on pension, shall,
during the lifetime of such surviving spouse, be entitled to receive the
full pension benefit the member was receiving or would have been
receiving had he been retired at the time of his death. If there is no
surviving spouse or if such surviving spouse subsequently dies, then the
§ 38-24 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-28
30:110
§ 38-28.1. Disability benefits. [Added 12-12-2016 by Ord. No.
1486-2016]
dependent child or children under the age of 18 years of a member
eligible for retirement or a member who retires on pension, shall,
until reaching the age of 18 years, be entitled to receive 100% of the
full pension benefit the member was receiving or would have been
receiving had he been retired at the time of his death, and, in the case
of multiple dependent children, in equal shares to each such dependent
child, to be reallocated upon a dependent child's attainment of age 18.
C. Death of a member before retirement and not in-service. In the event of
the death of a member, the total amount of the contributions paid into
the Fire Fighter's Pension Fund by the member shall be paid over to the
member's estate if any of the following apply: (1) the death did not
occur in the line of duty; (2) the death occurs before the member
becomes entitled to a pension; and/or (3) the member has no surviving
spouse or family entitled to payments.
A. Eligibility. If a member suffers permanent and total disability as a result
of a mental or physical condition or exposure which is determined to
have been incurred in the line of duty, no minimum period of service
shall be required for eligibility for disability benefits. A member entitled
to disability benefits hereunder shall be entitled to receive 100% of the
pension determined pursuant to §§ 38-29 and 38-30 hereof subject to
any offset required by law, excluding workers' compensation benefits.
Any such member who has not completed 20 years of service at the time
he or she suffers permanent and total disability shall be deemed to have
completed 20 years of service beginning the day before such permanent
and total disability occurred. Any such member who has completed at
least 20 years of service at the time he or she suffers the permanent and
total disability shall be credited with the actual service he or she
completed. Such disability benefits shall commence immediately after a
determination of eligibility by the Fire Fighters' Fund Commission and
shall continue until the earliest of the following events:
(1) The disabled member is determined to be no longer disabled; or
(2) The death of the member.
B. Permanent and total disability. For purposes of this § 38-28.1,
"permanent and total disability" shall mean a mental or physical
impairment which renders a member unable to perform the essential
duties of a City Fire Fighter, as determined in accordance with this
§ 38-28.1.
C. Physical or mental examinations. The Commission may, at any
reasonable time, and at the expense of the Commission, require a
physical examination or examinations or other satisfactory proof or
proofs of the beginning or continuance of a disability as a prerequisite
to making any payments to any member for disability benefits.
§ 38-28 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-28.1
30:111
§ 38-29. Compulsory retirement age; eligibility; conditions and
service increment.
D. Physicians' written statements on disability. No member shall receive
any benefits under this § 38-28.1 by reason of permanent and total
disability except upon the written statement of at least two of three
physicians to be named by the Commission, each of whom shall
examine the member. The Commission shall pay such physicians for
each such service rendered.
E. Concurrent disability benefits and pension benefits prohibited. No
member shall be entitled to receive from the Commission concurrently
both disability benefits and normal pension benefits.
F. The surviving spouse, or if there is no surviving spouse, a child or
children under the age of 18, of a member who had been receiving
disability benefits under this section shall be entitled to survivor
benefits in accordance with § 38-28.
A. Every fire fighter who is at least 50 years old and has served
continuously for a full period of 20 years, periods of suspension and
leaves of absence excluded, shall be eligible to retire from the Fire
Department if he so desires.
B. Every fireman who served in the armed forces subsequent to
September 1, 1940, shall be entitled to have full credit for each year or
fraction thereof, not to exceed five years of such service, upon their
payment to the Fire Fighters' Pension Fund an amount equal to that
which they would have paid had they been members during the period
for which they desire credit, and their payment to such fund of an
additional amount as the equivalent of the contributions of the City plus
any interest the City would have been required to pay on the
contributions on account of such military service.
C. If for any cause a member contributing to the pension fund ceases to be
a member of the Fire Department before he becomes entitled to a
pension, the total amount of contributions paid by him shall be refunded
to him in full without interest. If the member thereafter again becomes
a member of the Fire Department, he shall not be entitled to a pension
until 20 years after his reemployment, unless he returns to the pension
fund the amount withdrawn, in which event the period of 20 years shall
be computed from the time the member first became a member,
excluding any period when he was not employed by the Fire
Department. In the event of the death of a member of the Fire
Department not in the line of service before the member becomes
entitled to the pension and the member is not survived by a widow or
family entitled to payments hereunder, the total amount of
contributions paid in the pension fund shall be paid over to his estate.
D. From and after January 1, 1965, every fireman who has completed his
20 years of service and is otherwise entitled to a pension shall also be
§ 38-28.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-29
30:112
§ 38-30. Minimum pension of retired members.
§ 38-31. Causes for forfeiture of rights in fund.
§ 38-32. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
entitled to the payment of a service increment, which shall be the sum
obtained by computing the number of whole years after the completion
of 20 years of service in the Fire Department and multiplying the
number of years so computed by 1/40 of the pension to which he is
otherwise entitled. No employment after the member has reached the
age of 65 years shall be included, and no service increment shall be
paid in excess of $100 per month. Any member of the Fire Department
who, as of the effective date of Section 4322(b)(3) of the Third Class
City Code, has already reached the age of 65 years shall have his
service increment computed on the years of employment prior to the
date of reaching his 65th birthday.
A. On and after the passage of this article, members of the Bureau of Fire
who have proper civil service certification and who in the future are
retired from duty from the Fire Department as hereinabove set forth
shall receive a pension equal to 1/2 of the monthly salary received at the
time of retirement or the highest average annual salary which they
received during any five years of service preceding retirement,
whichever is higher.
B. Council may at any time, in its discretion and upon the recommendation
of the Commission, increase the allowances of persons receiving a
pension. Such increases shall be in conformity with a uniform scale,
which may be based on the cost of living, but the total of any such
allowance shall not at any time exceed 1/2 of the current salary being
paid fire fighters of the highest pay grade.
A. Any member entitled to receive a pension from the Firemen's Pension
Fund shall be deprived of his right to participate therein for one of more
of the following reasons:
(1) Conviction of a felony or misdemeanor.
(2) Becoming a habitual drunkard.
(3) Failure to comply with some general regulation relating to the
management of the fund which may be made by the managers and
which may provide that failure to comply therewith shall terminate
the right to participate in the pension fund.
B. Any termination of a pension shall only be after due notice and a
hearing as prescribed in the regulations of the managers.
§ 38-29 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 38-32
30:113
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts hereof.
§ 38-33. Repeal of all inconsistent ordinances.
All ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are repealed,
rescinded, canceled and annulled.
§ 38-34. When effective.
This article shall be effective 30 days after publication following final
adoption in accordance with the City Charter and the Third Class City Code.
§ 38-32 COATESVILLE CODE § 38-34
30:114
Chapter 41
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vacant Property Review Committee — See Ch.
61.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
197.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 41-1. Reconstitution of Commission; number of members.
[Amended 2-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1373-2012]
The City of Coatesville Planning Commission is hereby reconstituted to
consist of five members.
§ 41-2. Powers and duties of Commission.
The Planning Commission shall perform all duties and may exercise all
powers conferred by law, by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
(MPC),46 and as requested by the Council of the City of Coatesville
consistent with the provisions of § 10209.1 of the MPC. The City Council, by
ordinance, by resolution or by other official action, may confer powers and
duties on the Commission which are consistent with the provisions of the
MPC.
§ 41-3. Membership; terms of office.
A. All members of the Commission shall be appointed by the City Council
of the City of Coatesville.
B. The term of each of the members of the Commission shall be four years
or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, except that the
terms of the members first appointed pursuant to the MPC and this
chapter shall be so fixed that no more than two shall be reappointed or
replaced during any future calendar year.
C. The Chairman of the Planning Commission shall promptly notify the
City Council concerning vacancies in the Commission, and such
vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term. If a vacancy shall occur
otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment
for the unexpired term according to the terms of § 10203 of the MPC.
D. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Planning Commission absent from three or
more consecutive regular meetings of the Planning Commission
without an approved leave of absence granted by the City Council
46.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 38-34 HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION § 41-3
30:115
§ 41-4. Prior acts of Planning Commission approved.
All acts of the existing Planning Commission done heretofore are hereby
expressly approved, ratified and confirmed in all respects.
Chapter 44
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 38.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 51.
Social security — See Ch. 55.
after public hearing and prior written notice thereof shall be
removed from the Planning Commission by the City Council of the
City of Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the Planning Commission absent from 20% or more
of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Planning Commission
within any one-year period shall be notified in writing by the City
Manager acting on behalf of the City Council of the attendance
requirements of this subsection. Any member of the Planning
Commission who is absent from 20% or more of the regularly
scheduled meetings within a one-year period shall thereafter be
removed for cause from such position by the City Council with prior
written notice after public hearing unless such member resigns in
writing or waives the public hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the Planning Commission may be removed for
cause as determined by the City Council after public hearing and
prior written notice thereof.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Planning Commission without cause by the City
Council when authorized by state law, City Charter or City
ordinance.
§ 41-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 41-4
44:116
ARTICLE I
Establishment47
§ 44-1. Applicability of civil service regulations.48
All of the above employees shall be subject to civil service regulations of
the City of Coatesville in addition to those provided in the Third Class City
Code, Home Rule Charter or other provisions adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 44-2. Special police.
There shall be appointed by the City Manager, from time to time, as
required by him or her or on recommendation of Council, such members of
special police as may be required.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
48.Editor's Note: Original § 46-1, entitled "Composition of Department," which immediately
preceded this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
§ 44-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 44-2
44:117

ARTICLE II
Appointment Requirements49
§ 44-3. Civil service requirements.
The city shall be subject to the Third Class City Code, 53 P.S. § 39401 et
seq., in regard to civil service requirements.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 44-3 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 44-3
44:119

ARTICLE III
Probationary Appointments
§ 44-4. Probationary period.
Any person first appointed to the position of police officer, pursuant to the
rules of civil service, shall be appointed for a probationary period not to
exceed one (1) year from the date of his appointment, after which time, if his
services as a police officer have met with the approval of the City Manager
and City Council, he or she shall then be confirmed in his or her position as
a permanent member of the police force of the City of Coatesville.
§ 44-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 44-4
44:121

ARTICLE IV
Outside Employment
§ 44-5. Outside employment restricted.
No full-time police officer employed by the City of Coatesville shall be
employed by or be the employee of another police department and/or law
enforcement agency or shall be employed in any position requiring Act 120
certification.50
§ 44-6. Dismissal.
Any full-time police officer who violates § 44-5 by being employed either
full-time or part-time by another police department and/or law enforcement
agency shall be dismissed from his or her employment with the City of
Coatesville Police Department.
§ 44-7. Employment prior to shift.
No full-time or part-time police officer of the City of Coatesville shall be
employed for more than eight (8) hours immediately preceding the
beginning of such police officer's regularly scheduled shift of duty.
50.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 740 et seq.
§ 44-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 44-7
44:123
Chapter 47
PROCUREMENT AND PURCHASING
§ 47-1. Compliance with provisions.
All procurement and purchases shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of the Home Rule Charter and this chapter.
§ 47-2. Procurement of equipment, materials, supplies and repairs
or services.
All procurement of equipment, materials, supplies and repairs or services
shall be documented as follows:
§ 47-3. Other purchases and contracts.
Unless otherwise required by state law, other purchases and contracts shall
be made as follows:
A. Expenditures under $50 may be made from the petty cash account and
shall be supported by receipts. Purchases of common supplies and
materials may be made by controlled, open accounts maintained by
local suppliers offering the best terms and services, up to a monthly
total not to exceed $875 with each supplier.
B. Expenditures of $1,000 or more up to a maximum of $10,500 shall be
authorized by a standard form of purchase order signed by the Director
of Finance and approved by the City Manager.
A. In an amount not exceeding $10,500, by the City Manager or his/her
designee, in the open market after such inquiry as he or she deems
necessary to ensure that the price or offer obtained is the most
advantageous to the City.
B. In an amount from $10,500 and not exceeding $19,400 by the City
Manager or his/her designee, by solicitation of bids orally, by telephone
or in writing from at least three suppliers. Written tabulation of
solicitations made and quotations received shall be maintained on file
one year. For a purchase or contract exceeding $10,500, lack of
competition is permissible only when an emergency exists which
permits no delay because of the possibility of injury to life or
destruction of property or when only one source of supply is available
and the City Manager or Finance Director shall so certify. If an award is
made under the terms of this subsection, a report of such award,
together with a statement justifying the lack of competition, shall be
made to the City Council by the City Manager.
§ 44-7 COATESVILLE CODE § 47-4
44:124
§ 47-4. Procurement of equipment and supplies through State
Cooperative Purchasing Program.
For equipment and supplies, not exceeding $19,400 in the Pennsylvania
State Cooperative Purchasing Program, the City Manager may purchase
from the contract without any further solicitation or invitation of bids,
unless it is known that lower prices are available elsewhere. For purchases
over $19,400, Council approval is needed to acquire items through the state
program.
§ 47-5. Conditions on purchases and contracts exceeding $19,400.
§ 47-6. Certificate of financial interest.
Every contract shall contain a certification that no elected or appointed
official of the City or any employee thereof has any direct or indirect
financial interest with any person or other entity proposing to contract
with the City which has not been disclosed as required by Home Rule
Charter § 2-702B. This requirement shall also be made a part of any and all
subcontracts.
Chapter 49
A. Unless otherwise exempt from bidding as provided herein or by
provision of the Home Rule Charter, purchases and contracts in excess
of $19,400 shall be made only upon approval of the Council and on the
following conditions:
(1) Invitations to bid made by advertisement at least two times [the
last not fewer than seven days before the bid opening date (which
bid opening shall occur at least 10 days after the first
advertisement)], in at least one newspaper of general circulation
and by mail to known qualified and interested suppliers or
contractors, as well as posted at the City Hall.
(2) Written specifications, terms and conditions.
(3) Bid bond or deposit in the amount of 10% of bid.
B. All contract documents shall have the approval of the City Solicitor
prior to advertisement and shall be executed in accordance with Home
Rule Charter Section 2-607A.
C. All exemptions and restrictions/conditions set forth in the Third Class
City Code at 53 P.S. § 36901, as amended, are incorporated herein by
reference and enforceable by the City.
D. The determination of the value of a purchase or contract requiring a
public bid as set forth herein shall be adjusted based upon the
consumer price index for all urban consumers as specified in 53 P.S.
§ 36903.1, as amended.
§ 47-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 47-6
44:125
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 49, Reserve Trust Fund Commission, adopted 2-28-2000
by Ord. No. 1124-2000, was repealed 11-26-2018 by Ord. No.
1517-2018.]
Chapter 50
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Qualifications of Manager — See Charter,
§ 2-402.
§ 47-6 COATESVILLE CODE § 47-6
44:126
ARTICLE I
City Manager
[Adopted 8-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1390-2012]
§ 50-1. Residency.
The City within its authority under § 2-402 of the City Charter does hereby
specifically authorize that the City Manager of the City of Coatesville need
not be a resident of the City of Coatesville, but nonetheless requires that
the City Manager reside a distance to be established by the City Council in
the exercise of its discretion.
§ 50-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 50-1
44:127
Chapter 51
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 55
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 38.
§ 55-1. Election to participate in system.
The City of Coatesville shall become a participant in the Social Security
System and the benefits of Old Age and Survivors' Insurance shall be
extended to its officers and employees.
§ 55-2. Authorization to City Manager and City Clerk.
The President of Council and the City Manager of the City of Coatesville, in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, are authorized to execute and deliver
to the Secretary of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the state agency charged with the administration of the
enabling act, the plan and agreement required under the provisions of
Section 6 of said enabling act and the Social Security Act,51 to extend
coverage to the officers and employees of this city and to do all other things
necessary to that end.
§ 55-3. Payments into contribution fund authorized.
The Director of Finance be and he or she is hereby authorized to make all
required payments into the contribution fund established by Section 7 of
said enabling act52 and to establish such system of payroll deductions from
salaries of officers and employees as may be necessary to their coverage
under said Old Age and Survivors' Insurance System.
§ 55-4. Appropriation to contribution fund.
The Council of the City of Coatesville hereby appropriates from the proper
fund or funds of said city the amounts necessary to pay into the contribution
fund as provided in Section 4 of the enabling act53 and in accordance with
the plan and agreement.
51.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 206 and 42 U.S.C.A. § 301 et seq., respectively.
52.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 207.
53.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 204.
§ 50-1 COATESVILLE CODE § 55-5
51:128
§ 55-5. Duty of city officials.
The proper officials of the City of Coatesville shall do all things in
accordance with the provisions contained in the plan and agreement
necessary to the continued implementation of said Old Age and Survivors'
Insurance System.
§ 55-6. Effective date of participation.
The City of Coatesville shall become a participant in the Social Security
System, and such participation shall commence as of the first day of January
1956.
Chapter 58
TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION
§ 58-1. Commission created.
A Technology Commission is created for the City of Coatesville, Chester
County, Pennsylvania known as the "Coatesville Technology Commission."
§ 58-2. Composition; terms. [Amended 7-13-1998 by Ord. No.
1075-98]
The Commission shall be composed of seven members. Two of the members
will be members of City Council. One of the members will be a member
of the professional staff of the City of Coatesville as appointed by the City
Manager of the City of Coatesville, and four of the members will be citizens
of the City of Coatesville chosen by City Council. The Commission members
shall each serve a three-year term. The terms of the members shall be
staggered in such a manner that at least one expires annually.
§ 58-3. Serving of terms.
All persons so appointed to the Technology Commission shall serve their full
term, or until their successors are appointed, unless they voluntarily resign
or are removed by the City Council for dereliction or neglect of duty.
§ 58-4. Vacancies.
Any vacancy in the Technology Commission occurring otherwise than by
expiration of a term shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment and should be for the unexpired term.
§ 58-5. Compensation.
All members of the Technology Commission will serve without pay.
§ 58-6. Officers; rules and regulations; meetings.
§ 55-5 SOCIAL SECURITY § 58-6
55:129
§ 58-7. Authority.
The Technology Commission shall have all the powers conferred upon it
pursuant to the Third Class City Code to act for the good government and
interest of the city and shall assist the city in identifying technological
developments which are a benefit to the city and the citizens of the City
of Coatesville and to review information, conduct investigations and make
recommendations and reports relative to this purpose. However, any report
or recommendation provided by the Technology Commission shall not be
binding upon the City Council but shall be advisory only.
A. The Technology Commission shall appoint from its membership a
Chairperson and such other officers as it may deem necessary for the
orderly procedure of its business and will adopt bylaws, rules and
regulations covering its procedures. The Technology Commission shall
hold regular meetings, including two work sessions and at least one
public meeting each quarter. All public meetings shall be held in
accordance with the Sunshine Act.54
B. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Technology Commission absent from three or
more consecutive regular meetings of the Technology Commission
without an approved leave of absence granted by the City Council
after public hearing and prior written notice thereof shall be
removed from the Technology Commission by the City Council of
the City of Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the Technology Commission absent from 20% or
more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Technology
Commission within any one-year period shall be notified in writing
by the City Manager acting on behalf of the City Council of the
attendance requirements of this subsection. Any member of the
Technology Commission who is absent from 20% or more of the
regularly scheduled meetings within a one-year period shall
thereafter be removed for cause from such position by the City
Council with prior written notice after public hearing unless such
member resigns in writing or waives the public hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the Technology Commission may be removed for
cause as determined by the City Council after public hearing and
prior written notice thereof.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Technology Commission without cause by the
City Council when authorized by state law, City Charter or City
ordinance.
54.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
§ 58-6 COATESVILLE CODE § 58-8
55:130
§ 58-8. Powers limited.
Nothing in the bylaws, rules and regulations of the Technology Commission
shall vest in it any powers, responsibilities or duties not herein authorized.
Chapter 61
VACANT PROPERTY REVIEW COMMITTEE
§ 61-1. Committee created.
The city establishes and creates a Vacant Property Review Committee to
take all such action authorized by the Urban Redevelopment Law55 to assist
the Redevelopment Authority of the City of Coatesville.
§ 61-2. Membership.
The Vacant Property Review Committee shall be comprised of five members.
One of the members shall be a City Council member appointed by the
City Council President. The second member shall be a member of the
Redevelopment Authority as appointed by the City Council President. The
third member shall be a member of the Coatesville Planning Commission
as appointed by the City Council President. The fourth member shall be
an executive officer from the executive branch of the city appointed by the
City Manager. The fifth member shall be an adult resident of the City of
Coatesville appointed by the City Council President.
§ 61-3. Terms.
Four members of the aforementioned Vacant Property Review Committee
will each serve for a period of four years and will initially serve in staggered
terms in such a manner that at least one term of office expires annually, the
first term of office to expire being the member of City Council (whose term
will expire after one year), the second term of office to expire being the
Redevelopment Authority member, the third term of office to expire being a
member of the Planning Commission and the fourth term of office to expire
being the appointed resident of the City of Coatesville. The designated
executive officer will not serve for any term but shall be the City Manager
or his designee.
§ 61-4. Serving of terms.
All persons appointed to the Vacant Property Review Committee shall serve
their full terms, or until their successors are appointed, unless they
voluntarily resign or are removed by the City Council for dereliction or
negligence of duty.
55.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq.
§ 58-8 SOCIAL SECURITY § 61-5
55:131
§ 61-5. Vacancies.
Any vacancy in the Vacant Property Review Committee occurring otherwise
than by expiration of a term shall be filled in the same manner as the
original appointment and shall be for the unexpired term.
§ 61-6. Compensation.
All members of the Vacant Property Review Committee will serve without
pay.
§ 61-7. Officers; rules and regulations.
A. The Vacant Property Review Committee shall appoint from its
membership a Chairperson and such other officers as it may deem
necessary for the orderly procedure of its business and will adopt
bylaws, rules and regulations covering its procedures, as necessary.
B. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Vacant Property Review Committee absent from
three or more consecutive regular meetings of the Vacant Property
Review Committee without an approved leave of absence granted
by the City Council after public hearing and prior written notice
thereof shall be removed from the Vacant Property Review
Committee by the City Council of the City of Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the Vacant Property Review Committee absent from
20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Vacant
Property Review Committee within any one-year period shall be
notified in writing by the City Manager acting on behalf of the City
Council of the attendance requirements of this subsection. Any
member of the Vacant Property Review Committee who is absent
from 20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings within a
one-year period shall thereafter be removed for cause from such
position by the City Council with prior written notice after public
hearing unless such member resigns in writing or waives the public
hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the Vacant Property Review Committee may be
removed for cause as determined by the City Council after public
hearing and prior written notice thereof.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Vacant Property Review Committee without
cause by the City Council when authorized by state law, City
Charter or City ordinance.
§ 61-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 61-8
55:132
§ 61-8. Meetings.
The Vacant Property Review Committee shall hold regular meetings,
including work sessions and at least one public meeting each quarter. All
public meetings shall be held in accordance with the Sunshine Act.56
§ 61-9. Powers.
The Vacant Property Review Committee shall have all powers conferred
upon it by the Urban Redevelopment Law57 to provide assistance to the
Redevelopment Authority of the City of Coatesville and the City of
Coatesville.
§ 61-10. Powers limited.
Nothing in the bylaws, rules and regulations of the Vacant Property Review
Committee shall vest in it any powers, responsibilities or duties not herein
authorized.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 66
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 169.
§ 66-1. Consumption in public places or areas open to public use.
No person shall drink or carry, with the intention of consuming, an alcoholic
or fermented malt beverage upon the streets, sidewalks, parks, public
parking lots, school or church property or upon any private parking lots or
any other private areas open to public use on the City of Coatesville.
§ 66-2. Possession presumed to be with intent to consume.
The possession of any opened bottle, can or container containing an
alcoholic or fermented malt beverage upon any street, sidewalk, park,
public parking lot, school or church property or upon any private parking
lot or any other private areas open to public use in the City of Coatesville
shall be presumed to be with the intent to consume such beverage.
56.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 271 et seq.
57.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1701 et seq.
§ 61-8 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 66-3
66:133
§ 66-3. Construal of provisions.
No provision of this chapter shall be construed in derogation of the rights
of the owner or tenant of any private property to legally use said premises
or to grant permission to others for the lawful use thereof.
§ 66-4. Violations and penalties.58
A person in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than six hundred dollars ($600.) or imprisoned for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days, or both.
Chapter 69
ALARM DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 44. Fees — See Ch. 108.
§ 69-1. Title.
The title of this chapter shall be the "Coatesville Automatic Protection
Device Ordinance."
§ 69-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to the
interior or exterior of a building and emits a warning signal audible outside
the building and designed to attract attention when activated by a criminal
act or other emergency requiring police or firefighters to respond.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE — Any electronic or mechanical
instrument or system composed of sensory apparatus and related
components which automatically transmits any form of alarm or signal,
including but not limited to a prerecorded voice alarm, from the premises
to the Police Department or Fire Department radio network upon receipt of
a stimulus from a sensory apparatus that has detected a physical force or
condition inherently characteristic of intrusion or fire.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE SUPPLIER — Any person, firm or
corporation who sells or leases and/or installs automatic protection devices.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal activated by an automatic protection device,
any audible alarm or any other kind of direct or indirect signal given to the
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 66-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 69-2
69:134
Police or Fire Departments to which police or firemen respond, which is not
the result of a burglary, fire, robbery or similar emergency.
KEY — Use of a telephone or recording equipment to transmit a message or
signal directly or indirectly by an automatic protection device.
§ 69-3. Audible alarm restrictions.59
§ 69-4. Directly keyed automatic protection devices.
§ 69-5. Registration and permit; fees.
A. All automatic protection devices with audible alarms shall be registered
and comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Audible alarm protection devices must be equipped with a timing
device which will disconnect the alarm after a maximum period of
fifteen (15) minutes.
A. No automatic protection devices shall be keyed to an emergency or
municipal trunkline except to the Chester County police radio
network.60
B. Automatic protection devices may be keyed to a telephone or radio
which the owner or lessee of the automatic protection device has
available to himself or herself or his or her representative at some other
location, including a central station protective system having trained
operators and guards in attendance at all times to supervise, receive
and accept recorded messages or signals from automatic protection
devices and to take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or
message, including the relaying of messages to the Chester County
police radio network.
A. No automatic protection device shall be installed in the City of
Coatesville without obtaining a permit from the Police Department; a
separate permit shall be required for each separate installation of an
automatic protection device.
B. The permit fees for automatic protection devices are hereby as
provided in Chapter 108, Fees.61
C. Registration.
(1) 62Every automatic protection device supplier who has keyed an
automatic protection device in the City of Coatesville to a police
radio network shall furnish to the Chief of Police a current list of
such installations, which shall include the following information:
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 69-2 ALARM DEVICES § 69-5
69:135
§ 69-6. Requirements for devices keyed to network; service.
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the owner or
lessee.
(b) The name and address where the device is installed and the
telephone number of that address.
(c) The name, address and telephone number of a central station
protection system or any other person or firm who is
authorized to respond to an emergency and gain access to the
address where the device is installed.
(d) The name and telephone number of any person, firm or
corporation, if any, other than the alarm equipment supplier
who is responsible for maintenance and repair of the automatic
protection device.
(2) By the fifth working day of each month following the submission of
the initial list, every automatic protection device supplied shall
furnish the Chief of Police with a supplemental list of any additional
city installations keyed to the Chester County police radio network,
along with any corrections or deletions from previously furnished
lists. An automatic protection device supplier who enters into the
business after the effective date of this chapter shall furnish a list
containing the information specified in § 69-5C(1) by the fifth
working day of the month following a first installation and shall
thereafter furnish supplemental lists as required by this section.
(3) All information furnished pursuant to these sections shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the use of authorized personnel of the
city only.
A. Operational requirements. Automatic protection devices installed in the
city and keyed to the Chester County police radio network shall meet
the following requirements:
(1) The type and content of recorded messages must be intelligible and
in a format approved prior to the installation by the Chief of Police
and shall include the name of the person or business, the address
and the municipality in which the address is located.
(2) No more than one (1) call shall be made over the police radio
network as a result of a single activation of the automatic
protection device.
(3) The time for transmitting each recorded message shall not exceed
fifteen (15) seconds.
(4) Recorded messages may be repeated during one (1) call, but the
interval between each recorded message shall be no less than eight
(8) seconds nor more than twelve (12) seconds.
§ 69-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 69-6
69:136
§ 69-7. Inspection.
Application for a permit for the installation of an automatic protection
device and subsequent installation of such a device pursuant to a permit
issued or the continuance of the installation of any automatic protection
device already installed at the effective date of this chapter shall constitute
consent by the owner or lessee thereof and authorization for the inspection
of any such installation and/or operation of any such automatic protection
device by the Chief of Police, Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized
personnel of the city, at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice,
except in emergency situations.
§ 69-8. Authority to enter.
The installation of an automatic protection device shall constitute consent
by the owner or lessee thereof and authorization to police or other
emergency personnel to enter upon the owner's or lessee's premises in
whatever manner necessary, including forcible entry, in response to an
alarm or signal from an automatic protection device.
(5) The sensory mechanism used in connection with an automatic
protection device must be adjusted to suppress false indications of
fire or intrusion so that the device will not be actuated by impulses
due to fleeting pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of
light, the rattling or vibrations of doors and window, vibrations to
the premises caused by the passing of vehicles or any other forces
not related to genuine alarms.
(6) All components comprising such a device must be maintained by
the owner or lessee in good repair to assure maximum reliability of
operation.
B. Technical information. Each automatic protection device supplier who
sells or leases an alarm in the city which is keyed to the Chester County
police radio network shall furnish operating instructions, a circuit
diagram and maintenance manual to the buyer or lessee.
C. Service. Every supplier of automatic protection devices who sells or
leases such devices in the City of Coatesville shall provide for twentyfour-
hour service to repair such devices and correct malfunctions as
they occur. At the time of installation, the supplier of automatic
protection devices shall furnish to any buyer or lessee written
information on how to obtain service at any time, including the
telephone number of the supplier or agent responsible for such service.
The owner or lessee and the supplier of automatic protection devices or
the agent providing service shall be responsible for having the device
disconnected immediately after notice of malfunction until it has been
repaired or corrected.
§ 69-6 ALARM DEVICES § 69-9
69:137
§ 69-9. Testing.
No person shall conduct any tests or demonstrations of an automatic
protection device without prior notice and approval of the Coatesville Police
Department and the Chester County police radio network.
§ 69-10. False alarms.
§ 69-11. Violations and penalties.63
Chapter 70
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND DIRT BIKES
§ 70-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of all-terrain vehicles and
dirt bikes to limit the threats they pose to the health, safety and welfare of
the residents of the City of Coatesville.
A. The owner or lessee of any automatic protection device, by the
installation thereof or by the continuance of the installation thereof as
to any such device installed at the effective date of this chapter, shall be
deemed to have consented to pay to the city twenty-five dollars ($25.)
for each false alarm after the first such alarm originating from said
automatic protection device in any six-month period.
B. Any owner, lessee or user of an automatic protection device may revoke
or refuse to consent as set forth in Subsection A only by disconnecting
the automatic protection device.
C. Any police officer responding to an alarm which is determined to be
false shall promptly notify the person in whose name the alarm is
registered of the false alarm.
D. Failure to pay the charge for false alarms as provided in Subsection A
within seven (7) calendar days after notification shall constitute a
violation of this chapter, subject to prosecution as provided in § 69-11B.
A. Any person found guilty of misuse, false activation or repeated
accidental activation of an automatic protection device shall, upon
conviction thereof in summary proceedings, be guilty of a first degree
misdemeanor and punishable as provided in 18 Pa.C.S.A § 4905.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof in summary proceedings, be punished by a fine
of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or a period of
imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days, or both.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 69-9 COATESVILLE CODE § 70-2
69:138
§ 70-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV) — Any motorized off-road recreational
vehicle capable of cross-country travel on land, snow, ice, marsh,
swampland or other natural terrain, including but not limited to a
multitrack, multiwheel or low-pressure-tire vehicle or related two-wheel,
three-wheel, four-wheel or belt-driven vehicle, or an amphibious machine.
The definition of ATV excludes golf carts, construction machines, utility
vehicles used for business operations, agriculture, yard work, landscaping,
snow removal or otherwise being used in the reasonable maintenance
of a person's private property, or motorized vehicles being used for law
enforcement, fire, emergency, military or other authorized governmental
purposes.
DIRT BIKE — A motorcycle with tires and suspension designed and built for
riding on unpaved roads and over rough terrain.
OCCUPANT — A person who resides on the property in question.
OPERATE — To use in any manner within the boundaries of the City of
Coatesville, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
OWNER — Any person who has legal or equitable title to the property on
which an ATV or dirt bike is being operated.
PERSON — An individual, group of individuals, partnership, firm,
association or any other entity.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land, rights-of-way, roads or other real property
owned, maintained, or otherwise under the control of any person or entity
other than the City of Coatesville, Chester County, and not available for
general use by the public.
§ 70-3. Registration requirements.
Registration of vehicles governed by this chapter is required in accordance
with the registration provisions of Pennsylvania law. Proof of registration
in the nature of copies of the registration documents required by state law
shall be supplied to the City of Coatesville Police Department or the City's
designee when requested in the course of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 70-4. Compliance with state law.
Any person who operates an ATV within the City of Coatesville shall do so
only in full compliance with the provisions of Pennsylvania law, including,
but not limited to, registration and licensing.
§ 70-5. Operation and use.
§ 70-2 ALARM DEVICES § 70-5
69:139
A. Owner or occupant. Only the owner or occupant or their guests or
invitees shall be permitted to operate an ATV or dirt bike on private
property.
B. Access limitation. No person shall go on or cross the land of another
with an ATV or dirt bike without the written permission of the owner,
which written permission shall be carried on the person of the operator.
No person shall operate an ATV or dirt bike on state or City roads unless
properly registered and licensed for such purpose.
C. Setback requirements. A person operating an ATV or dirt bike on
private property must remain at least 100 feet from any adjoining or
adjacent property line and must remain at least 150 feet from an off-site
residential dwelling.
D. Maximum numbers, facilities and events.
(1) The operation of more than four ATVs at one time requires an event
or facility permit from the City, provided such event or facility is
otherwise a permitted use under applicable City ordinances.
(2) Where one or more structures, a track, a course, or one or more
obstacles, including dirt mounds, are installed or arranged for use
by vehicles regulated under this chapter, a facility or event permit
shall be obtained from the City in those areas where such facilities
or events may be permitted under applicable City ordinances.
Otherwise, such facilities and events are prohibited. Compliance
with all City ordinances, including required erosion and
sedimentation controls set forth in Chapter 194, prior to the
installation and use of these facilities by the vehicles governed
under this chapter is required.
E. Time limitations. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an ATV
or dirt bike for recreational purposes between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., prevailing time. Operation of ATVs and dirt bikes will be
limited to a one-hour session with a three-hour rest before the next
operation of the vehicle. The rest period must be provided to prohibit
disturbance of the peace within the City. Operation within this
prohibited time period shall be considered a disturbance of the peace
with the City.
F. Noise limitation. No person shall operate an ATV or dirt bike without an
effective and suitable muffling device on its engine, which efficiently
deadens or muffles the noise of the exhaust. Operation of an ATV or dirt
bike shall be subject to and compliant with the noise limitations,
restrictions and requirements set forth in Part II, General Regulations,
Chapter 161, Noise.
G. Speed limitation. No person shall operate an ATV or dirt bike at a speed
greater than that reasonable and prudent considering the existing
conditions.
§ 70-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 70-5
69:140
§ 70-6. Violations and penalties.
H. Dust limitation. No person shall operate any ATV or dirt bike in any
manner which creates dust which crosses onto any adjoining or
adjacent property. Visible dust, mud or debris shall not leave the
property boundaries of the parcel where vehicles governed by this
chapter are operated.
I. Environmentally sensitive area limitation. No person shall operate,
allow or permit the operation of an ATV or dirt bike within a stream,
creek, waterway, drainageway, wetland, erosion-sensitive area,
floodplain, or within 50 feet of such environmentally sensitive area.
A. Violations; persons liable. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
chapter for any property owner or person to violate any provision of this
chapter and any such violation shall subject the owner of the property
and any person operating an ATV or dirt bike in violation of this chapter
to the enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in this section.
B. Enforcement and penalties. The City of Coatesville Police Department,
the Pennsylvania State Police and such persons as may from time to
time be designated by the City are authorized to make a determination
of a violation of, and to enforce, the provisions of this chapter. The first
violation of this chapter shall result in the issuance of a citation, and
upon being found guilty thereof, shall subject the violator to a fine of
$250. A second or subsequent violation of this chapter shall result in
the issuance of a citation, and upon being found guilty thereof, shall
subject the violator to a fine of $600 for a second offense, and $1,000
for the third and each subsequent offense. Upon default in payment of a
fine or upon a guilty finding of a third or subsequent offense, the
violator may be subject to a term of imprisonment up 90 days, or the
maximum otherwise allowed by law. Each day that a violation continues
or each section of this chapter that is found to be violated shall be
considered a separate violation.
C. All offenders convicted of violating this chapter shall pay the costs of
prosecution in addition to any fine and court costs.
D. Any person guilty of a violation of this chapter may also be subject to
civil proceedings for damages and/or injunctive relief by the owner of
the property where violation(s) occur, the City, and any entity injured or
damaged by such violation.
E. Both criminal and civil proceedings may be commenced against a
person violating this chapter, and commencement of any such
proceedings shall not constitute an election of remedies preventing the
commencement of the other proceedings against such violator.
§ 70-5 ALARM DEVICES § 70-7
69:141
§ 70-7. Impoundment of ATV or dirt bike.
In addition to any actions brought under § 70-6 above, in the event a person
is operating an ATV or dirt bike in violation of this chapter on the street
or on private property without the owner's consent, a police officer may
impound any ATV or dirt bike operated by such person. Any such vehicle
impounded by a police officer may be redeemed by the owner or person
authorized by the owner, upon payment of any fines and costs, as well as
all costs of towing and storage applicable to such vehicle, and subject to
providing documentation establishing proof of registration as required by
§ 70-3.
Chapter 72
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 161.
Parks — See Ch. 169.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Solid waste — See Ch. 190.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 70-7 COATESVILLE CODE § 70-7
72:142
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 845-89 as Ch. 85 of the 1989
Code; amended in its entirety 12-11-2000 by Ord. No. 1150-2000]
§ 72-1. Unlawful acts.
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any animal shall
cause, suffer or allow such animal to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any
nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play
area, park or any place where people congregate or walk, or on any public
property whatsoever, or on any private property without the permission of
the owner of said property. The restriction set forth in this section shall not
apply to the portion of the street lying between the curblines, which shall
be used to curb such animal under the following conditions:
§ 72-2. Violations and penalties.64
Any person who shall be convicted of violating or failing to comply with the
provisions of this article, in summary proceedings, shall be punishable by a
fine of not more than $600, together with costs to be collected as fines and
penalties are, by law, collected or to a period of imprisonment not exceeding
90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. The continuation of such
violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the
person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of a violation may
be punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 72-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated unless a different meaning already appears from the context:
DANGEROUS or VICIOUS DOGS —
A. The person who so curbs such animal shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by such animal by any sanitary and reasonable manner.
B. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall be
disposed of in a sanitary manner by the person owning, harboring,
keeping or in charge of any animal curbed in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
Any dog which, according to records of the appropriate authority, has
bitten a human being or inflicted severe injury on a human being
without provocation on public or private property.
A.
Any dog which, according to the records of the appropriate authority,
has killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's
property.
B.
64.Editor's Note: See also §§ 72-9 and 72-21.
§ 72-1 ANIMALS § 72-3
72:143
OWNER — Any person, partnership or corporation owning, keeping or
harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored
if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS —
RUNNING AT LARGE — Running about loose on the street, public highway,
alley, park or any other public land or upon property of persons other than
the owners of the dog or dogs, unleashed and unaccompanied by the owner
or custodian or by any member of his family or by any servant or agent of
the owner of such dog or dogs.
SEVERE INJURY — Any physical injury that results in broken bones or
disfiguring lacerations or such an injury as would be identified as "serious
bodily injury" under the Pennsylvania Crimes Code and case law, i.e., such
injury which creates a substantial risk of death or which causes serious,
permanent disfiguration or protracted loss or impairment of the function of
any bodily member or organ.
§ 72-4. Unlawful to allow dogs to run at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or dogs to allow or permit such
dog or dogs to run at large in the City of Coatesville.
C. Attacked a human being without provocation.
Any dog owned or harbored primarily in part for the purpose of
dogfighting or any dog trained for dogfighting.
D.
E. Any dog which has been used in the commission of a crime.
Any dog which, according to the records of the appropriate authority,
has either or both of the following:
A history of attacking human beings and/or domestic animals
without provocation; or
(1)
A propensity to attack human beings and/or domestic animals
without provocation. A propensity attack may be proven by a single
incident of the context described in Subsections A, B, C or D above.
(2)
F.
Any dog when unprovoked chases or approaches a person upon the
streets, sidewalks or any public or private property in a menacing
fashion or apparent attitude of attack;
A.
Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack
unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten the safety of
human beings or domestic animals.
B.
Any dog which, on three separate occasions within a twelve-month
period, has been observed in the City of Coatesville by authorized
personnel and reported as being unrestrained or uncontrolled of its
owner's premises.
C.
§ 72-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 72-5
72:144
§ 72-5. Seizing of dogs.
Any authorized animal control officer, police officer or other authorized
agent for the city may seize any dog found at large in the City of Coatesville.
Such dogs are to be impounded in a licensed kennel.
§ 72-6. Licensed dogs.
Any authorized animal control officer, police officer or other authorized
agent for the city shall notify the owner of a licensed dog by registered or
certified mail, with return receipt, that the dog is impounded and will be
disposed of in five days if not claimed. Five days after the return receipt has
been received, and the dog has not been claimed, the dog may be sold or
destroyed in accordance with 3 P.S. § 459-302, as it may be amended from
time to time.
§ 72-7. Unlicensed dogs.
Unlicensed dogs that are seized shall be held in such kennel for 48 hours
and if not claimed may be destroyed in accordance with 3 P.S. § 459-303, as
it may be amended from time to time.
§ 72-8. Threatening dogs.
Dogs that, in the opinion of any police officer, constitute a threat to public
health and welfare may be killed by police.
§ 72-9. Additional violations and penalties. 65
§ 72-10. Notice of seizure.
In the event that a dangerous, vicious or potentially dangerous dog is found
running at large within the City of Coatesville, said dog may be seized
on sight, either in the daytime or at nighttime, by any authorized animal
control officer, police officer or other authorized agent for the city and
impounded. In such event, the owner or custodian of said dog or dogs shall
be notified of impoundment by registered mail or by personal service and
shall be given a period of 10 days to redeem such dog upon payment of all
costs assessed against such animal, including the cost of boarding the dog
A. The first two times a dog is seized, the owner shall pay a fine of $15 to
the City of Coatesville together with reasonable fees incurred by the
city for keeping the animal in a kennel.
B. Any person allowing a dog to run at large a third time in violation of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $600 and, in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 30 days.
65.Editor's Note: See also §§ 72-2 and 72-21.
§ 72-5 ANIMALS § 72-10
72:145
during the period of impoundment, and on payment of the penalty hereafter
set forth for the violation of this article.
§ 72-11. Disposal of unredeemed animals.
In the event that the owner or custodian of any dog seized and held under
the terms of this article shall not redeem such dog within 10 days of the
date of service of notice or posting of notice, the city, by its proper officials,
shall have authority to dispose of said dog by destruction in some humane
manner or to sell the same by public or private sale to such person or
persons as may desire to purchase the same to the benefit of the City of
Coatesville.
§ 72-12. Nuisance by animals.
§ 72-13. Complaints of nuisance.
§ 72-14. Determination of dogs as dangerous.
A. No person shall keep or harbor any dog in the City of Coatesville so as
to create offensive odors, excessive noise or unsanitary conditions
which are a menace to the health, comfort or safety of the public or
otherwise permit the commission or existence of a nuisance as herein
defined.
B. Any dogs which, by frequent and habitual barking, howling, screeching,
yelping or baying or in any way or manner, injures or disturbs the quiet
of any person or the community or which disturbs or endangers the
comfort, repose or health of persons, is hereby declared to be
committing a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or person
having custody of such animal to harbor it or permit it to commit such a
nuisance.
A. Any person who observes an animal committing a nuisance upon the
premises of a person other than its owner or on a public street on a
public sidewalk may file with a District Justice a signed complaint, upon
oath, specifying the objectionable conduct of the animal and the name
and residence of the owner or other person harboring said animal.
B. Upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint, signed by one or more
residents of the city, made under oath before an individual authorized
by law to take sworn statements and setting forth the nature and the
date of the act, the owner of the animal, the address of the owner and
description of the animal doing such act, the designation of such
dangerous dog shall automatically be changed to "dangerous."
C. Any police officer or animal control officer who observes an animal
committing those acts referred to in Subsection A above shall institute
summary proceedings by citation.
§ 72-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 72-14
72:146
A. Any of the characteristics in the definition of "dangerous or vicious
dogs," as defined in this article, automatically characterizes a dog as
dangerous and no hearing is required. However, if any owner disagrees
with the facts used to designate the dog as dangerous, he or she may
request a hearing under the provisions of Subsections C, D and E of this
section.
B. Any of the characteristics in the definition of "potentially dangerous
dogs," as defined in this article, automatically characterizes a dog as
potentially dangerous. A record of each dog characterized as potentially
dangerous, including the name and address of the owner and the breed
and age of the dog, shall be kept with the City Animal Control Officer.
Such dogs must be confined or leashed at all times.
(1) Upon receipt by the City Council of three affidavits of complaint
against a potentially dangerous dog signed by one or more
residents of the city, made under oath before an individual
authorized by law to take sworn statements and setting forth the
nature and the date of the act, the owner of the animal, the address
of the owner and the description of the animal doing such act, the
designation of such potentially dangerous dog shall automatically
be changed to "dangerous."
C. A determination hearing shall be conducted by the City Council
whenever there is cause to believe that a dog may be a dangerous
animal as defined in this article. Said hearing shall be conducted within
five days of serving notice to the owner by certified letter.
(1) Pending the outcome of such a hearing, the dog must be securely
confined in a humane manner either on the premises of the owner
or with a licensed veterinarian.
D. The City Council shall determine whether to declare the animal to be a
dangerous animal based upon evidence and testimony presented at the
time of the hearing by the owner, witnesses to any incident(s) which
may be considered germane to such a determination, Health
Department personnel, animal control personnel, police or any other
person possessing information pertinent to such determination.
E. The City Council shall issue written findings within five days after the
determination hearing. The owner or possessor of the animal found to
be dangerous by the hearing has the right to appeal the decision within
30 days of receiving such decision to the District Magistrate.
F. Determination of dogs as dangerous. No dog may be declared
dangerous if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person
who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon
the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog or was
teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or was committing
or attempting to commit a crime.
§ 72-14 ANIMALS § 72-15
72:147
§ 72-15. Notice regarding status of dangerous dogs.
The owner or keeper shall notify the city within 24 hours if a dangerous
dog is loose or unconfined, has attacked another animal or has attacked a
human being or has died, been sold or given away. If the dog has been sold
or given away, the owner or keeper shall provide the city with the name,
address and telephone number of the new owner, who must comply with the
requirements of this article.
§ 72-16. Muzzling of dogs which have bitten.
Any dog which is characterized as a dangerous dog as a result of having
bitten someone shall only be permitted in public subject to a muzzle.
§ 72-17. Biting by dangerous dogs.
Any dangerous dog which has subsequently been identified as involved in
a second biting incident will have its license suspended and the owner or
custodian will have to immediately have the dangerous dog moved from
the City or seized by the Animal Control Officer or delivered directly to the
custody of the Chester County ASPCA.
§ 72-18. Confinement of dangerous dogs.
§ 72-19. Insurance or bond required for a dangerous dog.
A. While on the owner's property, a dangerous dog must be confined
indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked area suitable to prevent
the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from
escaping. Such pen or structure must have minimum dimensions of five
by 10 feet and must have secure sides and a secure top. If it has no
bottoms secured to the sides, the sides must be imbedded into the
ground no less than two feet. Enclosure must also provide protection
from the elements for the dog.
B. The owner or keeper shall display a sign on his or her premises warning
that there is a dangerous dog on the property. The sign shall be visible
and capable of being read from a distance of 50 feet.
C. A dangerous dog may be off the owner's premises if it is restrained by a
substantial chain or leash, not exceeding six feet in length and under
the control of a responsible person. In circumstances where a
dangerous dog has bitten someone, the dog must be muzzled, and the
muzzle must be made in such a manner that it will not cause injury to
the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but must be prevented
from biting any person or animal.
A. The owner or keeper of a dangerous dog shall present to the city proof
that the owner or keeper has liability insurance in the amount of at least
$50,000 covering a twelve-month period during which licensing is
sought. This policy shall contain a provision naming the city as an
§ 72-15 COATESVILLE CODE § 72-19
72:148
§ 72-20. Liability of parents for children's dangerous dogs.
If the owner or the keeper of a dangerous dog within the city is a minor, the
parent and/or guardian of minor(s) shall be responsible for compliance with
the requirements of this article and shall be liable for injuries and damages
sustained by any person or domestic animal caused by the unprovoked
attack of the dog.
§ 72-21. Violations and penalties.
§ 72-22. Enforcement responsibilities.
The Police Department of the City of Coatesville shall, in addition to the
Animal Control Enforcement Officer, also have authority to enforce the
provisions of this article. However, the specific requirements of licensure
are the responsibility of the designated Animal Control Officer identified by
the City of Coatesville.
§ 72-23. Procedures and regulations to be in conformity with Dog
Law.
The procedures identified in this article are to be consistent with and are
intended to incorporate by reference the procedures as set forth in the
Dog Law, 3 P.S. §459-101 et seq. To the extent necessary, the City Council
will adopt rules and regulations by resolution to address any additional
necessary procedures, particularly if the city should, in accordance with the
Dog Law, determine that it will take over all aspects of enforcement of the
Dog Law pursuant to procedures available for such by Third Class Cities
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit regulations supplementing the terms and provisions
of the aforementioned Dog Law, to the extent permitted by law.
additional insured for the sole purpose of the city being notified by the
insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the
policy.
B. In lieu of the insurance identified above, the owner or keeper of a
dangerous dog may elect to post a bond payable in the amount of
$50,000 with the city to insure payment of damages or injuries which
may be caused by owner's or keeper's dangerous dog.
A. Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $600 and/or imprisonment of
up to 30 days.
B. In addition, any person violating provisions of this article relating to
dangerous dogs shall be subject to the following:
(1) Forfeiture of their bond.
§ 72-19 ANIMALS § 72-24
72:149
§ 72-24. Renumbering.
The provisions originally numbered §§ 72-13 through 72-32 shall be
renumbered as §§ 72-27 through 72-46, respectively.
§ 72-25. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 72-26. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable and, if any portion is held
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of federal or state
constitutional statute or statutory law, that portion is hereby repealed, and
the decision of the court will not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions of this article. It is hereby declared to be the City Council's
intention that this article would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional or ultra vires provision not been included.
§ 72-24 COATESVILLE CODE § 72-26
72:150
ARTICLE II
Keeping of Certain Animals
[Adopted 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 1073-98]
§ 72-27. Purpose; greater restrictions.
§ 72-28. Definitions and word usage.
A. This article is enacted to regulate the maintenance, keeping or
possession of animals within the City of Coatesville in order to promote
the health, safety and general welfare of its inhabitants.
B. Where the provisions of this article impose greater restrictions than
those of any other statute, ordinance, regulation or resolution, the
provisions of this article shall be controlling. Where the provisions of
any other statute, ordinance, regulation or resolution impose greater
restrictions than this article, the provision of such other statute,
ordinance, regulation or resolution shall be controlling.
A. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this article:
ANIMAL — Any domestic animal or fowl, any wild animal or any
household pet, including birds, fish, reptiles and insects.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any animal normally or ordinarily domesticated
or raised in this area or climate as livestock or for work or breeding
purposes or normally or ordinarily kept as a household pet.
HOUSEHOLD PET — Any dog, cat or other domestic animal normally
and ordinarily kept in or permitted to be at large in the dwelling of its
owner.
KEEPER — Any person, firm or corporation owning or actually keeping,
having, using or maintaining any of the animals herein referred to.
OFFICER — Any police officer or duly appointed Animal Control Officer
or Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee.
MENAGERIE — A collection of animals kept in cages or exhibition by a
full-time professional trainer.
OWNER — Any person having a right of property or having custody of
any animal, or any person who harbors or permits an animal to remain
on or around his or her property.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
WILD ANIMAL — Any animal, including bird, fowl, reptile or insect not
normally or ordinarily domesticated, not normally or ordinarily raised
in this area and climate as livestock or for work or breeding purposes,
or not capable of being kept as a household pet.
B. In this article the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 72-27 ANIMALS § 72-29
72:151
§ 72-29. Kinds of animals permitted.
Any person is permitted to maintain, keep or possess within the City of
Coatesville, subject to the numerical limitations of § 72-32, any of the
following animals, which classification shall be strictly construed:
Cage birds: (The term includes parakeets, parrots, canaries, finches,
lovebirds, myna birds and other birds ordinarily kept in cages in
households; it excludes wild birds captured or rescued and kept in cages,
as well as poultry.)
Cats
Dogs
Ferrets
Frogs
Gerbils
Goldfish and carp
Guinea pigs
Hamsters
Lizards
Mice, white
Rabbits, restricted to European-type rabbits commonly kept as pets
Rats, white
Salamanders, any tailed amphibian
Snakes, nonpoisonous
Toads
Tropical fish, limited to those customarily maintained in a household
aquarium, except piranhas
Turtles
Vietnamese pot bellied pig
§ 72-30. Keeping of animals regulated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domestic animals, except
household pets, except as provided in this section:
A. The keeper of every such animal shall confine the same in an enclosure
sufficient to prevent such animal from running at large, and such
enclosure shall be of a size and construction conducive to the animal's
health, and adequate sanitary drainage facilities shall be provided.
B. Every keeper of any animal shall cause the litter and droppings
therefrom to be collected daily in a container or receptacle that when
closed shall be rat-proof and fly-tight and after every such collection
shall cause such container or receptacle to be kept closed. At least once
§ 72-29 COATESVILLE CODE § 72-30
72:152
§ 72-31. Household pets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any household pet except as
provided in this section:
§ 72-32. Limitations on number of animals.
Except for species of fish, it shall be unlawful to keep more than three
animals three months of age or older on any premises regardless of the
number of owners unless said premises is a zoo, petting zoo, menagerie,
kennel, aviary, cattery, pet shop or veterinary clinic which has received
zoning approval to operate as such, as well as the appropriate licenses and/
or certifications required for said operation.
§ 72-33. Enforcement authority.
The provisions of this article will be jointly shared by the Police Department
and the Codes Department as defined by "officer" in the definitions. The
officer is hereby authorized to enter upon any premises within the City
of Coatesville for the purpose of investigating possible violation(s) of this
article.
§ 72-34. Application for a permit to exceed the number of permitted
animals.
a week every such keeper shall cause all litter and droppings so
collected to be disposed of in such a manner as not to permit the
presence of fly larvae.
C. Every keeper of any animal shall cause all feed provided therefor to be
stored and kept in a ratproof and fly-tight building, box, container or
receptacle.
A. If any such pet shall be kept in a dwelling owned or occupied by its
owner, such owner shall be required to follow such procedures and
practices as to the number of such pets to be kept there and as to
sanitation to ensure that no public nuisance shall be created or
maintained and no threat to the health of persons living in the dwelling
or elsewhere than in such dwelling shall be created.
B. If any such pet shall be kept in an enclosure outside such dwelling, the
provisions of § 72-30 of this article, insofar as the same applies to
domestic animals, shall be applicable to the keeping of such household
pet.
A. The application for a permit for the keeping of more than three animals
from the permitted list shall have attached thereto a registered
veterinarian's health certificate for each animal to be covered by the
permit, shall be verified by an affidavit and shall set forth the following:
(1) The type and number of animals to be covered by the permit.
§ 72-30 ANIMALS § 72-34
72:153
§ 72-35. Powers and duties of officer; issuance of permit.
(2) The purpose of keeping such animals.
(3) The period of time for which the permit is requested.
(4) A description of the quarters in which the animals will be kept and
the facilities for sanitation and disposal of animal wastes.
(5) The circumstances, if any, under which the animals will be removed
from their quarters.
(6) Biographical information about the applicant and any other person
to be placed in charge of the animals.
(7) Such additional information as the officer may require.
B. In addition to such verified information, the officer shall consider all
other relevant conditions, including but not limited to:
(1) The odor emanating or likely to emanate from the premises to
persons off the premises.
(2) The noise emanating or likely to emanate from the premises to
persons off the premises.
(3) The attitudes of the applicant's neighbors to the proposed permit.
(4) The security with which the animals will be restrained.
(5) Prior complaints regarding animals at the premises.
A. The officer shall have the power to review or cause to be reviewed each
application for a permit and may either approve or reject such
application or require modification of the application. When the officer
has approved the application, he/she shall issue the permit. The permit
shall be personal and not transferable and shall be issued for a calendar
year or part thereof. The officer shall also have the power to revoke the
permit for cause.
B. The officer shall also have the power to make such rules and regulations
as he/she shall deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
He/she shall be responsible to determine whether any person is
violating any provisions of this article or the rules and regulations
adopted hereunder. In making such determination the officer shall
consider the following standards:
(1) All animals and animal quarters shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition with adequate ventilation.
(2) The permittee shall use every reasonable precaution to assure that
the animals are not teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed,
tormented or in any manner made to suffer by any means.
§ 72-34 COATESVILLE CODE § 72-35
72:154
§ 72-36. Permit fees.
The applicant for any permit to exceed the limitation of permitted animals
contained in § 72-32 shall at the time of his/her application pay to the City of
Coatesville a nonrefundable fee of $50 to cover the costs of processing the
permit application and the issuance of the permit. Upon issuance the permit
shall be for the calendar year or part thereof and thereafter renewable for
a like fee of $50 each calendar year or part thereof.
§ 72-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 and
not exceeding $600, plus costs, and, in default of payment, to undergo
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each prohibited animal and
(3) Animals that are enemies by nature or are temperamentally
unsuited shall not be quartered together or so near each other as to
cause the animals fear or to be abused, tormented or annoyed.
(4) Animals shall be maintained on the premises so as to eliminate
offensive odors or excessive noise.
(5) Animals shall not permit any condition causing disturbance of the
peace and quiet of his/her neighbors.
(6) Animals must be maintained in quarters so constructed as to
prevent their escape. The permittee assumes full responsibility for
recapturing any animal that escapes from his/her premises. The
permittee shall make adequate provisions and safeguards to
protect the public from the animals.
(7) Every person shall conform to all present and future laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States of America,
the ordinances of the City of Coatesville and the rules and
regulations that may accompany this article in any way connected
with animals, specifically including anticruelty laws.
(8) Any and all animals must be kept healthy and free from sickness
and disease at all times. Should the officer question the health of
any animals, he/she shall have the authority to require an
examination of a doctor of veterinary medicine with such
examination to be at the owner's expense.
(9) The permittee shall be responsible and liable for the actions of all
persons employed by or otherwise associated with him/her as such
actions relate to the permittee's obligation to comply with this
article.
(10) Every owner and occupant of a structure or property shall be
responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests in all areas of the premises.
§ 72-35 ANIMALS § 72-37
72:155
each animal in excess of the maximum limit of animals shall constitute a
separate violation, and each day that a violation of this article continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 72-37 COATESVILLE CODE § 72-37
72:156
ARTICLE III
Excessive Noise
[Adopted 8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 1079-98]
§ 72-38. Purpose; greater restrictions.
§ 72-39. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be added and apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this article:
ANIMAL — Any domestic animal or fowl, any wild animal or any household
pet including birds.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any animal normally or ordinarily domesticated or
raised in this area or climate as livestock or for work or breeding purposes
or normally or ordinarily kept as a household pet.
HOUSEHOLD PET — Any dog, cat or other domestic animal normally and
ordinarily kept in or permitted to be at large in the dwelling of its owner.
KEEPER — Any person, firm or corporation owning or actually keeping,
having, using or maintaining any of the animals herein referred to.
OFFICER — Any police officer or duly appointed Animal Control Officer.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
WILD ANIMAL — Any animal, including bird, fowl, feline or canine not
normally or ordinarily domesticated, not normally or ordinarily raised in
this area and climate as livestock or for work or breeding purposes, or not
capable of being kept as a household pet.
§ 72-40. Regulated animals
This article shall apply to the following animals:
Cage birds (the term includes parrots, other tropical birds and other birds
ordinarily kept in cages in household.)
Cats
Dogs
Vietnamese pot bellied pigs
A. This article is enacted to regulate animal noise disturbances within the
City of Coatesville in order to promote the health, safety, peace,
tranquility and general welfare of its inhabitants.
B. Where the provisions of this article impose greater restrictions than
those of any other statute, ordinance, regulation or resolution, the
provisions of this article shall be controlling. Where the provisions of
any other statute, ordinance, regulation or resolution impose greater
restrictions than this article, the provision of such other statute,
ordinance, regulation or resolution shall be controlling.
§ 72-38 ANIMALS § 72-41
72:157
§ 72-41. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any regulated animal, as
described above, to bark, bay, cry, grunt, screech, squawk, squeal, yowl or
make any other noise either continuously and/or incessantly for a period of
10 minutes or more or make such noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more
when such noise disturbs the peace and tranquility of others, regardless of
whether the animal is physically situated in or upon private property.
§ 72-42. Enforcement authority.
The provisions of this article will be enforced by the Police Department as
defined by "officer" in the definitions. The officer is hereby authorized to
enter upon any premises within the City of Coatesville for the purposes of
investigating possible violation(s) of this article.
§ 72-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 and not exceeding $600, plus
court costs, and, in default of payment, to undergo imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 72-44. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed.
§ 72-45. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this article.
§ 72-46. When effective.
This article shall become effective 30 days after publication following final
adoption.
§ 72-41 COATESVILLE CODE § 72-46
72:158
Chapter 76
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 169.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 193.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 218.
§ 76-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — A two-wheeled vehicle propelled solely by human power.
§ 76-2. Registration required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle upon any
street or public place within the city unless said bicycle shall first have been
properly registered and tagged as hereinafter provided.
§ 76-3. Registration information filed with Police Department.
Every owner or operator of any bicycle within the city shall, within ten (10)
days after the passage and publication of this chapter, file with the Chief or
Captain of Police a complete description of such bicycle upon a blank form
to be provided for the purpose, which filing shall constitute a registration
of such bicycle. Such registration shall be serially numbered and be kept on
file by the Chief or Captain of Police in his or her office as a public record.
Bicycles operated for hire shall be registered in the name of owner.
§ 76-4. Issuance of identification tag; fee.66
Immediately upon the registration of a bicycle in his or her office, the Chief
or Captain of Police, or someone in his or her office designated by him,
shall affix an identification tag, serially numbered to correspond with the
registration of such bicycle. Such tag shall thereafter remain affixed to
such bicycle unless removed by the Chief or Captain of Police, or someone
in his office designated by him for cause or for replacement with another
tag upon reregistration. A charge as provided in Chapter 108, Fees, per
registration shall be made for the registration or tagging of any bicycle
under the provisions of this chapter.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 72-46 BICYCLES § 76-5
76:159
§ 76-5. Time of registration.
Bicycles registered under the provisions hereof shall be registered on or
before April 1, 1940, and annually thereafter. The Chief or Caption of Police,
or someone in his or her office designated by him or her, shall affix a
new identification tag upon each bicycle at the time of such reregistration
thereof.
§ 76-6. Inspection of bicycles.
The Chief or Captain of Police, or someone in his of her office designated by
him, shall inspect each bicycle presented to him or her for registration and
shall have the authority to refuse to register any such bicycle found by him
or her to be in unsafe mechanical condition.
§ 76-7. Authority to cancel registration.
The Chief or Captain of Police shall have the authority to cancel the
registration of and remove the identification tag from any bicycle being
operated upon any street or public place in the city in an unsafe manner
or in violation of any state law or local ordinance, and such cancellation
of registration and removal of tag shall be in addition to other penalties
provided hereunder.
§ 76-8. Change of ownership; dismantling; report required.
Within ten (10) days after any bicycle registered hereunder shall have
changed ownership or been dismantled and taken out of operation, such
information shall be reported to the Chief or Captain of Police by the person
in whose name the bicycle has been registered.
§ 76-9. Operation of bicycles in reckless manner or not properly
registered.
Any person who shall operate any bicycle not properly registered or
carrying a proper identification tag, as required herein, upon any street
or public place in the city, or who shall operate such bicycle in a reckless
manner, shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty provided in
§ 76-15 hereof.
§ 76-10. Riding of bicycles and skateboards and rollerblading on
streets and sidewalks. [Amended 7-24-1995 by Ord. No. 997-95]
It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle or skateboard or rollerblade upon any
sidewalk. Bicycles may be ridden on streets and roadways, provided that
the rider shall ride as near as practicable within five (5) feet of the righthand
curb or edge of the roadway except when passing a standing vehicle or
making a left-hand turn at an intersection. All bicyclists shall ride in single
file on the streets and highways within the city limits.
§ 76-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 76-11
76:160
§ 76-11. Carrying passengers on public streets; trick riding.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle, when upon a street or
public place, to carry any other person upon the bar, handle or other part
of any such bicycle, and it shall be unlawful for any other person to so ride
upon any such bicycle. It shall be unlawful for every operator of a bicycle
to do trick riding, such as riding the same without having his hands on the
handlebars, when such bicycle is being operated upon any street or public
place in said city.
§ 76-12. Lights.
Every bicycle operated upon a street or public place during any of the time
between one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour before
sunrise shall be equipped with a lamp on the front exhibiting a white light
visible from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the front, with a
lamp or a reflector on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from a distance
of five hundred (500) feet to the rear.
§ 76-13. Adequate brakes and warning devices required.
Every bicycle shall be equipped with brakes in good condition and with a
bell, horn or similar device for giving warning, and shall be operated in
conformity with all traffic regulations.
§ 76-14. Nontransferability.
No registration or identification tag shall be assigned or transferred by the
owner or holder thereof to any other persons.
§ 76-15. Violations and penalties.67
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in summary proceedings, be punished by a fine of not
more than six hundred dollars ($600.).
Chapter 79
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land with substantial violations — See Ch. 87.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 193.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
197.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 76-11 BICYCLES § 79-1
76:161
§ 79-1. Purpose.
It has been determined that in the City there are significant problems
regarding the maintenance of trees which have an impact on the public
and public rights-of-way, streets, roads, alleys, walkways, etc., such that
the trees on private property are not being properly maintained, thereby
creating a nuisance or danger to the public which requires remedial
legislation from the City.
§ 79-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Coatesville.
NUISANCE — Anything that interferes with the use or enjoyment of
property, endangers personal health or safety or is offensive to the senses.
PERMIT — A permit, in writing, as issued by the Codes Director or such
other person or department as the City Manager shall designate.
PERSON — Includes individuals, corporations, groups of individual, firms,
associates and their servants, agent or employees.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any tree, street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by any
government entity.
PUBLIC TREES — Those shade or ornamental trees adjacent to the lawn
or upon the side of any street within the public right-of-way, street or alley,
any right-of-way intended for the general public use to provide means of
approach for vehicles and pedestrians.
TREE — Any tree, shrub, ornamental growth or woody plant grown in or
upon any public street, highway, avenue, park, sidewalk or other public
area or that part of any tree, shrub, ornamental growth or woody plant
which extends within the lines of any public street, highway, avenue, park,
parkway, sidewalk or other public area in the City of Coatesville.
§ 79-3. Tree trimming required.
All trees shall be kept trimmed by the property owner of the property on
which any tree is located so that the minimum clearance of any overhang
over any public walk shall be at least 10 feet, and the minimum clearance
of any branches over any public street or highway shall be at least 15
feet. However, the City reserves the right to designate a higher clearance
on certain streets or highways where heavy traffic or other conditions
make it appropriate, said clearances to be established by resolution of City
Council, which such resolution shall be attached and made an "Addendum
to this Code" without the enactment of an ordinance. All trees standing on
private property and having branches projecting over a public walk, street
or highway shall be kept trimmed by the owner of such property so that the
§ 79-1 COATESVILLE CODE § 79-3
76:162
lowest branches shall have the minimum clearance specified above or such
clearance as may be specified by the City.
§ 79-4. Tree trimming penalty.
In the event that the owner of such property shall neglect or refuse to trim
such tree upon notification, in writing, by the City to do so, the City may,
after the expiration of the date specified in said notification, cause such
trimming to be done at the expense of the owner, and the entire cost thereof
shall be a lien upon said premises and shall be filed and collected by the City
in the same manner as municipal claims are filed and collected. Notice shall
be sent by any of the following: certified mail, regular mail or posting of
the property. In emergency circumstances, the notice identified above may
require immediate action by the property owner. Except for such emergency
situations, at least 10 days' notice is required before action to trim a tree
may be undertaken as noted previously.
§ 79-5. Tree removal required.
All trees which are dead or decayed to such an extent that they become
a public nuisance or threaten the health, safety and welfare of the public
shall be removed by the owner of the property upon which such trees exist.
Notice shall be given by the City in the manner identified in § 79-4 above
relative to tree trimming.
§ 79-6. Tree removal penalty.
In the event that such property owner fails to remove the offending tree
within 30 days after written notice from the City to do so (notice to be
provided in the same manner as is provided with respect to tree trimming
in § 79-4 above), then the City may remove the tree, and the entire cost of
removal shall be assessed and collected from the property owner, filed and
collected by the City in the same manner as municipal claims are filed and
collected. The City's cost of removal shall be a lien upon the property until
such cost is paid.
§ 79-7. Distance from street corners to fireplugs.
No tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet to any street corner, measured
from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No tree shall be
planted closer than 10 feet to any fireplug.
§ 79-8. Tree planted in violation of distance requirements.
Any tree planted in violation of § 79-7 above shall be removed by the
property owner after notice from the City in the same manner as is provided
in § 79-4 (regarding notice with respect to tree trimming). The failure to
remove such a tree as identified previously shall permit the City to have the
tree removed and to charge the entire cost of tree removal assessed and
collected from the property owner. The City's cost of removal shall be a lien
§ 79-3 BICYCLES § 79-8
76:163
upon the property until such cost is paid, filed and collected by the City in
the same manner as municipal claims are filed and collected.
§ 79-9. Permit required; application fees.
§ 79-10. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
From time to time, the City may promulgate rules and regulations governing
the planting, maintenance, fertilization, pruning, bracing, removal and
ordering of trees, after such rules and regulations have been approved by
City Council. Copies of said rules and regulations shall be furnished to any
person making application hereunder.
A. Permits required. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, prune,
remove or cut above the ground any public tree in the City without first
securing a permit therefor as hereinafter provided. All applicants for
permits to work on public trees shall perform such work in full
compliance with the City's Rules and Regulations, adopted by City
Council, and shall comply with all state and local liability insurance
requirements, workers' compensation and safety requirements.
B. Application. Any person who shall desire to plant, prune, remove or cut
above the ground any public tree shall make application in writing to
the Codes Department or other department designated by the City
Manager. Such application shall be made on forms to be furnished by
the City and shall set forth the name of the applicant, the exact location
of the tree or trees and the approximate size of the tree or trees and
contain a plan for the proposed planting, pruning, removal or cutting
above the ground of trees.
C. Fees. Before any permit shall be issued to any person to plant, prune,
remove or cut above the ground public trees, the person making such
application shall pay to the City such fee as shall be required by a
Schedule of Fees which shall be established and may be amended from
time to time by resolution of the City Council. The Schedule of Fees
shall be kept on file at the City.
D. Right of review. The Codes Department or other department designated
by the City Manager shall have the right to refer any application for a
permit to City Council for its review when, in his/her judgment, the
project which is the subject of the application would have a negative
effect on the general health, safety and welfare.
E. In the event of an emergency, it shall be unlawful for person(s) to
perform emergency work before securing a permit; provided, however,
that an application for a permit shall be made promptly and not later
than the next business day thereafter.
§ 79-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 79-11
76:164
§ 79-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable, upon conviction thereof, to a fine or penalty of not
to exceed $600 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days, for
each and every offense, and whenever such person shall have been notified
by the City by service or summons in prosecution or by any other means
that he is committing such violation, each day which he shall continue
such violation after any such notification shall constitute a separate offense,
punishable by like fine or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected
as prescribed by law.
§ 79-12. Severability.
If any portion of this chapter shall be determined to be unconstitutional,
illegal or unenforceable, then the portion and only that portion of this
chapter, which is deemed to be unconstitutional, illegal or unenforceable
shall be severed from the remainder of this chapter and all other terms
thereof shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 79-13. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective 30 days after publication following final
adoption in accordance with the City Charter and the Third-Class City Code.
Chapter 82
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 41.
Licensing of building contractors — See Ch.
84.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 102.
Fees — See Ch. 108.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 115.
Improvement policies — See Ch. 142.
Insurance — See Ch. 145.
Lifesafety standards — See Ch. 151.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 156.
Nuisances — See Ch. 164.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 176
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 185.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 193.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
197.
Use registration — See Ch. 214.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 79-11 BICYCLES § 79-13
76:165

ARTICLE I
Floodplain District Requirements
[Adopted 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 845-89 as Ch. 80, Art. IV, of the
1989 Code]
§ 82-1. Purpose; applicability.
In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings and structures due to
flooding conditions, the following provisions shall apply to all proposed
construction or development occurring in any of the floodplain districts
designated in Chapter 224, Zoning, as amended.
§ 82-2. Definitions.
The following are special definitions which shall be used in making
reasonable interpretations of the provisions contained in this article:
BASEMENT (level on all sides) — Any area of the building having its floor
below ground.[Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry during
flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage
of water and water vapor.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of mobile homes.
DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS — Those floodplain districts
specifically designated in Chapter 224, Zoning, as being inundated
primarily by the one-hundred-year flood. Included would be areas identified
as Floodway District (FW), Flood-Fringe District (FF) and General
Floodplain District (FA).
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY DISTRICT OR AREA — The channel of a river
or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas required to carry and
discharge a flood of the one-hundred-year magnitude as specifically defined
in Chapter 224, Zoning.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities mining,
dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations, subdivision of
land and the storage of equipment and materials.[Amended 9-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 1033-96]
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the
structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
addition, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
§ 82-1 BICYCLES § 82-2
76:167
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:[Added 9-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 1033-96]
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such open space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this article.[Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling, intended for
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly, contained in one or more
sections, built on a permanent chassis, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used with or without a
permanent foundation. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers,
recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed in a site for more
than 180 consecutive days.[Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which has
been planned and improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes
for nontransient use.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after May 10, 1982, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.[Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
OBSTRUCTIONS — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile
abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building,
fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across or
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs that have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 82-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 82-2
76:168
projecting into any channel, watercourse designated floodplain district,
which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water
either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water or
is placed where the flow of the water might carry the same downstream to
the damage of life and property.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year). This is more precisely
defined/delineated in Chapter 224, Zoning.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light-duty truck; and not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.[Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation, plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.[Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:[Added 9-9-1996
by Ord. No. 1033-96]
§ 82-3. General standards. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
An alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
A. Residential structures. Within any designated Floodway (FW), Flood-
Fringe (FF) or General Floodplain (FA) District, the lowest floor,
including basement, of any new construction or substantial
improvement of a residential structure shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above
the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
B. Nonresidential structures.
§ 82-2 BICYCLES § 82-3
76:169
(1) Within any designated Floodway (FW), Flood-Fringe (FF) or
General Floodplain (FA) District, the lowest floor, including
basement, of any new construction or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure shall be at least 1 1/2 feet above the onehundred-
year-flood elevation or be designed and constructed so
that the space enclosed by such structure shall remain either
completely or essentially dry during any flood up to that height.
(2) Any structure, or part thereof, which will not be completely or
adequately elevated shall be designed and constructed to be
completely or essentially dry in accordance with the standards
contained in the publication entitled "Floodproofing Regulations"
(United States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972) or some other
equivalent standard for that type of construction. All plans and
specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied by a
statement certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect which states that the proposed design and methods of
construction are in conformance with the above-referenced
standards.
(3) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Requirements.
[1] Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) is prohibited.
[2] Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access or incidental storage in an area
other than a basement shall be designed and constructed
to allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for
the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior
walls. The term "partially enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(b) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space shall be provided.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwater.
§ 82-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 82-3
76:170
§ 82-4. Design and construction standards. [Amended 10-23-2006
by Ord. No. 1278-2006]
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development within any identified floodplain area:
C. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on a site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring and outlets will be at least 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure drainage at all points along streets and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
§ 82-3 BICYCLES § 82-4
76:171
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
B. Sanitary sewer facilities. All new or replacement sanitary sewer
facilities and private package sewage treatment plants, including all
pumping stations and collector systems, shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into the floodwaters. In addition, they should be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and
impairment.
C. Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system and be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
D. Streets. The finished elevation of proposed new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
E. Utilities. All utilities, such as gas lines and electrical and telephone
systems, being placed in flood-prone areas should be located, elevated
(where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment
during a flood.
F. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling.
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Codes Enforcement Officer.
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be constructed and placed on the lot so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water. In so doing, consideration shall be
given to their effect upon the flow and height of floodwaters.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse
or other movement, thus reducing the threat to life and property
§ 82-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 82-4
76:172
and decreasing the possibility of the blockage of bridge openings
and other restricted sections of the watercourse.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings. Where located at or below the regulatory
flood elevation:
(1) Wood flooring shall be installed to accommodate a lateral
expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain,
without incurring structural damage to the building.
(2) Plywood shall be of any exterior or marine grade and of a waterresistant
or waterproof variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings in nonresidential structures shall have sufficient
wet strength and be so installed as to survive inundation.
(4) Window frames, door frames, door jambs and other components
shall be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
J. Electrical systems.
(1) All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, electric airconditioning
and ventilating systems and other electrical
equipment or apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above
the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) No electrical distribution panels shall be allowed at an elevation
less than three feet above the level of the one-hundred-year flood
elevation.
(3) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
K. Plumbing.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces and other mechanical equipment or
apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above the
regulatory flood.
(2) No part of any on-site sewage disposal system shall be constructed
within any designated floodplain districts.
(3) Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to preclude infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
(4) All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to preclude the
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for
§ 82-4 BICYCLES § 82-4
76:173
§ 82-5. Special provisions for mobile homes and mobile home parks
in the designated floodplain districts.
the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
L. Paint and adhesive. Where located at or below the regulatory flood
elevation:
(1) Adhesives shall have a bonding strength that is unaffected by
inundation (i.e., marine or water-resistant quality).
(2) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be sealed
with a marine or water-resistant quality or similar product.
(3) Paints or other finishes shall be capable of surviving inundation
(i.e., marine or water-resistant quality).
M. Storage. No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in time
of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall be
stored below the regulatory flood elevation.
N. Compliance with UCC, Building Code and Residential Building Code.
The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401 through 405, and Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612,
3402, and Appendix G of the International Building Code (IBC) 2003, or
the latest edition thereof, as adopted by the City on November 22, 1993,
in Ordinance No. 944-93, as amended, and Sections R104, R105, R109,
R323, Appendix AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J of the International
Residential Code (IRC) 2003, or the latest edition thereof, as adopted by
the City on November 22, 1993, in Ordinance No. 948-93, as amended,
shall apply to all construction and development in the floodplain to the
extent such regulations are more restrictive and/or supplement the
requirements of this ordinance.
A. All mobile homes and any additions thereto shall be placed on a
permanent foundation and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground
anchors in accordance with the American National Standards Institute
and National Fire Protection Association Standards as specified in the
Standard for the Installation of Mobile Homes Including Mobile Home
Part Requirements [NFPA No. 501A-1974 (ANSI A119.3 1975)], as
amended, for Mobile Homes in Hurricane Zones or other appropriate
standards such as the following: [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96]
(1) Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the
mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations for units 50 feet or more in length, and one additional tie
per side for units less than 50 feet in length.
§ 82-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 82-5
76:174
§ 82-6. Existing structures in designated floodplain districts.
Structures existing in any designated floodplain districts prior to the
enactment of this article, but which are not in compliance with these
provisions, may continue to remain subject to the following:
(2) Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the mobile home,
with five additional ties per side at intermediate locations for units
50 feet or more in length, and four additional ties per side for units
less than 50 feet in length.
(3) All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds per square inch.
B. All mobile homes and any additions thereto shall also be elevated in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The stand or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill, or on pilings
so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the
elevation of the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) Adequate surface drainage is provided.
(3) Adequate access for a hauler is provided.
(4) Where pilings are used for elevation, the lots shall be large enough
to permit steps; piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no
more than 10 feet apart; reinforcement shall be provided for pilings
that will extend for six feet or more above the ground level.
C. An evacuation plan indicating the primary and at least one secondary
vehicular access and escape route shall be filed with the Codes Office
and Fire and Police Departments for mobile home parks and mobile
home subdivisions where appropriate. Each mobile home in such a park
shall have a copy of said evacuation plan.
D. No mobile homes shall be placed in any designated floodway district or
area.
A. Existing structures located in a designated floodway district or area
shall not be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed
expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by
accompanying improvements.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of its
market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 82-5 BICYCLES § 82-7
76:175
§ 82-7. Variances.
A. If compliance with the elevation or floodproofing requirements stated
above would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective
building developer or landowner, the Planning Commission may, upon
request, grant relief from the strict application of the requirements.
B. Requests for variances to the strict application of the provisions of this
article may be granted by the City in accordance with the following
procedures and criteria:
(1) No variances shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any designated Floodway (FW) District that
would cause any increase in the one-hundred-year elevation.
(2) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(3) In granting any variance, the Planning Commission may attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this article.
(4) Whenever a variance is granted, the Planning Commission shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(5) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Planning Commission
shall consider, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will not result in any
unacceptable or prohibited increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or
conflict with any other applicable local or state ordinances and
regulations.
(6) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Codes Enforcement Officer. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in
the annual report to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
[Amended 10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 1278-2006]
C. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
§ 82-7 COATESVILLE CODE § 82-7
76:176
§ 82-8. Supplementary administrative provisions.
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic load and pressures and effects of
buoyancy of the one-hundred-year flood.
A. Plan requirements. In addition to the permit application requirements
normally required under the City Building Code, as amended, the Codes
Enforcement Officer shall require the following specific information to
be included as part of the application for a building permit:
(1) A plan which details the:
(a) Existing and proposed contours and/or elevation (in relation to
mean sea level, i.e., the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of
1929) of the ground and the lowest floor of proposed
construction.
(b) One-hundred-year-flood elevation.
(c) Other associated factors such as pressures and impact forces,
etc.
(d) Storage elevations.
(e) Size of the structures.
(f) Location and elevations of streets, water supply and sanitary
facilities.
(g) Soil types.
(h) Floodproofing measures, including specific reference to the
level of the floodproofing in relation to the one-hundred-year
flood.
(2) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other hydrostatic,
hydrodynamic and buoyancy factors associated with the onehundred-
year flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structures.
(3) The building permit application for any site where flood damage
has occurred and which any claim or potential claim under the
National Flood Insurance Program shall also include: [Added
10-23-2006 by Ord. No. 1278-2006]
(a) Site location, including address;
(b) A brief description of proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of the flood-related cost and the market
value of the building before the flood damage occurred.
§ 82-7 BICYCLES § 82-8
76:177
B. Review by County Conservation District. A copy of all applications and
plans for construction or development in any designated floodplain
district to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the City
Codes Enforcement Officer to the County Conservation District for
review and comment prior to the issuance of a building permit. The
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by
the City Codes Enforcement Officer for possible incorporation into the
proposed plan.
C. Other permits issuance requirements. Prior to the issuance of any
building permit, the Codes Enforcement Officer shall review the
application for a permit to determine if all other necessary
governmental permits such as those required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, including those required by Act 537, the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, the Pennsylvania Water
Obstructions Act of 1913, and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. 1334. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
D. Start of construction. For purposes of implementation of these
provisions, construction shall be considered to have started with the
first placement of permanent construction on the site, such as the
pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation.
For a structure without a basement or poured footings, the start of
construction includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the
structure or any part thereof on its pilings or foundation, or the affixing
of any prefabricated structures or mobile home to its permanent site.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, land
clearing, grading, filling, excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations, erection of temporary or the installation of sewer, gas and
water pipes, or electric or other service lines from the street.
§ 82-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 82-8
76:178
ARTICLE II
Building Code
[Adopted 11-22-1993 by Ord. No. 944-93]
§ 82-9. Standards adopted; permit provisions. [Amended 9-9-1996
by Ord. No. 1033-96; 2-24-1997 by Ord. No. 1045-97; 8-13-2001 by
Ord. No. 1171-2001]
The City of Coatesville hereby adopts, for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the construction, alteration, equipment, fire protection
and safety of buildings and structures, including administration, building
permits and penalties, the building code known as the "International
Building Code," 2000 Edition, Inc., as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted,
modified or amended, of which three copies have been and are now filed in
the office of the Codes Department, and the same are hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. From the date on which
this article shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the
construction of all buildings and structures, and in all other subjects therein
contained, within the corporate limits of the City of Coatesville.
§ 82-10. Amendments to standards.
The building code hereby adopted is amended as follows:
A. No fee shall be required for permits for repairs which involve the
reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing structure for the
purpose of maintenance with a total cost valued at less than $250.
B. Permits shall be required for the construction, alteration, conversion,
removal, demolition, repair and/or maintenance of any building or the
addition to existing buildings. All persons desiring to perform such
work shall make application for a permit for such work and shall pay, at
the time of application, for the use of the City, the fee prescribed in
Chapter 108, § 108-1C, of the Coatesville Code, based upon the value of
the construction work. The Building Inspector shall have the right to
verify or correct the estimate value or contract figures of such
construction or work.
A. Section 101.1, "Title," is amended to read as follows:
Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the
"Building Code of the City of Coatesville," hereinafter referred to as
"this code."
B. Section 108.2, "Fee Schedule," is amended to read as follows:
[Amended 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 1171-2001]
§ 82-9 BICYCLES § 82-10
76:179
Section 108.2. Fee Schedule. A fee for each plan examination,
building permit and inspection shall be paid in accordance with the
schedule of fees as established, from time to time, by ordinance of the
City Council as set forth in Chapter 108 of the Code of the City of
Coatesville pertaining to the schedule of fees and charges.
C. Section 113.4, "Violation Penalties," is amended to read as follows:
[Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96; 8-13-2001 by Ord. No.
1171-2001]
Section 113.4. Penalties.
1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate provisions of
this code, or any provision of the International Building Code or
who shall fail to comply with any requirement thereof, or who
shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the Codes
Enforcement Officer or of a permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of International Building Code shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$1,000 and/or to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Every
day that a violation of the code or of the International Building
Code continues shall constitute a separate offense.
2. Any person, firm or corporation who shall erect, construct, alter
or repair a building or structure or who shall undertake any
work or activity requiring a permit under this chapter or under
the International Building Code without first obtaining the
required permits and who shall be convicted under this
Subsection B of failing to obtain the necessary permit shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of up to $500 and/or to imprisonment for
not more than 30 days and further shall pay two times the
appropriate permit fee.
D. Section 114.3, "Unlawful Continuance," is amended to read as follows:
[Amended 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 1171-2001]
Section 114.3. Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall
continue any work in or about the structure after having been served
with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be, upon
conviction, sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.68
68.Editor's Note: Former § 82-10E, which previously followed this subsection and contained
an amendment to Section 3408.2, Applicability, of the 1996 Edition of the BOCA National
Building Code, as amended, was repealed 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 1171-2001.
§ 82-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 82-11
76:180
§ 82-11. Conflicts with statutory provisions.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the
Commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations,
or other ordinances of the City of Coatesville, as the case may be, shall
control where the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the
provisions of this article. The code shall control in all cases where the state
requirements, or the requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not
as strict as those contained in this article.
§ 82-12. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of this article so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and/or codes in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and codes and
not as new enactments. The provisions of this article shall not affect any
act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
§ 82-11 BICYCLES § 82-12
76:181

ARTICLE III
Residential Dwelling Code
[Adopted 11-22-1993 by Ord. No. 948-93]
§ 82-13. Standards adopted. [Amended 8-13-2001 by Ord. No.
1171-2001]
The City of Coatesville hereby adopts for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the fabrication, erection, construction, reconstruction,
enlargement, alteration, addition to, repair, location and use of detached
one- and two-family dwellings, their appurtenances and accessory
structures, the one- and two-family dwelling code known as the
"International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings," 2000
Edition, of which three copies have been and now are filed in the office
of Codes Department, and the same are adopted and incorporated as if
fully set out at length herein. From the date by which this article shall
take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the fabrication,
erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, alteration, addition to,
repair, location and use of detached one- and two-family dwellings, their
appurtenances and accessory structures within the corporate limits of the
City of Coatesville.
§ 82-14. Amendments to standards. [Amended 8-13-2001 by Ord.
No. 1171-2001]
The dwelling code hereby adopted is amended as follows:
§ 82-15. Conflicts with statutory provisions.
In all matters that are regulated by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the
commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations,
as the case may be, shall control where the requirements thereof are the
same as or more limiting than the provisions of this article. The code shall
control in all cases where the state requirements are not as strict as those
contained in this article.
§ 82-16. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and/or codes in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and codes and
not as new enactments. The provisions of this article shall not affect any
A. Section R113.4, shall be amended to read as follows:
Section R113.4 Any person who shall violate any provision of this
code shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding $1,000 and costs of prosecution, or in default of payment to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day a violation of
this code continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 82-13 BICYCLES § 82-16
76:183
act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
§ 82-16 COATESVILLE CODE § 82-16
76:184
ARTICLE IV
Vacant Premises
[Adopted 8-25-2008 by Ord. No. 1307-2008; amended in its entirety
11-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1366-2011]
§ 82-17. Purpose.
§ 82-18. Public nuisance.
Vacant premises as further defined herein shall constitute a public
nuisance.
§ 82-19. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words, whenever used in
this article, shall be construed to have the meaning indicated herein:
BOARDED — Some or all of the building's doors or windows have been
covered with plywood, wood or metal sheeting, paneling or other similar
materials, for the purpose of preventing entry into the building or damage
by persons, animals or the elements of weather.
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy.
DEBRIS — Material which is incapable of immediately performing the
function for which it was designed, including, but not limited to, abandoned,
discarded, or unused objects, junk comprised of equipment and such
vehicles, trucks, boats, trailers and carts that are unregistered and missing
parts, not complete in appearance, and in obvious state of disrepair, parts
of vehicles, furniture, appliances, cans, scrap metal, building supplies, tires,
batteries, containers, barrels, and garbage in the public view.
DETERIORATION — The condition or appearance of a building
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting
or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, excessive use or lack of
maintenance.
A. The problem of vacant and abandoned housing units and commercial
and other properties is a barrier to reducing crime, encouraging private
investment, and enhancing well-being of neighborhoods. It is the
responsibility of the property owners to prevent buildings from
becoming a burden to the neighborhood and community and a threat to
the public health, safety, and welfare. A neglected building or lot that is
not well maintained and managed can be the core and source of
spreading blight.
B. The purpose of this article is to return properties to productive use by
establishing a procedure for identifying and registering vacant
buildings which violate City Codes or state law and/or have such other
identified characteristics as to constitute a nuisance (blighted buildings
or structures).
§ 82-17 BICYCLES § 82-19
76:185
DILAPIDATED — Having structural damage or decayed or rotten beyond
repair.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any duly authorized City of Coatesville
employee of the Codes Department.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, entity having a legal or equitable
interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state,
county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having
control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such
person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structure thereon.
UNOCCUPIED — A building or portion thereof which is no longer used or
occupied for its lawful purpose, including buildings ordered vacated by the
Enforcement Officer.
UNSECURED — A building or portion of a building which is open to entry
by unauthorized persons without the use of tools or ladders.
VACANT LOT — A parcel of land with no structures.
VACANT PREMISES — Residential, commercial and industrial buildings and
vacant lots which are:
§ 82-20. Vacant premises identification.
A. Unoccupied for a period of time over 180 days; or
Unoccupied for a period of 60 days and abandoned (as established by
the Enforcement Officer's determination that the building lacks utility
services, or has multiple City Code, property maintenance or other
violations, or is subject to a foreclosure action or tax sale and/or there
is a determination by the Chief of Police that the property is attracting
illegal activity).
B.
A. Immediately after the effective date of this article, the Director (Codes
Department) shall evaluate all buildings in the City believed to be
unoccupied on the effective date of this article and shall make a
determination for each as to whether the building is a "vacant
premises" within the meaning of § 82-19. The determination shall be in
writing and shall state the factual basis for the determination. The
Director (Codes Department) shall, within 10 days of determining that a
building is a "vacant premises," send notice of his written
determination with the factual findings to the last owner of record listed
on the most recent Chester County tax roll. Said notice of determination
shall be sent to the owner or designated agent by certified mail, return
receipt requested. However, if the address of the owner or designated
agent is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Codes Department
in the exercise of reasonable diligence, copies of the notice shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the property affected. Any appeals
from the determination of the Codes Department shall be made within
§ 82-19 COATESVILLE CODE § 82-20
76:186
§ 82-21. Vacant premises registration; registration fee schedule.
10 days before the International Property Maintenance Code Appeals
Board as set forth in Section 111.1 of Chapter 180 of the City Code
upon the deposit of an appropriate fee. In the absence of such an
appeal, the determination of the Codes Department shall be final.
B. The written notice sent to the owner or the owner's agent shall describe
the conditions that render the property vacant, and shall demand
registration within 15 days of the receipt of such notice. The City may
also post notices on the City's website to provide additional notice to
the public.
A. The owner or operator of vacant premises shall register with the Codes
Department no later than 15 days after being notified by an
Enforcement Officer of the requirement to register.
B. The registration will be submitted on a form provided by the Codes
Department and will include the following information:
(1) A description of the premises, e.g., square footage, number of
stories, age of the building, and most recent or current use of the
building.
(2) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the owner or
owners.
(3) The names and addresses of all known lien holders and all other
parties with a legal or equitable ownership interest in the building.
(4) The name of the resident agent designated to act on the behalf of
the owner to accept legal processes and notices and to authorize
repairs as required.
C. Registration shall be required for all vacant premises. In the instance of
a vacant premises which is determined to be structurally secure and to
have a good roof, and which is properly boarded up in accordance with
the requirements of this article and the direction of the Codes
Department, the payment of the registration fee shall exonerate the
owner, agent or responsible party from responsibility for compliance
with any other building code or housing code requirements unless there
are violations relating to the property resulting from its deterioration or
dilapidated condition and for which the condition of being boarded up
does not provide a practical and safe solution as determined by the
Codes Department, circumstances which shall require affirmative
action to avoid action by the Codes Department for violations. The
owner of the vacant premises as of December 1 of each calendar year
shall be responsible for the annual payment of a nonrefundable
registration fee of $250. Said registration fee shall be billed by the City
on or after January 1 of each year on a calendar-year basis.
§ 82-20 BICYCLES § 82-21
76:187
§ 82-22. Time restrictions for vacant buildings.
It is the policy of the City of Coatesville that boarding is a temporary
solution to prevent unauthorized entry into vacant boarded buildings. A
vacant building may not remain boarded longer than two years unless an
extension of that time is approved by the Codes Department, which such
extension shall not be unreasonably withheld. If at any time the property
becomes in a deteriorated or dilapidated condition, regardless of whether
or not it is boarded up, the Codes Department shall take such action as it
deems necessary, including removing the property from the Vacant Property
List, revoking any privileges granted to such properties, and pursuing any
and all remedies available at law or in equity to protect the public and
enforce the laws and regulations of the City and the Commonwealth.
§ 82-23. Exemptions.
A building which has suffered fire damage or damage caused by extreme
weather conditions will be exempt from the registration requirements of
this article for a period of 90 days after the date of the fire or the extreme
weather event, if the property owner submits a request for exemption in
writing to the Codes Department. All boarding of vacant premises will be
performed in accordance with the requirements in the 2009 International
Property Maintenance Code, Appendix A, Boarding Standards, or current
edition.
§ 82-24. Penalties for noncompliance.
The failure of the owner of vacant premises to register and pay all required
fees under § 82-21 after receipt of a mailing of a delinquency shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day of violation will
be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
§ 82-25. Delinquent registration fees as a lien.
After the owner is given notice of the registration fee due, said amount shall
constitute a debt due and owing to the City of Coatesville. An unpaid fee
shall be a lien upon the premises. All delinquent fees will be paid by the
owner prior to any transfer of an ownership interest in any vacant premises.
D. If vacant premises are owned by the City of Coatesville or its
instrumentalities, it shall be subject to the registration requirements of
this section and the maintenance requirements in Chapter 180, but
shall not be subject to the fee requirements under this article.
E. Any new owner shall register or reregister the vacant premises with the
Codes Department upon transfer of an ownership interest in the vacant
premises, and the new owner shall get credit for that portion of the year
for which a registration fee has already been paid by the prior owner.
§ 82-21 COATESVILLE CODE § 82-26
76:188
§ 82-26. Annual report.
Once a year, the Codes Department will send to the City Council and to the
City Manager a list of all buildings in the City of Coatesville declared vacant
under the provisions of this article, as well as a list of all previously declared
vacant buildings which are no longer subject to the provisions of this article.
§ 82-27. Advisory Committee.
The City shall have authority to appoint an Advisory Committee which such
Advisory Committee shall consist of no more than five adult residents of
the City determined to be capable of assisting the City and appointed on
an annual basis by the City Council. The Advisory Committee if created
by the City Council shall be charged with assisting the City in identifying
properties in the City that may qualify as vacant premises as defined by
this article. The Advisory Committee, if established, shall have no ability
to enter onto private property and shall have no direct involvement with
Code Enforcement, but shall act in an advisory capacity only and shall be
permitted to prepare a report of its activities and to report to City Council
as it deems appropriate on an annual or semiannual basis, but no more than
four times a year.
§ 82-26 BICYCLES § 82-27
76:189

ARTICLE V
Water Supply
[Adopted 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 1415-2013]
§ 82-28. Purpose.
The City recognizes that the City has public water available and the City
has authority, by means of its Home Rule Charter and 53 P.S. §§ 38501 and
37403(60), to make appropriate regulations for the safety and welfare of the
City and to prohibit private wells.
§ 82-29. Private wells determined to be a nuisance.
Private wells have been determined to be nuisances as the use of public
water promotes the health, safety, morals, general welfare, cleanliness,
beauty, convenience, comfort and safety of the City, and private wells are
determined to be inconsistent with the health, safety and welfare of the City
and its residents.
§ 82-30. Private wells prohibited.
No private wells shall be permitted within the City of Coatesville after the
effective date of this article.
§ 82-31. Existing private wells.
Any private wells currently existing shall be permitted to continue.
However, if a private well is abandoned or fails, a replacement well is
prohibited.
§ 82-32. Penalties for noncompliance.
A property owner who installs a private well in violation of the terms
of this article shall be required to immediately remove the private well
and abandon same and failure to do so shall make said property owner
liable to the City for all expenses incurred by the City including reasonable
attorney's fees in enforcing the terms of this article.
§ 82-33. Conflicts with statutory provisions.
In all matters herein subject to the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or as established by regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by departments or agencies of the commonwealth
promulgated by authority of law, such law or regulations, or other ordinance
of the City of Coatesville, as the case may be, shall control where the
requirements thereof are the same or exceed the provisions of this article.
The provisions of this article control in all cases where the state
requirements or the requirements of other ordinances of the City are not as
strict as those contained in this article.
§ 82-28 BICYCLES § 82-34
76:191
§ 82-34. Severability.
If any portion of the article shall be determined to be unconstitutional,
illegal or unenforceable, then the portion and only that portion of this
article, which is deemed to be unconstitutional, illegal or unenforceable,
shall be served from the remainder of this article and all other terms thereof
shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 82-34 COATESVILLE CODE § 82-34
76:192
Chapter 84
CONTRACTOR LICENSING AND INSURANCE REGISTRATION
CERTIFICATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82. Fees — See Ch. 108.
§ 84-1. License required. [Amended 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
1346-2011]
No person, partnership, association, corporation or like entity shall engage
in business within the city as a contractor without first having obtained a
license therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 84-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACTOR — Includes any person or entity, including an owner or
authorized agent, engaged in the business of cement or concrete
contracting, masonry contracting, carpentry contracting or as an
excavating, general building contractor; electrical contractor, plumbing
contractor or mechanical contractor; and any person or entity engaged in
the construction, alteration, repair, removal, conversion or replacement of
any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system of buildings or other
structures, road construction or building development for which a permit is
required under the applicable zoning, subdivision or building ordinances of
the city.[Added 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 1346-201169]
§ 84-3. License fee; expiration. [Amended 10-26-1992 by Ord. No.
902-92; 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96; 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96; 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96; 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96; 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 1346-2011]
The initial annual fee for such license shall be $25 as provided in Chapter
108, unless exempt by proof of current state or federal regulations. Such
license shall be valid commencing with the date of issuance until the 31st
day of December of the year of issuance. The City Council by resolution may
adopt an amended schedule of fees, adjusting the aforementioned initial fee.
69.Editor's Note: The former definition of “building contractor” was repealed 1-24-2011 by
Ord. No. 1346-2011.
§ 82-34 BICYCLES § 84-4
76:193
§ 84-4. Contents of license application.70 [Amended 5-28-1996 by
Ord. No. 1012-96; 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
Application for a license hereunder shall contain the following information:
name, address, names of principal partners or officers, municipalities where
other permits are held and shall be accompanied by a certificate evidencing
coverage under a current public liability insurance policy, the limits of not
less than $100,000 per person, $300,000 per occurrence for bodily injury
liability and $100,000 on property damage liability and evidence of workers'
compensation coverage.
§ 84-5. Filing of application; quality of work.
§ 84-6. Revocation of license.
Any license granted hereunder may be revoked by the City Council upon
a finding that a holder of such license has committed repeated violations
of any ordinance relating to the improvement of structures or land or
development of land and construction of improvements. Such revocation
may be in addition to any fine imposed for violations of this chapter.
§ 84-7. Regulation of all contractors; insurance registration
certificate. [Added 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 1346-2011]
No person, partnership, association, corporation or like entity shall engage
in business within the City of Coatesville as a construction contractor
without first obtaining an insurance registration certificate from the City's
Code Office.
A. Application for license shall be filed with the Codes Administrator of the
city, who shall issue or deny such license within five working days of the
date of the receipt of the completed application.
B. All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations must be done
in a workmanlike manner, in accordance to acceptable practices of their
discipline and in accordance with the Code of the City of Coatesville. In
addition to this, any and all fences, shrubbery, flowers, lighting, signs,
etc., must be restored to its original condition at the completion of work
unless a signed agreement between all parties is submitted. [Added
11-24-1997 by Ord. No. 1054-97]
A. Insurance requirements.
(1) The following minimum insurances are required to obtain an
insurance registration certificate:
(a) General liability.
[1] Per occurrence: $500,000.
70.Editor's Note: Former § 84-4, Subcontractors, was repealed 1-24-2011 by Ord. No.
1346-2011. This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 84-5 through
84-7 as §§ 84-4 through 84-6, respectively.
§ 84-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 84-7
76:194
§ 84-8. Nonliability of city.
This chapter shall not be deemed to create any rights or claims against the
city, its agents, servants or employees by any person or entity who shall
claim damage from any contractor who has performed work in the city
without complying with the provisions of this chapter.
[2] Per personal injury: $500,000.
[3] Property damage: $500,000.
(b) Automobile.
[1] Liability: $300,000.
[2] Combined coverage: $500,000.
(c) Workers compensation and employer's liability.
[1] Each accident: $100,000.
B. Application information.
(1) The City shall have available the application and insurance
requirements at the municipal facility located at One City Hall
Place, Coatesville, Pennsylvania, which shall request all pertinent
information for the registration of contractors.
(2) The application will be available through the City's Codes
Department, and said Codes Department shall have five days in
which to issue said registration.
C. Establishment of initial registration fee.
(1) The initial annual fee, of which registration shall run from January
1 through December 31, shall be $50 per year.
(2) Upon registration, the Codes Department shall issue an insurance
registration certificate to the contractor acknowledging that said
minimum insurance requirements have been provided to the City.
(3) The Coatesville City Council may, by resolution, amend the
schedule of fees set forth in §§ 84-3 and 84-7 and the minimum
amounts of insurance set forth herein after the initial year upon
resolution enacted by the City Council of the City of Coatesville.
D. Revocation of registration. Any registration granted hereunder may be
revoked by the Codes Department upon finding that a holder of such
registration is in violation of any ordinance of the City.
§ 84-7 BICYCLES § 84-9
76:195
§ 84-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96; 1-24-2011 by Ord. No. 1346-2011]
Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity, who or which shall
violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
or such person or members of such partnership or the officers of such
corporation shall be liable to imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both. The city shall give official written notice to the violator by registered
or certified mail or by hand delivery that he or she is committing a violation,
and each day that the violation is continued shall constitute a separate
offense. The fine shall be collected as fines are now collected by law, and all
fines collected for violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the city.
§ 84-10. Enforcement.
In addition to the penalties provided for in § 84-9 above, the city may in its
discretion proceed in an action in law or equity to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to enjoin any violations thereof.
Chapter 86
(RESERVED)
Chapter 87
BUILDINGS AND LAND WITH SUBSTANTIAL VIOLATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 102.
Fire protection and prevention — See Ch. 115.
Housing standards — See Ch. 136.
Lifesafety standards — See Ch. 151.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 156.
Nuisances — See Ch. 164.
Plumbing — See Ch. 176.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
§ 87-1. Definitions.
The following are definitions under Chapter 87 of the City Code which
shall be used in making reasonable interpretations of the provisions of this
chapter:
CONSTRUCTIVE KNOWLEDGE — Knowledge of a violation listed on the
seller's property disclosure statement made pursuant to the Act of July 2,
1996 (P.L. 500, No. 84), known as the "Real Estate Seller Disclosure Act," 68
P.S. § 1021 et seq., a violation appearing on a buyer's notification certificate
provided by a municipality or a violation that is a matter of public record.
§ 84-9 COATESVILLE CODE § 87-1
86:196
DATE OF PURCHASE — The closing date or, in cases where the property is
sold pursuant to the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153), referred to as
the "Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law," 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., the first day
following the right of redemption period authorized under the Municipal
Claim and Tax Lien Law.
KNOWN TO HAVE — Knowledge of a violation based on actual or
constructive knowledge.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Coatesville.
SUBSTANTIAL VIOLATION — A violation of a building, housing, property,
maintenance or fire code, which violation posed a threat to health, safety
or property, but not a violation of such a code deemed by a court to be de
minimis.
§ 87-2. Compliance requirements.
A. General Rule No. 1: Building structures. The owner of any building,
structure or part of a building or structure known to have one or more
substantial violations of municipal codes relating to building, housing,
property maintenance or fire shall, within 18 months of the date of
purchase (or such longer period of time if agreed to between the owner/
purchaser and the City of Coatesville) do the following:
(1) Bring the building, structure or that part of a building or structure
into compliance with those codes with respect to which said
building, structure or part of a building or structure was known to
have been noncompliant; or
(2) Demolish the building or structure in accordance with the law.
(a) Considerations as to demolition of attached buildings. [Added
4-13-2009 by Ord. No. 1322-2009]
[1] Before the Department of Codes Enforcement issues a
permit for demolition, drawings shall be submitted by a
licensed engineer or architect, indicating that the
demolition will leave a solid and secure base upon which
the surviving building will rest.
[2] The surviving wall, after demolition, shall be rebuilt to
reflect the same appearance as the front of the remaining
building or structure previously attached to the
demolished building or structure.
[3] Insulation shall be installed so as to guarantee a minimum
standard to assure occupants of the surviving building that
there will be the same level of comfort on a year-round
basis, as there was prior to the demolition of the adjoining
building.
§ 87-1 (RESERVED) § 87-2
86:197
[4] The additional thickness in inches required to construct
such a wall in accordance with the foregoing requirements
may be eased over to the owner of the existing building, as
well as all rights of access to the building wall and the
right to use that wall for any reason that the owner of the
surviving building may choose.
[5] If and when a new building is built on the site of the
demolished building, and if such new structure requires
the use of the common wall, the owner of the site of the
demolished building shall have the right to bring his or her
property line back to the same point that it was prior to the
demolition of the previously existing building or structure
and any easement as aforesaid.
[6] The Department of Codes Enforcement shall notify
neighboring tenants and owners of buildings proposed to
be demolished of their rights under this section, and shall
spell out the obligations of the demolition company
involved. Such requirements shall include a list of
measures of protection that such neighboring tenants and
owners are entitled to, should there be current or future
damage to the surviving building resulting from the
subject demolition.
[7] The Department of Codes Enforcement will provide an
advocate to work with property owners involved in order
to assist in minimizing the impact of the demolition and to
promote projects which will enhance appearances for both
the City and the property owner.
[8] Disclosure of environmental conditions. Every owner or
agent for the owner of a property for which a demolition
permit application is filed with the Department of Codes
Enforcement, shall provide full disclosure with such
demolition permit application of any pending
environmental assessment, review, remediation, or
voluntary compliance action that has been issued, ordered
or approved by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, or by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP). No demolition permit
shall be issued or approved until such full environmental
disclosure has been filed with the Department of Codes
Enforcement to the satisfaction of the Director of Codes
Enforcement. The purpose and intent of this section is to
prevent any property owner, builder, contractor, developer
or other person from obtaining a demolition permit from
the City without fully disclosing and informing the City
officials of known environmental hazards on the site for
which an application for a demolition permit has been
made.
§ 87-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 87-2
86:198
§ 87-3. Violations and penalties; other remedies.
[9] Where a structure has been demolished or removed and a
demolition permit has not been approved, the vacant lot
shall be filled, graded and maintained in conformity to the
established elevation of the street grade at curb level
nearest to the point of demolition or excavation. Provision
shall be made to prevent the accumulation of water or
damage to any foundations on the premises or the
adjoining property.
[10] The owner shall make arrangements for the parcel to be
identifiable by an address after demolition.
B. General Rule No. 2: Lot or parcel of land. The owner of any lot or parcel
of land known to have one or more substantial violations of municipal
nuisance ordinances relating to maintenance, health or safety is
required to make a reasonable attempt to abate the nuisance within one
year of the date of purchase.
C. General Rule No. 3: Coordination. The City of Coatesville shall not
refuse to issue a use and occupancy certificate or similar permit on the
basis of a substantial violation or require the correction of a substantial
violation as a condition to issuing a use and occupancy certificate or
similar permit in connection with the purchase of a building, structure,
part of a building or structure, lot or parcel of land subject to the
General Rule No. 1 and No. 2 above, unless the substantial violation
renders the property unfit for habitation.
A. Violation of General Rule No. 1. Failure to comply with the
requirements of General Rule No. 1 of this chapter, § 87-2A, shall result
in the purchaser being personally liable for the costs of repairs or
demolition and a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than
$10,000. Fines shall be remitted to the municipality in which the
building, structure or part of a building or structure is located. In
municipalities with low-income housing, not less than 1/3 of the fine
imposed shall be used by the municipality for low-income housing in a
manner determined by the municipality.
B. Violation of General Rule No. 2. Failure to comply with the
requirements of General Rule No. 2 of this Chapter, § 87-2B, shall result
in the purchaser being personally liable for the cost of maintenance and
a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than $10,000. Fines shall be
remitted to the municipality in which the lot or parcel of land is located.
C. The penalties identified herein are nonexclusive remedies available to
the City of Coatesville and do not act as a waiver of other remedies
available by statute or common law but are provided in addition to
those other available remedies.
§ 87-2 (RESERVED) § 87-4
86:199
§ 87-4. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 87-5. Severability.
Chapter 92
CURFEW
§ 92-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Curfew Ordinance."
§ 92-2. Purposes and findings.
This chapter is an updating of the city curfew ordinance, and in accordance
with prevailing community standards, prescribes regulations for the
presence of minors on streets, in public places and other locations in the
city during certain hours, all for the welfare and protection of minors,
the furtherance of parental responsibility and for public health, safety and
welfare. Accordingly, the City Council finds as follows:
A. The provisions of this chapter are severable, and, if any portion is held
by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of federal or state
constitutional statute or statutory law, that portion is hereby repealed,
and the decision of the court will not affect or impair any of the
remaining provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the City
Council's intention that this chapter would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional or ultra vires provision not been included.
B. If any portion of this chapter shall be determined to be unconstitutional,
illegal or unenforceable, then the portion and only that portion of this
chapter, which is deemed to be unconstitutional, illegal or
unenforceable shall be severed from the remainder of this chapter and
all other terms thereof shall remain in full force and effect. This chapter
shall be effective 30 days after publication following final adoption in
accordance with the City Charter and the Third Class City Code.
A. A curfew can reduce the extant problem of juvenile delinquency by
regulating the hours during which minors may remain in public streets,
places and certain establishments without adult supervision.
B. A curfew meets a local need of the city and has over the years been a
significant factor in minimizing juvenile delinquency and disorderliness
by imposing additional duties and responsibilities upon the parents of
minors.
C. The City of Coatesville is a stable family community in which parental
responsibility for the whereabouts of minors is the norm, and legal
§ 87-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 92-2
86:200
§ 92-3. Definitions and word usage.
sanctions to enforce parental responsibility have demonstrated their
effectiveness over the years.
D. As parental control increases, the likelihood of juvenile delinquency
decreases.
E. There is a continuing need for the curfew and the regulations attendant
thereto as established by the following chapter.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings set forth hereinafter:
CITY — The City of Coatesville, Chester County, Pennsylvania, with
offices located at 1 City Hall Place, Coatesville, Pennsylvania.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated,
any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is invited
or any nonprofit entity operating within the city.
KNOWINGLY — Having actual knowledge and including such
knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have,
under all attendant circumstances, concerning the whereabouts of a
minor in that parent's legal custody. It shall be no defense for purposes
of this chapter that a parent is indifferent to the activities or conduct or
whereabouts of a minor.
MINOR — Any individual under the age of 18 years.[Amended
9-11-1995 by Ord. No. 1001-95]
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or
corporation owning, operating, managing or conducting any
establishment, and, whenever used in any clause prescribing a penalty,
the term "operator" as applied to associations or partnerships shall
include all members or partners thereof and, as applied to corporations,
shall include the officers, thereof.
PARENT — Any person having legal custody of a minor as:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street (as defined herein) and all city
parks, playgrounds, public buildings or vacant lots located in the city,
whether such vacant lots are owned by the city or are owned privately.
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon
the streets or in public places or establishments, including the
congregating of groups totaling four or more persons, in which any
(1) A natural or adoptive parent; and/or
(2) A legal guardian; and/or
(3) A person who stands in loco parentis to a minor; and/or
A person to whom legal custody of a minor has been given by order
of any court of competent jurisdiction.
(4)
§ 92-2 (RESERVED) § 92-3
86:201
§ 92-4. Curfew for minors established. [Amended 9-11-1995 by Ord.
No. 1001-95; 8-8-2005 by Ord. No. 1253-2005; 6-25-2007 by Ord.
No. 1287-2007; 10-13-2008 by Ord. No. 1310-2008; 2-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 1321-2009; 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 1338-2010]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to remain in or
upon any street, public place or establishment in the City between 9:00 p.m.
prevailing time and 6:00 a.m. prevailing time, Sunday through Thursday,
minor involved would not be using the streets, public places or
establishments for ordinary or serious purposes, such as mere passage
or going home. To implement this definition with additional precision
and precaution, numerous exceptions hereto are expressly contained in
and defined in § 92-5 of this chapter.
STREET — A way or place of whatever nature, open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel or, in the case of sidewalk
thereof, for pedestrian travel. The term "street" as used herein includes
the legal right-of-way, including, but not limited to, the cartway of
traffic lanes, the curb and sidewalks (whether paved or unpaved) and
any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of
a street. For purposes of this chapter, "street" also applies to ways the
public is privileged to use over private property as long as the owner
thereof permits such public use (including, by way of example but not
limited to, sidewalks and grass plots open to public use) and to parking
areas of any types (including, by way of example but not limited to,
residential, municipal or commercial parking areas) which are open to
and available for public use whether or not accessed by any street. In
addition, the term "street" shall apply irrespective of what it is named
or was formerly named, whether "alley," "avenue," "court," "road," or
otherwise, or whether it is maintained by the city and irrespective of
whether it is open to the public as a matter of right.
TIME — The prevailing standard of time, whether Eastern Standard
Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time, as observed at that hour (or
minute) by the public in the city; prima facie evidence of the "time"
for purposes of this chapter shall be the "time" actually observed in
the city's administrative offices or in the City of Coatesville Police
Department.
YEAR OF AGE — The age of an individual as established on the day of
any infraction alleged hereunder. For purposes of this chapter, the "year
of age" shall be the period of time between the previous birthday of an
individual and the next consecutive birthday (but not including the day
of such birthday) of an individual.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
shall include the future, words in the plural number shall include the
singular, words in the singular number shall include the plural and the
masculine pronoun shall include the feminine pronoun. The word
"shall" as used hereinafter is to be construed as mandatory and not
directory.
§ 92-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 92-4
86:202
and between 10:00 p.m. prevailing time and 6:00 a.m. prevailing time,
Friday and Saturday, except when the curfew hours established hereunder
are temporarily suspended or modified by proclamation of the City Council
of the City of Coatesville. In addition, for those children under the age of
12, the foregoing prohibition against remaining in or upon any street, public
place or establishment in the City shall be effective between 9:00 p.m.
prevailing time and 6:00 a.m. prevailing time Sunday through Saturday.
§ 92-5. Exceptions.
In the following cases, a minor remaining on a public street, public place or
in an establishment during the hours set forth in § 92-4 above, shall not be
considered to be in violation of this chapter:
A. When accompanied by:
(1) The parent of the minor; or
(2) An adult authorized by the parent of the minor to take the parent's
place in accompanying the minor for a designated period of time
and purpose within a specified area.
B. When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly. Any minor desiring to avail himself or
herself of the provisions of this exception shall establish the validity of
such exercise by first delivering to the City Police Department a letter,
dated and signed by the minor and a parent of the minor, containing the
following information:
(1) The minor's name.
(2) The minor's age.
(3) The minor's address.
(4) The minor's telephone number.
(5) The parents' name.
(6) The parents' address.
(7) The parents' telephone number.
(8) A statement specifying when, where and in what manner the minor
will be in or on the streets, a public place or an establishment
(during the hours when this chapter is otherwise applicable) in the
exercise of the First Amendment rights specified in the letter.
C. In the case of reasonable necessity, provided that the minor's parents
shall have first delivered to the City Police Department a written notice
stating:
(1) The facts establishing the reasonable necessity.
§ 92-4 (RESERVED) § 92-5
86:203
§ 92-6. Parental responsibilities.
§ 92-7. Responsibilities of establishment operators.
(2) A description of the specified streets, public place or establishment
at designated times for a described purpose, including points of
origin and destination.
(3) The written notice has been countersigned and dated by the Chief
of the City of Coatesville Police Department (or other police officer
authorized by the Chief to sign such notices).
D. When the minor is on the sidewalk of the minor's place of residence, or
on the sidewalk of any premises immediately adjacent to the premises
in which the minor resides, provided that the owner of the adjacent
premises does not object to the minor's presence.
E. When returning home, by a direct route from (and within 30 minutes
after the termination of) a school activity or an activity of a religious or
other voluntary association, provided that the minor shall, upon request
of any police officer, provide to such police officer a written statement
identifying:
(1) The school activity or other function which the minor has attended.
(2) The location of the activity.
(3) The time of termination of the activity.
F. When the minor is employed and carries a card signed by the minor's
employer, dated (or issued) not more than 45 days previous to the date
shown on such card. Such card shall:
(1) Identify the minor by name, address and telephone number.
(2) Identify the minor's employer.
(3) Identify the hours of employment.
G. When the minor, with parental consent, is in a motor vehicle and such
motor vehicle is involved in bona fide interstate travel through the city
or such interstate travel begins or ends in the city.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a parent having legal custody of
a minor to knowingly permit or allow such minor to be or remain upon
any city street, public place or establishment within the city between
the hours specified in § 92-4 above.
B. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any parent of a
minor who is otherwise exempt from the provisions of this chapter in
accordance with the exceptions specified in § 92-5 above.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for the operator (or their agents or
employees) of any establishment to knowingly permit any minor to
§ 92-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 92-7
86:204
§ 92-8. Enforcement procedures; violations and penalties.
remain upon the premises of the establishment during the hours
specified in § 92-5 hereof.
B. Each violation of the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. Any police officer, upon finding or having attention called to the
presence of any minor on the streets, in public places or establishments
of the city in prima facie violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
immediately obtain from the minor the minor's:
(1) Name.
(2) Address.
(3) Age.
(4) The name of his or her parents.
B. Upon obtaining this information, and in order to safeguard the person
of the minor, the police officer shall take the minor to the City of
Coatesville Police Department and shall immediately notify the parent
or parents of the minor and instruct the parent or parents to come to
the City of Coatesville Police Department and take custody of the minor.
Upon the arrival of the parent or parents at the City of Coatesville
Police Department, the minor shall be released to the custody of the
parent or parents after a written copy of the violation has been issued to
them. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 1089-98]
C. If a parent cannot be located, or fails to take charge of the minor, then
the minor shall be released to the juvenile authorities of Chester
County, except that the minor may temporarily be entrusted to a
relative, neighbor or other person who will, on behalf of the minor's
parent, assume the responsibility of caring for the minor pending the
availability or arrival of the minor's parent.
D. In the case of a first violation of this chapter by a minor, and the parents
did not make contact with the Coatesville Police Department to receive
the written copy of the violation, the Chief of the Coatesville Police
Department shall within 72 hours after the time of the taking of the
minor into custody send to the minor's parents by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a written notice of the violation of the provisions of
this chapter, accompanied by a written warning that any subsequent
violation will result in full enforcement of the provisions of this chapter,
including enforcement of the parental responsibility provision of § 92-6
and the penalties contained in § 92-8. [Amended 11-9-1998 by Ord.
No. 1089-98]
E. If, after the written warning notice sent pursuant to Subsection D above
of a first violation by a minor, a parent violates the provisions of this
§ 92-7 (RESERVED) § 92-8
86:205
Chapter 97
DRUGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 66. Towing services — See Ch. 210.
chapter, such violation shall be treated as a first offense by the parent.
For such offense, the parent, upon conviction thereof, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $250, and not more than $500,
together with costs of prosecution, or to imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 30 days. As an alternative or in addition to a sentence to
pay such fine and costs, such parent may be sentenced to complete
community service in the City of Coatesville, in a community service
program offered by the Police Department or other appropriate agency,
organization or program, for a minimum of 25 hours and a maximum of
40 hours of community service. In default of payment of such fine and
costs, or satisfactory completion of said community service, the parent
shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment for a term of at least two
days and not to exceed 30 days. Such sentence shall be in addition to
any sentence of imprisonment originally imposed for such offense. For
each subsequent violation, the parent, upon conviction thereof, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $500, and not more than $1,000,
together with costs of prosecution, or to imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 30 days. As an alternative or in addition to a sentence to
pay such fine and costs, such parent may be sentenced to complete
community service in the City of Coatesville, in a community service
program offered by the Police Department or other appropriate agency,
organization or program, for a minimum of 40 hours and a maximum of
80 hours of community service. In default of payment of such fine and
costs, or satisfactory completion of said community service, the parent
shall be sentenced to a term of imprisonment for a term of at least
five days and not to exceed 30 days. Such sentence shall be in addition
to any sentence of imprisonment originally imposed for such offense.
[Amended 10-13-2008 by Ord. No. 1311-2008]
F. Any minor who violates any provision of this chapter more than three
times within a one-year period shall be referred to the appropriate
county or state entity established pursuant to the provisions of the Act
of July 9, 1976, P.L. 586, No. 142, Section 2, et seq., as amended (42
Pa.C.S.A. § 6301 et seq.), i.e., the Juvenile Act, for disposition.
G. Any operator of an establishment and any agents or employees of that
operator who violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500,
together with costs of prosecution, or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days, or both.
§ 92-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 92-8
97:206
ARTICLE I
Use of Real Estate for Illicit Sales
[Adopted 10-23-1989 by Ord. No. 847-89 (Ch. 91 of the 1989 Code)]
§ 97-1. Findings and purpose.
The Council finds it to be in the interest of the residents of the City of
Coatesville and the general public to provide for the regulation of conduct
it deems to be offensive; to prevent vice, disorder and immorality; and to
promote public peace, health and safety, and to this end the Council enacts
this article.
§ 97-2. Unlawful acts.
No person who has legal or equitable ownership of real estate (property)
located in the city shall knowingly allow that real estate to be used as
the site for the sale of illicit narcotics or controlled dangerous substances,
after having received written notice from the City that a present occupant
or tenant of that property has been convicted of selling illicit narcotics or
controlled dangerous substances at that property.
§ 97-3. Discrimination.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to encourage or authorize the
discrimination by lessors against any person(s) based upon race, creed,
religion, sex, age or national origin. Rather, it is the intent of this article
to hold persons accountable for acquiescing in the continued use of their
property as the location of illegal drug sales, after having received notice as
set forth in § 97-2.
§ 97-4. Criteria for establishing violations.
The conviction for violation of this article will be determined by the
appropriate judicial authority; such determination of conviction shall be
made where:
§ 97-5. Eviction proceedings as defense.
No person shall be charged with the violation of this article if such person
has instituted eviction proceedings against the tenant(s) whose suspected
criminal activities would otherwise give rise to potential liability under
this article. The owner (lessor) is required, however, to move forward
expeditiously with any such eviction proceedings.
A. The owner (lessor) has received notice as set forth in § 97-2; and
B. It has been established that the owner (lessor) aided or acquiesced in
illegal activities described in § 97-2.
§ 97-1 DRUGS § 97-6
97:207
§ 97-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution or shall be
imprisoned for no more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 97-6 COATESVILLE CODE § 97-6
97:208
ARTICLE II
Towing and Storage of Vehicles Used in Drug Transactions
[Adopted 2-28-2000 by Ord. No. 1123-2000]
§ 97-7. Authority to remove and impound.
§ 97-8. Approved storage garages.
The City of Coatesville shall designate, by resolution, specific buildings or
outdoor parking areas where vehicles impounded under this chapter shall
be taken and stored, including any city parking lot or lots, as applicable.
§ 97-9. No bond required.
No storage garage shall be required to post a bond in order to be approved
as a pound.
§ 97-10. Towing and storing charges.
A. Any member of the City of Coatesville's Police Department is authorized
to remove and/or impound or to order the removal and/or impounding
of any vehicle used in violation of the Controlled Substance, Drug,
Device and Cosmetic Act71 which constitutes property subject to
common law rights of forfeiture or seizure by the commonwealth as
determined by the Chester County District Attorney's office or such
other appropriate law enforcement authority.
B. Any vehicle impounded under the above authority shall be impounded
in the City of Coatesville for a time period of a maximum of 10 days. Any
impounded vehicle will be held until the Chester County District
Attorney's office, or other appropriate law enforcement authority,
determines that the vehicle held subject to the aforementioned
authority should be released or transferred. In the event that a
determination is made not to release a vehicle from forfeiture, the
vehicle will be towed to the towing lot of the Chester County District
Attorney's Office, or other appropriate law enforcement authority,
subject to procedures promulgated by such authority. In the event that
a determination is made by the above-referenced authorities to release
a vehicle from forfeiture, the vehicle will be released to the owner or
custodian upon payment of the towing and storage charges identified
herein, or disposed of in accordance with the laws and regulations
(including the laws of the City of Coatesville) governing abandoned
vehicles.
A. The owner or custodian of any vehicle removed or impounded under the
provisions of this article shall pay to the city the standard towing and
storing charges (for a maximum of 10 days' storage) as authorized by
resolution of the City Council (and made part of the city's Fee
71.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq.
§ 97-7 DRUGS § 97-10
97:209
§ 97-11. Notice to owners of removal.
Within 12 hours of the time of the removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by § 97-7 herein, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded shall be sent by the City of Coatesville Police Department to
the owner of record of such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place
from which such vehicle was removed, and reasons for its removal and
impounding and the authority under which it was impounded.
§ 97-12. Payment of charges without protest.
The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this
article shall, unless such payment has been made under protest, be final and
conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money
so paid.
§ 97-13. Payment of charges under protest; refund.
If any towing and impounding charges are paid under protest, the offender
shall be entitled to a hearing before a court having jurisdiction. In such
case, the defendant shall receive such notice as is provided by applicable
law in other cases of summary offenses and shall have the same rights
as to appeal and waiver of hearing. If the court shall find in favor of the
defendant, the City Finance Director shall refund to the alleged offender the
towing and storage charges paid under protest.
§ 97-14. Record of vehicle impounded.
The City of Coatesville Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles
impounded and shall, at all reasonable times, furnish the owners thereof
with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
Schedule), before the vehicle shall be released. Payments should be
made to the City of Coatesville Police Department, which shall issue a
receipt therefor. Such payments shall be in addition to the payment of
any fine levied for the violation of the law necessitating the towing and/
or impounding.
B. Any towing service or wrecking company engaged to tow vehicles in the
City of Coatesville shall agree to accept payment for its towing services
from the city after the city's receipt of payment for same. If a vehicle
must be towed an additional time (if abandoned or declared to be
forfeited), the towing service or wrecking company shall receive
payment for its towing services in accordance with the procedures
governing abandoned vehicles or those promulgated by the supervising
authority. This second towing will be made by the tower subject to the
acknowledgment that the towing fee and storage charges owed to the
city shall be given first priority of payment.
§ 97-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 97-15
97:210
§ 97-15. Owner or operator liability.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not operate to relieve
the owner or operator of any fine or penalty for the violation of the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania on account of which the vehicle was
removed and impounded.
§ 97-16. Poundkeeper's rights.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to limit or change in any way
rights or remedies to which poundkeepers may be entitled.
§ 97-17. Interpretation.
This article governing the towing and impoundment of vehicles shall be
consistent with and interpreted in pari materia with the provisions
governing towing services found in Chapter 210 of the City Code and
relating to abandoned vehicles.
§ 97-18. Administrative fee.
In addition to the towing and storage charges as identified herein, in
circumstances where the Coatesville Police Department has impounded a
vehicle in a city parking lot (or lots) in accordance with the provisions
herein, there shall be, in addition to the daily storage costs and towing
costs, as authorized hereunder, an administrative fee of 25%
§ 97-15 DRUGS § 97-18
97:211
Chapter 102
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Licensing of building contractors — See Ch.
84.
Buildings and land with substantial
violations — See Ch. 87.
Fees — See Ch. 108.
Firearms, weapons and fireworks — See Ch.
112.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 115.
Lifesafety standards — See Ch. 151.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 156.
Plumbing standards — See Ch. 176.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
197.
Use registration — See Ch. 214.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 102-1. Standards adopted. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96; 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 1171-2001]
The City of Coatesville hereby adopts, for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the installation, renewal, extension and reception of
electric writing and electric apparatus in existing buildings, structures, or
outdoor electrical displays or signs or in the construction, reconstruction,
alteration or repair of buildings, structures or outdoor electrical displays
or signs, the electrical code known as the "International Electrical Code,"
2000 NFPA current edition (hereinafter also referred to as the "National
Electrical Code"), as recommended and published by the National Fire
Protection Association, of which not less than three copies have been and
now are filed in the office of the Codes Department, and the same are
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. From
the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall
be controlling for all existing and future electrical wiring and apparatus
in buildings, structures or outdoor electrical displays or signs within the
corporate limits of the City of Coatesville.
§ 102-2. Enforcement.
The National Electrical Code adopted in § 102-1 hereof shall be enforced
by the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, upon
the installation, removal, extension and reception of any electrical writing
and electric apparatus pursuant to this chapter cause an inspection or
inspections to be made by himself or herself or his or her duly authorized
agents, to determine that the electrical work conforms with the National
Electrical Code, this chapter and other ordinances of the City of Coatesville
and the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 97-18 COATESVILLE CODE § 102-3
97:212
§ 102-3. Permit required.
No person, copartnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal
entity shall hereafter install, receive, renew or extend electrical wire or
conductors to be used for the transmission of electric current for electric
light, heater power purposes in existing buildings, structures or outdoor
electrical displays or signs or in the construction, reconstruction, alteration
or repair of buildings, structures or outdoor electrical displays or signs,
without first applying for and obtaining a permit to do so pursuant to this
chapter.
A. All such applications for a permit shall be made to the Code
Enforcement Officer in writing on forms supplied by said Code
Enforcement Officer.
B. Any person making false answers to any questions or items set forth in
such application form shall forfeit and surrender any permit issued
pursuant thereto.
C. Such application form shall contain questions designed to elicit
information to determine whether or not said proposed electric wiring
and electric apparatus complies with the National Electrical Code, any
other ordinances of the City of Coatesville and statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. Each such application form shall be accompanied by a fee as prescribed
by ordinance from time to time by the City Council. [Amended
9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
E. Each applicant for a permit shall furnish to the Code Enforcement
Officer, proof in writing that an application for inspection of the
proposed electric wiring and electric apparatus has been made to a
local area inspection agency that specializes in such inspections, to
determine that the electrical work conforms with the provisions of the
National Electrical Code and this chapter. The payment of all inspection
fees and charges of the local area inspection agency shall be borne by
the applicant.
F. Each applicant for a permit shall cause the premises covered by the
application to be open for inspection or inspections by the Code
Enforcement Officer and his agents and the representative or
representatives of the local area inspection agency at all reasonable
times.
G. Upon the determination of the Code Enforcement Officer that the
proposed electric wiring and electric apparatus comply with the
National Electrical Code, this chapter and other ordinances of the City
of Coatesville and the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a
permit shall be issued.
H. Homeowner's electrical permit. [Added 12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
1292-200772]
§ 102-3 DRUGS § 102-3
97:213
(1) Eligibility.
(a) Homeowner's electrical permit. Homeowners' permits, issued
if a home is not for sale or rent, are required for new
construction, renovation, and any work that requires a building
permit. Generally, homeowners' permits are not required for
replacement in kind. Only owner-occupants who perform the
work themselves qualify for homeowners' permits.
[1] A homeowner's permit is not authorized until a dwelling is
on the site or under construction. A homeowner shall not
be permitted to install his or her own internal wiring,
electrical work or equipment associated with a hot tub or a
swimming pool.
[2] A homeowner's permit issued for a mobile home on a
leased lot authorizes feeder installation for the mobile
home itself and it does not include the installation or
repair of service equipment.
[3] If a homeowner's permit is approved for a dwelling on a
lot, other structures on the same lot, such as a
noncommercial garage, are also covered unless otherwise
prohibited.
[4] Applicants for homeowners' permits shall contact one of
the third-party inspection agencies to have the electrical
work inspected and to answer applicant's questions about
the electrical code. Before installing dry wall, applicants
shall contact an inspection agency for a "rough in"
inspection.
(2) Application requirements. Applicants shall submit the application
with the following items for processing:
(a) Proof of home ownership:
[1] A copy of the official, signed deed with Recorder of Deeds
stamp which has been recorded at the Chester County
Recorder of Deeds Office. If you need a copy, contact the
Chester County Courthouse, Market and High Streets,
West Chester, PA 19382, phone: (610) 344-6000; or
[2] A copy of the long-term lease, e.g., 99 years, if the site of
the dwelling is part of a community where title to the land
is not conveyed by deed to the homeowner; or
[3] A copy of the title to a mobile home; or
[4] A written contract of sale, signed by the parties, for a
mobile home that includes the names of the buyer, seller,
72.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection H as Subsection I.
§ 102-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 102-3
97:214
§ 102-4. Inspection of work under permit.
§ 102-5. Inspection of existing electrical wiring and apparatus.
In order to safeguard persons and property against the hazards and perils
incident to defective electric wiring and apparatus that are or may now
be in existence within the corporate limits of the City of Coatesville the
Code Enforcement Officer is hereby given the duty to inspect with his or
her agents and their representative or representatives of the local area
inspection agency, when requested by proper authority, or when public
interest so requires, any premises within the City at reasonable times
to ensure that the existing electric wiring system and apparatus is not
defective and unsafe.
contract price, date of sale, and identification number of
the mobile home.
(b) A copy of the homeowner's driver's license or other photo
identification.
I. All permits shall expire six months from the date of issuance by the
Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96]
A. All inspections shall be made to ensure that the proposed electrical
work complies with the National Electrical Code. No electric wiring
shall be concealed unless inspected and approved by the Code
Enforcement Officer and his or her agents and the representatives or
representative of the local area inspection agency, but such inspection
or reinspection shall be made within a reasonable time after notice of
completion of the electrical work sought to be inspected for approval. A
duplicate record of each written approval made by the local area
inspection agency shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. All decisions made to determine whether or not the proposed electrical
work complies with the provisions of the National Electrical Code shall
be made by the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to stop electrical
work and order the removal thereof when he or she determines that
such work is being installed not in conformity with the National
Electrical Code, this chapter and other ordinances of the City of
Coatesville and the statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D. The Code Enforcement Officer may waive his or her inspection to
determine compliance with the National Electrical Code and this
chapter of all or that portion of the proposed electrical work for which
he or she shall have received a duplicate record of approval by the local
area inspection agency. The Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice
so that the approved work may be concealed.
§ 102-3 DRUGS § 102-5
97:215
§ 102-6. Hearings.
Every application and owner of the premises and other parties in interest
shall have the right to demand in writing a hearing before the City Council
to contest any decision or order made by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Such demand for a hearing shall be signed by the contesting party within
10 days of denial of permit stating what portions of the decision or orders
are contested and his or her or their interest in the premises.
§ 102-7. Approved materials.
Only materials, fittings and devices enumerated in the "List of Inspected
Appliances" of the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., as revised from time
A. All decisions that the existing electric wiring system and apparatus is
defective shall be made by the Code Enforcement Officer in writing on
notice to the owner of the premises served forthwith personally or by
regular mail addressed to the address shown on the latest tax records,
with reasons for his or her decision.
B. Upon the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer that the existing
electric wiring is defective and unsafe as aforesaid, the system or
portions of the system which are defective and unsafe shall be
discontinued until it is corrected and made to comply with the
provisions of the National Electrical Code in accordance with this
chapter.
C. Operation of any system or portions of a system discontinued pursuant
to § 102-5B shall be restored only upon certification of a licensed
electrician that the system is no longer defective and unsafe, and
further that it complies with the provisions of the National Electrical
Code, which certification shall be obtained at the cost of the property
owner. [Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall fix a time and place for the hearing
to be held not more than 30 days after receiving such demand for a
hearing and cause a notice of the hearing to be served personally or by
regular mail on the contestant, owner of the premises, other parties in
interest and the City Council.
B. The contestant, owner of the premises and other parties in interest
shall have the right to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the hearing. Rules of evidence prevailing in the courts
shall not be controlling.
C. The City Council, within a reasonable time after such hearing, shall
make its decision in writing with a finding of the facts and the reasons
for its decision, and serve a copy of its decision personally or by regular
mail on the contestant, owner of the premises and other parties in
interest.
§ 102-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 102-7
97:216
to time, shall be used in the electrical work regulated by the National
Electrical Code and this chapter.
§ 102-8. Amendments to standards.
The National Electrical Code herein adopted is supplemented by adding
thereto the following, which is made a part hereof:
§ 102-9. Modification on application.
The City Council shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of
this chapter, upon application in writing by the owner of a premises or his
agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of this chapter, provided that the spirit of this chapter shall be
observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
§ 102-10. Records.
All records of the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to this chapter shall
be open to public inspection for good and sufficient reasons during office
hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the Code Enforcement
Officer without his or her written consent.
§ 102-11. Exemptions.
No permit shall be required under this chapter for the following electrical
work:
§ 102-12. Fees.
Fees for permits or renewals thereof required by this chapter shall be
established, from time to time, by the City Council as set forth in Chapter
108, Fees.
A. Whenever a permit is required under the terms of this chapter for
electrical wiring and apparatus to be done in connection with a gas or
oil burner installation in any existing building or structure or in the
construction, reconstruction, alteration or repair of buildings or
structures, there shall be installed an emergency shutoff switch with a
red plate thereon marked "oil burner" or "gas burner," as the case may
be, at the entrance to the basement or heating room.
A. Minor repair work such as the replacement of lamps and fuses.
B. Equipment installed or work performed by or for a public utility
operating under authority granted by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission.
C. Equipment installed or work performed by a railway utility in the
exercise of its function as a utility and located in or on its right-of-way.
§ 102-7 DRUGS § 102-13
97:217
§ 102-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or of the National
Electrical Code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith or who shall
violate or fail to comply with any order made hereunder or who shall do or
cause to be done electrical work in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder or any certificate
or permit issued hereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or
who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by
the Code Enforcement Officer within the time fixed therein, shall be, upon
conviction thereof, sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
or to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues, following notice thereof,
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 102-14. Conflicts with statutory provisions.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the
commonwealth promulgated by authority by law, such laws or regulations,
or other ordinances of the City of Coatesville, as the case may be, shall
control where the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the
provisions of this chapter. The code shall control in all cases where the state
requirements or the requirements of other ordinances of this City are not as
strict as those contained in this chapter.
§ 102-15. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and/or codes in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and codes and
not as new enactment. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any
act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
Chapter 108
FEES
§ 108-1. Fees established.
Fee shall be established in the following amounts by the Council of the City
of Coatesville:
A. Alarm devices. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1096-99]
(1) Installation permit (regular): $50.
§ 102-13 COATESVILLE CODE § 108-1
97:218
(2) Installation permit (senior citizen): $25. [Amended 6-25-2001 by
Res. No. 2001-15]
B. 73Hot-water heaters: $75, plus payment of state fee and third-party
inspection for electrical installation (this is exempt from fixture count).
[Added 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1428-2014]
C. (Reserved)74
D. Building contractor's license fee: $75 per year.
(1) Commercial building contractor: $100. [Added 1-14-2013 by
Ord. No. 1402-2013]
(2) Home improvement contractor insurance registration: $75.
[Added 1-14-2013 by Ord. No. 1402-2013]
E. Tree removal: $50. [Amended 1-14-2013 by Ord. No. 1402-2013]75
F. Application to Noise Control Board for special variance: $100.
G. (Reserved)76
H. Replacement of lost, defaced or destroyed original amusement tax
certificate or seal: $5. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
I. Charge for collection, transport and disposal of: [Amended
12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1267-2005; 7-14-2014 by Ord. No.
1434-2014]
(1) Up to 1/2 cubic yard of solid waste per week: $295 per year per unit
per parcel.
(a) Each resident who pays his or her solid waste bill in its entirety
when first due and by the deadline for a first installment
payment shall receive a reduction of $5 in the yearly cost per
unit per parcel. [Added 12-14-2015 by Ord. No.
1466-2015]
(2) Where circumstances warrant a need for additional service, the
person in need of such additional service, meeting the
qualifications for such service, shall be entitled to pay for an
additional container and additional service as set forth in
Subsection I(1) above at the same cost, upon paying for same and
filling out an application form with the City and paying the
73.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, bicycle registration fee, was repealed 12-22-2005 by
Ord. No. No. 1267-2005.
74.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Building construction, as amended, was repealed
2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 1471-2016. See now the Fee Schedule included as an attachment to
this chapter.
75.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, containing the fee for a license to carry a gun, was
repealed 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96.
76.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, shopping cart redemption fee, was repealed
12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1267-2005.
§ 108-1 DRUGS § 108-1
97:219
additional administrative cost for processing the application in an
amount of not more than $10.
(a) Fee for disposal of television: $30; [Added 3-28-2016 by Ord.
No. 1472-2016]
(b) Fee for disposal of computer monitor: $20; [Added 3-28-2016
by Ord. No. 1472-2016]
(c) Fee for disposal of tires: $5 per/tire if dropped off; $7.50 per/
tire if picked up; [Added 3-28-2016 by Ord. No. 1472-2016]
(d) Fee for disposal of refrigerators/air conditioners/freezers: $15
if dropped off; $30 if picked up. [Added 3-28-2016 by Ord.
No. 1472-2016]
J. Peddling and soliciting: [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96;
2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1096-99; 6-25-2001 by Res. No. 2001-15;
12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1267-2005]
(1) License application fees:
(a) One-day license: $50.
(b) One-week license: $100.
(c) One-month license: $200.
(d) One-year license: $500.
(e) Group license: $200. Two or more people per week with
corporate verification. [Amended 1-14-2013 by Ord. No.
1402-2013]
(2) Deposit fees:
(a) One-day license: $50.
(b) One-week license: $100.
(c) One-month license: $200.
(d) One-year license: $500.
(e) Group license: $200.
K. Plumbing fees:
(1) Examination fee: [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
(a) If examination is taken at a regular meeting of the Board of
Examiners: $50.
(b) If examination entails a special meeting of the Board of
Examiners: $50.
§ 108-1 COATESVILLE CODE § 108-1
97:220
(2) Application for reregistration (add to building contractor's license
fee): [Amended 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1267-2005]
(a) Master plumbers, firms and corporations: $15.
(b) Journeymen plumbers: $10.
(c) Apprentice plumbers: $5.
(3) Reciprocal license (add to building contractor's license fee):
[Amended 6-25-2001 by Res. No. 2001-15; 12-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 1267-2005]
(a) Master plumbers, firms and corporations: $25.
(b) Journeymen plumbers: $20.
(c) Apprentice plumbers: $15.77
K.1. Public Works Department fees. [Added 5-26-2015 by Ord. No.
1456-2015]
(1) Equipment: hourly rate (with a one-hour minimum).
Type of Equipment Fee
Bill air compressor $35
Backhoe 24 inches $50
Jackhammer $10
Concrete saw $10
Blade 16 inches $5
71-inch mower $30
Skid loader $30
16-inch chain saw $10
Dump truck $35
Pickup truck $25
Generator $12
Tamper $12
(2) Labor, hourly rate: $51.
L. Solid waste fees:78
(1) Annual license fee for private trash haulers: $250.
(2) Annual license fee for recyclable collectors: $250.
77.Editor's Note: Former Subsection K(4), inspection and approval fee, as amended, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1267-2005.
78.Editor's Note: See § 108-1I regarding residential solid waste fees.
§ 108-1 DRUGS § 108-1
97:221
(3) Registration for private collection, transport and disposal of solid
waste is $25 per tax parcel serviced by a dumpster supplying such
service. [Amended 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1267-2005;
10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 1437-2014; 12-14-2015 by Ord. No.
1465-2015]
(4) Penalty fee: $35, to be added to the base fee. [Added 11-13-2000
by Res. No. 2000-35]
(5) Collection of trash fees. [Added 10-12-2015 by Ord. No.
1462-2015]
(a) Fees to be added to the unpaid claims. The City hereby
approves the following fee schedule for the collection of the
unpaid claims, which fees shall be added to the unpaid claims.
[1] Notice expense. A charge of $40 plus applicable postage
shall be added to the unpaid claims for providing notice of
delinquency pursuant to § 7106 of the Act. The City may
hire a private company to perform this service and add the
amount of this charge to the unpaid claims.
[2] Legal fees.
Legal Action Fee
Initial review and sending first
demand letter
$160
File lien and prepare satisfaction $250
Prepare writ of scire facias $250
Obtain reissued writ $30
Prepare and mail letter under Pa.
R.C.P. 237.1
$30
Prepare motion for alternate
service
$250
Obtain vehicle identification
number (VIN) for mobile home
$35
Prepare discovery in preparation
for trial
$100
Prepare pretrial memorandum $150
Prepare motion for judgment for
want of sufficient affidavit of
defense pursuant to 53 P.S. § 7271
$150
Prepare default judgment $175
Prepare writ of execution $800
Attendance at sale; review
schedule of distribution and
resolve distribution issues
$400
§ 108-1 COATESVILLE CODE § 108-1
97:222
Legal Action Fee
Continue sheriff sale $50
Prepare petition to assess
damages
$50
Prepare petition for free and clear
sale
$400
Services not covered above At an hourly rate
between $60 and
$275 per hour
[3] Collection fees.
Type of Collection Fee Fee
Bookkeeping fee for payment
plan of 3 months or less
$25
Bookkeeping fee for payment
plan of more than 3 months
$50
Guaranteed payoff fee $25
Handling fee for returned check Bank charge, if any
(b) Costs to be added to the unpaid claims. In addition to the fees
set forth in Subsection L(5)(a) above, the reasonable and
necessary out-of-pocket charges, costs, expenses, commissions
and fees incurred in collection, including, but not limited to,
postage, title searches, VIN searches, prothonotary fees and
charges, and sheriff fees, shall be added to the unpaid claims.
(c) Credit card and debit card charges. The City authorizes any
attorney or private collector collecting the unpaid claims on
behalf of the City to accept payment of the unpaid claims by
credit card or debit card. Where payment is made by credit
card or debit card, any fees charged by the credit card or debit
card company and/or the credit card or debit card servicing
agent shall be charged immediately to the credit card or debit
card used to make payment. This applies to credit card or debit
card payments made by mail, telephone, over the Internet, or
in person.
(d) Interest. Interest will be assessed upon the unpaid claims at a
rate of 10% per annum and added to the unpaid claims.
(e) Collection procedures. The following collection procedures are
hereby established in accordance with the Act:
[1] At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney
fees in connection with the collection of an unpaid claim
account, the City or its designee shall mail or cause to be
mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
§ 108-1 DRUGS § 108-1
97:223
notice of such intention to the property owner or other
entity liable for the account (the "property owner").
[2] If the certified mail notice is undelivered, then, at least 10
days prior to assessing or imposing such attorney fees, the
City or its designee shall mail or cause to be mailed, by
first class mail, a second notice to the property owner.
[3] All notices required by this Subsection L(5) shall be mailed
to the property owner's last known post office address as
recorded in the records or other information of the City or
such other address obtained by the City from the county
tax assessment office.
[4] Each notice as described above shall include the following:
[a] The type of municipal claim or other charge, the year
that it became due and the amount owed, including
penalty and interest;
[b] A statement of the City's intent to impose or assess
attorney fees no earlier than 30 days after receipt of
the first notice, or no earlier than 10 days after receipt
of the second notice;
[c] The manner in which the assessment or imposition of
attorney fees may be avoided by payment of the
account; and
[d] The place of payment for accounts and the name and
telephone number of the City's representative
designated as responsible for collection matters.
(f) Related action. The proper officials of the City are hereby
authorized and empowered to take such additional action as
they may deem necessary or appropriate to implement this
Subsection L(5).
(g) Appointment of Solicitor. The City appoints Michelle R.
Portnoff, Esquire, as Solicitor for the limited purpose of
collecting the unpaid claims and hereby authorizes her, and
attorneys under her supervision, to sign any and all
documents, including municipal claims and liens, on behalf of
the City.
M. Streets and sidewalks:
(1) Permit for opening or excavating for a sidewalk or for pole planting
or removal: $25. [Amended 12-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1062-97]
(2) Permit for opening or excavating any street shall be based upon a
fee schedule adopted by resolution of City Council and as amended
from time to time by resolution of City Council. [Amended
§ 108-1 COATESVILLE CODE § 108-1
97:224
12-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1062-97; 8-13-2012 by Ord. No.
1389-2012]
(3) Permit for placement of dumpster on street, roadway or sidewalk:
$35 per week per dumpster or similar container. [Amended
6-25-2001 by Res. No. 2001-15; 1-14-2013 by Ord. No.
1402-2013]
(4) After-hours inspection: $60 per hour, minimum of two hours.
[Added 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1096-99; amended 6-25-2001
by Res. No. 2001-15; 4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 1302-2008]
(5) Billboard permit/maintenance fee: $100. [Added 3-12-2001 by
Res. No. 2001-6]
N. Application fee for permit to operate wrecker service: $100 for wrecker
business, plus $25 for each wrecker to be operated by said applicant.
O. Use registration: [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96;
2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1096-99; 6-25-2001 by Res. No. 2001-15;
12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1267-2005]
(1) Initial inspection under Chapter 214, Use Registration: $100 (this
also includes one follow-up inspection). The fee provided is for
buildings with up to five dwelling units. An additional fee of $100 is
required for each additional five dwelling units. Any further
inspections after the initial and follow-up inspection are at a cost of
$50 per inspection. [Amended 1-14-2013 by Ord. No.
1402-2013; 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1428-2014]
(2) Appeal to the Board of Use Regulation Appeals: $500.
P. Copies:
(1) Chapter 224, Zoning: $50. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1010-96; 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
(2) Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development: $50. [Amended
3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1010-96; 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96]
(3) (Reserved)79
(4) City Map: $5. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
(5) (Reserved)80
(6) (Reserved)81
79.Editor's Note: Former Subsection P(3), deeds, as amended, was repealed 12-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 1267-2005.
80.Editor's Note: Former Subsection P(5), deed registration, as amended, was repealed
12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1267-2005.
81.Editor's Note: Former Subsection P(6), plan reproduction, was repealed 12-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 1267-2005.
§ 108-1 DRUGS § 108-1
97:225
(7) Copies, per page: $0.50. [Amended 1-14-2013 by Ord. No.
1402-2013]
(8) Fax copies, per page: $2. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
1096-99]
(9) Mailing requested material: cost of mailing in addition to
reproduction cost.
(10) Municipal budget: $100. [Added 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1010-96; amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1096-99]
(11) Municipal Code. [Added 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1010-96;
amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1096-99]
(a) Residents: $150.
(b) Nonresidents: $350.
(12) Pictures: $6. [Added 12-19-1996 by Ord. No. 1040-96]
(13) (Reserved)82
(14) (Reserved)83
(15) Return paid receipts: self-addressed envelope. [Added 2-22-1999
by Ord. No. 1096-99]
(16) Pay with memo bill: $10. [Added 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
1096-99]
Q. City Finance Department charges:
(1) Tax certificate and solid waste certificate: $20. [Amended
9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-9684]
(2) Duplicate tax bill: $25.
(3) Bad check charge: $35.85 [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
1096-99]
R. Zoning permits and fees; subdivision and land development fees.
[Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96; 12-19-1996 by Ord. No.
1040-96; 12-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1062-97; 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
1096-99; 6-25-2001 by Res. No. 2001-15]
82.Editor's Note: Former Subsection P(13), Tax certification, added 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
1096-99, was repealed 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 1447-2015. See now Subsection Q(1).
83.Editor's Note: Former Subsection P(14), Duplicate tax, and Subsection P(17), Duplicate
bill/requests, both added 2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1096-99, were repealed 3-23-2015 by Ord.
No. 1447-2015. See now Subsection Q(2).
84.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection Q(5) and (6), setting fees
for garbage no-lien letters and property tax no-lien letters.
85.Editor's Note: Former Subsection Q(4), Maps, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 1447-2015. See now Subsection P(4).
§ 108-1 COATESVILLE CODE § 108-1
97:226
(1) Zoning permits and fees. [Amended 10-10-2011 by Ord. No.
1365-2011; 11-14-2011 by Ord. No. 1367-2011; 1-14-2013 by
Ord. No. 1402-2013]
(a) Sign permit: $4 per square foot.
(b) Annual registration fee for each approved sign: $20.
(c) Zoning Hearing Board appeal:
[1] Application fee: $100.
[2] Residential, for appeals, variances or special exceptions:
$900.
[3] Nonresidential, for appeals, variances or special
exceptions: $1,200.
[4] Curative challenge: $1,000.
[5] Amendment challenge: $1,000.
(d) Zoning compliance letter: $100.
(e) UCC Appeals Board application for appeal: $500.
(f) (Reserved)86
(g) (Reserved)
(h) Conditional use hearing (by City Council): $750.87
(2) Subdivision and land development fees.
(a) Minor subdivision:
[1] Sketch plan:
[a] Application fee: $150. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 1096-99]
[b] Escrow amount (The escrow fund shall be used to pay
for the City Engineer's, Solicitor's or outside
consultant's time spent with the applicant or his
designee and the time spent reviewing the submitted
plans. The rates charged for this time may be adjusted
from time to time and are on file at the City. Additional
escrow funds may be required to cover costs for
86.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection R(1)(f), Use and occupancy, as amended, and R(1)(g),
Rental license, as amended, were repealed 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 1471-2016. See now the
Fee Schedule included as an attachment to this chapter.
87.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection R(1)(i), Rental inspection, as amended, and which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 1471-2016. See
now the Fee Schedule included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 108-1 DRUGS § 108-1
97:227
reviewing and administering the plans and
application.): $300.
[2] Preliminary plan:
[a] Application fee: $250. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 1096-99]
[b] Escrow amount (The escrow fund shall be used to pay
for the City Engineer's, Solicitor's or outside
consultant's time spent with the applicant or his
designee and the time spent reviewing the submitted
plans. The rates charged for this time may be adjusted
from time to time and are on file at the City. Additional
escrow funds may be required to cover costs for
reviewing and administering the plans and
application.): $600.
[3] Final plan:
[a] Application fee: $500. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 1096-99]
[b] Escrow amount (The escrow fund shall be used to pay
for the City Engineer's, Solicitor's or outside
consultant's time spent with the applicant or his
designee and the time spent reviewing the submitted
plans. The rates charged for this time may be adjusted
from time to time and are on file at the City. Additional
escrow funds may be required to cover costs for
reviewing and administering the plans and
application.): $1,000.
(b) Major residential subdivision/multifamily land development:
[1] Sketch plan:
[a] Application fee: $250. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 1096-99]
[b] Escrow amount (The escrow fund shall be used to pay
for the City Engineer's, Solicitor's or outside
consultant's time spent with the applicant or his
designee and the time spent reviewing the submitted
plans. The rates charged for this time may be adjusted
from time to time and are on file at the City. Additional
escrow funds may be required to cover costs for
reviewing and administering the plans and
application.): $50 per lot and/or dwelling unit.
[2] Preliminary plan:
§ 108-1 COATESVILLE CODE § 108-1
97:228
[a] Application fee: $750 per plan, plus $25 per lot and/or
dwelling unit over 10. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 1096-99]
[b] Escrow amount (The escrow fund shall be used to pay
for the City Engineer's, Solicitor's or outside
consultant's time spent with the applicant or his
designee and the time spent reviewing the submitted
plans. The rates charged for this time may be adjusted
from time to time and are on file at the City. Additional
escrow funds may be required to cover costs for
reviewing and administering the plans and
application.): $100 per lot and/or dwelling unit
($1,000 minimum).
[3] Final plan:
[a] Application fee: $750 per plan, plus $25 per lot and/or
dwelling unit over 10. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 1096-99]
[b] Escrow amount (The escrow fund shall be used to pay
for the City Engineer's, Solicitor's or outside
consultant's time spent with the applicant or his
designee and the time spent reviewing the submitted
plans. The rates charged for this time may be adjusted
from time to time and are on file at the City. Additional
escrow funds may be required to cover costs for
reviewing and administering the plans and
application.): $100 per lot and/or dwelling unit
($1,000 minimum).
(c) Nonresidential subdivision/land development:
[1] Sketch plan:
[a] Application fee: $500. [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 1096-99]
[b] Escrow amount (The escrow fund shall be used to pay
for the City Engineer's, Solicitor's or outside
consultant's time spent with the applicant or his
designee and the time spent reviewing the submitted
plans. The rates charged for this time may be adjusted
from time to time and are on file at the City. Additional
escrow funds may be required to cover costs for
reviewing and administering the plans and
application.): $1,000. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 1033-96]
[2] Preliminary plan:
§ 108-1 DRUGS § 108-1
97:229
[a] Application fee: $750 per plan, plus $150 per building
or additions, plus $50 per acre. [Amended
2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1096-99]
[b] Escrow amount (The escrow fund shall be used to pay
for the City Engineer's, Solicitor's or outside
consultant's time spent with the applicant or his
designee and the time spent reviewing the submitted
plans. The rates charged for this time may be adjusted
from time to time and are on file at the City. Additional
escrow funds may be required to cover costs for
reviewing and administering the plans and
application.): $4,000.
[3] Final plan:
[a] Application fee: $750 per plan, plus $150 per building
or additions, plus $50 per acre. [Amended
2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1096-99]
[b] Escrow amount (The escrow fund shall be used to pay
for the City Engineer's, Solicitor's or outside
consultant's time spent with the applicant or his
designee and the time spent reviewing the submitted
plans. The rates charged for this time may be adjusted
from time to time and are on file at the City. Additional
escrow funds may be required to cover costs for
reviewing and administering the plans and
application.): $8,000.
(d) UCC Appeals Board request for application: $500. [Added
12-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1062-97; amended 1-14-2013 by
Ord. No. 1402-2013]
(3) Certification or zoning district classification and uncorrected
violation: $100. [Amended 1-14-2013 by Ord. No. 1402-201388]
(4) Hole permit: $25 (base fee). [Amended 12-8-1997 by Ord. No.
1062-97; 6-25-2001 by Res. No. 2001-15]
S. Police Department charges:
(1) Accident and crime reports: [Amended 3-11-2002 by Res. No.
18-2002]
(a) Accident report: $15.
(b) Crimes report: $25.
(2) Fingerprinting of private citizen: $20.
88.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection R(4), regarding rental
inspection, and renumbered former Subsection R(5), regarding hole permits, as
Subsection R(4). See now Subsection R(1)(i) for rental inspection fees.
§ 108-1 COATESVILLE CODE § 108-1
97:230
(3) Jail cell rental: $100 per prisoner per day.
(4) Police presence at special events involving paid attendance,
$155.48 for a minimum of four hours’ presence for any event with
up to 100 attendees. This amount will increase for every multiple of
100 attendees (or portion thereof) and will also be increased after
the minimum four hours of presence at the applicable rate of
$38.87 per man-hour per every multiple of 100 attendees (or
portion thereof). [Amended 6-13-2005 by Ord. No.
1248-200589]
(5) Meter bag rental: $2 per day.
(6) Impound fee: $30 per day, not to exceed $300. [Added 2-28-2000]
T. Fire Department charges. Fire Department charges shall be as set forth
in Exhibit A, included at the end of this chapter, and all conditions and
terms therein. [Amended 1-14-2013 by Ord. No. 1402-2013]
U. Parks and recreation fees: [Amended 2-22-1999 by Ord. No.
1096-99; 11-13-2000 by Res. No. 2000-34; 12-10-2007 by Ord.
No. 1294-2007]
(1) Nonrefundable application fee: $20.
(1.1) Additional charge of $25 for failure to pay in advance for any
recreational use fee. [Added 8-24-2015 by Ord. No. 1459-2015]
(2) Park name; cost; time limitation. The hours of operation are posted
in each park for public information. Parks generally are open daily
from dawn to dusk. Permits for use of parks for special events are
limited to the hours specified as follows: [Amended 3-28-2011 by
Ord. No. 1348-2011]
(a) Time limitation.
Park Hours
Abdala Park Dawn to dusk
Ash Park (pavilion w/elec.) Dawn to dusk
Friendship Park Dawn to dusk
Gateway Park (w/elec.) 10:00 p.m.
James Park Dawn to dusk
Palmer Park (pavilion) Dawn to dusk
Patton Park Dawn to dusk
(b) Cost.
89.Editor's Note: Former Subsection S(4), Special events fee, was repealed 9-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 1033-96.
§ 108-1 DRUGS § 108-1
97:231
Park/Use Fee
Park/picnic pavilion/courts/ballfields,
unlighted
$10 per hour
Park/picnic pavilion/courts/ballfields,
lighted
$20 per hour
League use (baseball) $800 per season
(3) Fees per size of crowd.
Number of People Fee
1 to 50 $25
51 to 100 $50
101 to 200** $100
**Groups over 100 persons will be required to privately secure two
portable toilets for up to 150 people (plus an additional portable
toilet for every additional 100 people). After a special event permit
has been approved by City Council, verification of portable toilets
must be submitted with permit request and all fees are payable.
Groups over 500 persons will be required to pay $100 for extra
garbage pickup, payable with the fee before a special event permit
can be issued.
(4) Electrical use fee (or PA system use): $25.
(5) Street closing: $100. [Amended 10-10-2011 by Ord. No.
1362-2011]
(6) Tent inspection by Fire Department: $75 per hour.
(7) Refundable key deposit: $50.
(8) Police presence: $40 per man-hour.
NOTE: Refunds will be made if notice is received 30 days prior to
the event. No refunds will be made for weather conditions. Any
and all additional expenses, including time involving cleanup of
the pavilion and surrounding areas due to the careless disposal
of garbage and waste material or the lack of any cleanup by the
group renting the facility, will be billed to the responsible parties.
(9) Coatesville Community Center use fee: [Added 7-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 1357-2011; amended 8-24-2015 by Ord. No.
1459-2015]
(a) Fifty dollars per hour for first four hours of use (four-hour
minimum required).
(b) Seventy-five dollars per hour for each additional hour after the
first four hours of use.
§ 108-1 COATESVILLE CODE § 108-1
97:232
(c) Security deposit of $150 payable in advance before use
(refundable if returned in same condition).
(d) Application fee of $25 payable in advance.
V. Housing standards: [Amended 7-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1050-97;
2-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1096-99; 4-28-2008 by Ord. No.
1302-2008]
(1) (Reserved)90
(2) (Reserved)
(3) (Reserved)
(3.1) The property owner and/or rental management company of any
property subject to a rental unit leasing license shall be jointly and
severally liable for allowing occupancy of any rental unit, without
licensing of same and without inspection of same, and shall be
assessed a penalty of $500 for the first offense in a calendar year, a
penalty of $750 for the second offense in a calendar year and a
penalty of $1,000 for a third offense in a calendar year, to be added
to the licensing fee for the unit at issue. Separate violations (lack of
a license or lack of prior inspection) shall be subject to a penalty of
$250 per incident and shall not be cumulative. [Added 5-11-2015
by Ord. No. 1454-2015]
(4) (Reserved)91
(5) (Reserved)
(6) (Reserved)
(7) Registration fee for vacant premises: $250. [Added 8-25-2008 by
Ord. No. 1307-2008]
(8) After-hours inspection (8:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. to 4:30
p.m.): $60 per hour or any part of the hour. [Added 11-14-2011 by
Ord. No. 1367-2011]
W. Fee schedule to be paid to legal counsel for the collection of delinquent
municipal claims pursuant to the fee schedule identified in Chapter 182
which is incorporated herein by reference and subject to modification
by resolution of City Council which said fee schedule attached to the
aforementioned Chapter 182 Municipal Lien section of the City Code is
90.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection V(1), regarding inspection fees for vacant dwelling units
and rental units, as amended; V(2), Rooming house and hotel annual license fee, as
amended; and V(3), Multifamily dwelling annual license fee, as amended, were repealed
2-22-2016 by Ord. No. 1471-2016. See now the Fee Schedule included as an attachment to
this chapter.
91.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection V(4), Leasing license annual fee, as amended; V(5),
Appeal of Codes Department decision to the Board of Housing Appeals; and V(6), Base
inspection fee for inspection of rooming house, as amended, were repealed 2-22-2016 by
Ord. No. 1471-2016. See now the Fee Schedule included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 108-1 DRUGS § 108-1
97:233
Chapter 112
FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 108. Fire prevention — See Ch. 115.
incorporated herein by reference as though set forth at length. [Added
3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1013-96; amended 8-14-2000; 6-25-2001
by Res. No. 2001-15; 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 1381-2012]
X. Parking. [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 1357-2011]
(1) Parking escrow: $2,500 per parking space.
(2) Residential permits:
(a) For permit parking in and only in either: the residential
parking permit area or the parking permit district (as defined
in Chapter 218, Article XIX, of the City Code) for the ward in
which the permitted party resides: $180 per year and $20 per
month.
(b) Renewal fees: as set forth in Subsection X(2)(a) above.
(c) Transfer fee: $20.
Y. (Reserved)
Z. Violations and penalties. Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to
comply with any of the terms or provisions of this chapter will be
subject to a fine of $100 per incident within the time frame required by
the Codes Department, in addition to legal fees and court appearance
fees. Each incident shall constitute a separate offense. [Added
4-28-2008 by Ord. No. 1302-2008]
§ 108-1 COATESVILLE CODE § 108-1
112:234
ARTICLE I
Firearms and Weapons
[Adopted 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 845-89 as Ch. 97, Art. I, of the
1989 Code]
§ 112-1. Sale or possession of unlawful articles.
From and after the passage and final adoption of this Article, it shall
be unlawful and it is hereby prohibited for any person, persons, firm or
corporation to store, sell, offer or expose for sale at retail, or have in their
possession with intent to sell at retail or with intent to use, within the City of
Coatesville, any air rifle or air pistol (commonly known as "BB gun"), water
pistol, slingshot, switchblade knife, the blade of which can be opened or
released by mechanical means, or any similar devices. A "sale at retail" shall
mean any sale of less than one (1) dozen such articles or any sale to anyone
who is not a bona fide dealer therein.
§ 112-2. Authorization to seize, remove or destroy unlawful articles.
The Chief of Police of the City of Coatesville is hereby authorized to seize,
remove and destroy any air rifle or air pistol (commonly known as BB
gun), water pistol, slingshot, switchblade knife, the blade of which can be
opened or released by mechanical means, or similar device, which is used
or discharged within the City of Coatesville or which shall be held and
possessed in violation of this Article, provided always that the sale, use or
possession of switchblade knives as herein defined shall not be deemed to
prohibit the sale or use of knives falling within the above description which
are designed primarily for use in hunting or fishing when sold to and carried
and used by a duly licensed hunter or fisherman for such purposes.
§ 112-3. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to air guns or pistols, gaspowered
guns or pistols having rifled barrels and being commonly used for
target practice and the shooting of small game. For the purpose of this
Article, such articles shall be deemed to be a deadly weapon and may be
sold by dealers licensed to sell firearms after proper application has been
made by the purchaser thereof on forms prepared by the Chief of Police of
the City of Coatesville and supplied by him to the dealer. The dealer shall
have the prospective purchaser of such weapon fill out the application and
shall immediately thereafter file a copy of said application with the Chief
of Police of the City of Coatesville. If the Chief of Police does not notify
the dealer that he has any objection to the sale within a period of fortyeight
(48) hours thereafter, then the dealer may complete the sale and file a
record of such completion with the Chief of Police on forms to be supplied
by said Chief.
§ 112-4. (Reserved)92
§ 112-1 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 112-5
112:235
§ 112-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this Article shall, upon conviction in summary proceedings, be subject
to a fine of not more than six hundred dollars ($600.) or to undergo
imprisonment in the Chester County Prison for a period of not more than
ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
92.Editor's Note: Former § 112-4, License required to carry certain guns, as amended, was
repealed 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96.
§ 112-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 112-5
112:236
ARTICLE II
Fireworks
[Adopted 8-22-1994 as Ord. No. 973-94]
§ 112-6. Unlawful acts; exceptions.
In order to protect life and property in the City of Coatesville, it shall be
unlawful within the corporate limits of the city for any person or persons,
firm or corporation to sell or offer for sale, or have in his or her possession
for sale, any fireworks of any kind, character or composition. Nothing in
this Article shall be construed to prohibit any resident wholesaler, dealer
or jobber to sell at wholesale such fireworks as are not herein prohibited;
or the sale of any kind of fireworks provided the same are to be shipped
directly out of state in accordance with the Department of Transportation
(DOT) regulations covering the transportation of explosives and other
dangerous articles by motor, rail and water.
§ 112-7. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREWORKS — Includes any combination or explosive composition, or any
substance or combination of substances, or articles prepared for the
purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include black cartridges,
toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns in which explosives are used,
the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same,
firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, dayglo bombs,
sparklers or other devices of like construction and any device containing
any explosive or flammable compound.
§ 112-8. Manufacture, sale and discharge.
A. The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the City of
Coatesville.
B. It shall be unlawful for any persons to store, offer for sale, expose for
sale, sell at retail, possess for sale, or explode any fireworks except as
provided in Subsections C through F.
C. The Fire Chief shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the
granting of permits for the supervised public displays of fireworks by
fair associations, amusement parks, and other organizations or groups
of individuals. Such permits may be granted upon application to the
Fire Chief after approval of the Chief of Police and the filing of a bond
by the applicants as provided in § 112-9. Every such display shall be
handled by a competent operator approved by the Fire Chief and shall
be of such composition, character and so located, discharged or fired as
in the opinion of the Fire Chief after proper inspection, and shall not be
hazardous or endanger any person or persons.
§ 112-6 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 112-8
112:237
§ 112-9. Bond; responsibility for fireworks display.
§ 112-10. Disposal of fireworks.
Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be
immediately disposed of in a way safe for the particular type of fireworks
remaining.
§ 112-11. Seizure of fireworks.
The Fire Chief shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale,
stored or held in violation of this Article.
D. Applications for permits shall be made in writing at least thirty (30)
days in advance of the date of the display. After such privilege has been
granted, sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such
display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted
hereunder shall be transferable.
E. The sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for display
purposes shall be conducted so as to be reasonably safe to persons and
property. Evidence that the sale, possession, use and distribution of
fireworks for display purposes has been conducted in accordance with
the applicable standard specified in NFPA No. 1122L shall be evidence
that such design, construction and use provides reasonable safety to
persons and property.
F. The Fire Chief may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the use
of model rockets. The design, construction, and use of model rockets
shall be reasonably safe to persons and property. Evidence that the
design, construction and use of model rockets is in accordance with the
applicable standard specified in NFPA No. 1122L shall be evidence that
such design, construction, and use provides reasonable safety to
persons and property.
A. The Fire Chief shall require a bond from the permittee in a sum not less
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.), conditioned on
compliance with the provisions of this Article.
B. Before any permit for a pyrotechnic display shall be issued, the person,
firm or corporation making application therefore shall furnish proof of
financial responsibility to satisfy claims for damages to property or
personal injuries arising out of any act or omission on the part of such
person, firm or corporation or any agent or employee thereof, in such
amount, character and form as the Fire Chief determines to be
necessary for the protection of the public.
§ 112-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 112-12
112:238
§ 112-12. Bonfires and rubbish fires prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Article for any person to set,
kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to
be set, kindled or maintained at any time or anywhere in the city.
§ 112-13. Violations and penalties.93
Any person or persons, whether as principal, agent or employee, or any
firm or corporation, violating any of the provisions of this Article shall upon
conviction in summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine not more
than six hundred dollars ($600.) or imprisonment in the jail of Chester
County for a period of not less than ninety (90) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 112-12 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 112-13
112:239
Chapter 115
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm devices — See Ch. 69.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 79.
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 86.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 102.
Fees — See Ch. 108.
Firearms, weapons and fireworks — See Ch.
112.
Hazardous material spills — See Ch. 132.
Insurance — See Ch. 145.
Lifesafety standards — See Ch. 151.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 156.
Plumbing — See Ch. 176.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
197.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 112-13 COATESVILLE CODE § 112-13
112:240
Part 1
[Adopted 2-27-1989 As ArFtisr.e I PArnodte IcItIi oOnf Ord. No. 829-89 (Ch. 19,
Arts. I And III, Of The 1989 Code)]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 115-1. Adoption of state law.
All the provisions and requirements of Article XXI of the Third Class City
Code of Pennsylvania, insofar as such provisions and requirements have
application within the City, relative to fire departments and fire marshals
are hereby accepted, approved and adopted and made a part of this Part 1
as fully as though set out herein.
§ 115-2. Fire Department established.
The several fire companies, known as "Washington Hose Fire Company No.
1" and "West End Fire Company No. 3," and any fire company which may
be established and recognized by the City Council, shall constitute the Fire
Department of the City of Coatesville, Pennsylvania.
§ 115-3. Use of fire-fighting equipment outside City limits.
Except as may be provided by an agreement entered into by the City Council
with a political subdivision of the state, the Fire Department may fight fires
and use the City fire-fighting equipment outside the corporate limits of the
City upon permission from the City Manager. In the event of the absence
of the City Manager or of his or her inability to act, such permission shall
be secured from the Chief of the Fire Department. In the event of the
absence of both the City Manager and the Chief of the Fire Department,
permission shall be secured from the Deputy Chief or Assistant Chief of the
Fire Department.
§ 115-4. Calls for fire-fighting assistance from other municipalities.
The City Manager or or Fire Chief may call on the Fire Department of any
nearby municipality for its fire apparatus for the purpose of fighting fire
within the City. Should such assistance be asked of any such municipality,
this City hereby agrees to indemnify and save harmless any such
municipality for any loss or damage that may occur to the City's fire
apparatus.
§ 115-5. Storage of flammable liquids.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to store any flammable liquids, as
defined in the Fire Prevention Code adopted by Part 2, Fire Prevention,
in outside aboveground tanks at any place within the City, except within
the I-2 Heavy Industrial Zoning District, as established by Chapter 224,
Zoning; provided, however, that any storage of Class I and Class II
flammable liquids, as so defined, in aboveground tanks within the
§ 115-1 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 115-5
112:241
§ 115-6. Unauthorized tampering with or use of fire hydrants.
[Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized employee
or agent of the City, to tamper with or use any fire hydrant in the City. A
violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.
§ 115-7. Allowing fire to spread to land of another.
Any person who intentionally sets or procures another to set fire to any
woods, brush, leaves, grass, straw or any other flammable substance
capable of spreading fire and who intentionally allows the fire to escape to
lands not his or her own, whereby the property of another is damaged or
jeopardized, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable for the full
amount of all expenses incurred in fighting the fire.
§ 115-8. Damaging property by fire.
If any person carelessly, negligently or intentionally sets any woods or
marshes on fire or sets fire to any stubble, brush, straw or any other
substance capable of spreading fire on lands, whereby the property of
another is damaged or jeopardized, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be liable for the full amount of all expenses incurred in fighting the
fire.
§ 115-8.1. Identification of truss construction. [Added 7-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 1198-2002]
corporate limits as of January 1, 1989, shall be allowed to continue and
the use of facilities connected therewith shall be permitted, but such
facilities may not be added to or extended in any way.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install or maintain any new
bulk plant for flammable liquids, as defined in the Fire Prevention Code
adopted by Chapter 115, Fire Prevention, within the City, except within
the I-2 Heavy Industrial Zoning District, as established by Chapter 224,
Zoning.
C. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $1,000. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
A. Except as provided in Subsection C below, the owner of a building or
structure containing truss construction in any form or manner shall
install and maintain a truss emblem in a location so specified by the Fire
Department. The location will be designated as close to the main
entrance as possible and at a height not more than five feet above the
floor level. These emblems will be provided by the Fire Department at a
cost determined by resolution by City Council and listed in Chapter 108
of the City Code.
§ 115-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 115-8.1
112:242
B. The owner and/or developer of a residential subdivision or multifamily
occupancy shall install and maintain a truss emblem within the public
right-of-way or within the common elements areas as so determined by
the Fire Department.
C. Single-family dwelling units or semidetached dwelling units containing
not more than two dwelling units shall be exempt from installing and
maintaining the truss emblem.
D. The Fire Department, with approval of the Fire Chief, shall determine
the exact location for the designated location of such truss emblem and
keep such record on file in the Fire Department along with the
application being filed in the property file in the Codes Department at
City Hall.
E. The provisions of this section shall apply to the owners of existing
buildings or structures having truss construction but such owners shall
have six months from the effective date of this section to comply.
F. The truss emblem will be a triangle in design with a white background
with the following letters marked in red in the inside: (F) floor truss
construction, (R) roof truss construction, (FR) floor and roof truss
construction.
§ 115-8.1 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 115-8.1
112:243

ARTICLE II
Fire Department
§ 115-9. Appointment of Chief of Fire Department. [Amended
12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1269-2005]
The City Manager, with the concurrence of the City Council, shall appoint
the Chief of the Fire Department, to the extent that this position is
determined to be needed or required by state law. The Fire Chief, if
appointed, shall work under the supervision of the City Manager and shall
be appointed in accordance with the qualifications hereinafter provided.
The Fire Chief shall work for the City upon terms agreed upon between
the City and the person so appointed, with or without compensation, and at
hours determined by agreement between the parties.
§ 115-10. Qualifications of Chief.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall possess the following minimum
qualifications. He or she shall:
§ 115-11. Powers and duties of Chief.
A. Be a citizen of the United States.
B. Have attained the age of 25 years.
C. Have been an active firefighter for at least the previous 10 years and
have been in a fire management position for at least three years.
D. Possess a minimum of a high school education.
E. Have minimum training in fire prevention, management and
administration as provided in the job description approved by the City
Manager.
F. Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, be a resident of the City
at the time of appointment or within six months of the date of
appointment.
G. Have other qualifications as set forth in the job description prepared
and approved by the City Manager.
A. The administration of the fire laws of the City shall be enforced by the
Fire Chief, who shall have the duties, responsibilities and authority
prescribed by the City Code and the laws for Fire Chiefs in the cities of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. He or she shall have the power and
it shall be his\her duty to enforce the laws of the commonwealth,
together with the authority to prohibit any and all bonfires and outdoor
rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make
such fires hazardous; and to make and enforce such additional rules
and regulations as permitted him\her by law, as well as any and all rules
§ 115-9 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 115-11
112:245
§ 115-12. Removal of Fire Chief.
The City Manager, upon concurrence of City Council, may remove the Fire
Chief for incompetence, neglect of duty or any other cause involving the
powers and duties of such officer, on charges preferred and sustained and
after a hearing before City Council if so requested by the Fire Chief. The
City Manager shall, upon any vacancy of Fire Chief, appoint a temporary
Fire Chief until such time as a permanent Fire Chief shall be appointed.
The temporary Fire Chief shall have the same responsibilities, powers and
duties assigned to the permanent Fire Chief.
and regulations now or hereafter adopted by and enacted and ordained
by the City Council.
B. The Fire Chief shall have full control of the Fire Department, assign to
each company its duties when occasion arises and dismiss said
companies when their services are no longer required. In case of fire,
he\she shall have full control of all fire apparatus and give directions
how, when or where to use them and where the hose shall be attached
and direct the streams and have general supervision over such matters.
The Fire Chief may, with the approval of the City Manager, prescribe
rules for the regulation and management of the companies at fires and
tests and going to and returning therefrom and, where in his\her
judgment necessary, cause the scene of the fire to be secured and admit
none within the secured area except firefighters and those immediately
interested in the property on fire. He or she shall issue and enforce all
such orders as, in his or her judgment, are necessary to protect the
property and extinguish the fire. He or she shall see to the enforcement
of all ordinances and rules and regulations governing the Fire
Department. He or she shall investigate all fires and keep a correct
account of them and shall, at a stated meeting of the City Council, make
an annual report containing an account of all fires during the year past
with the probable cause and approximate loss and the amount of
insurance on property destroyed and damaged, as well as full statement
of the condition of the Fire Department. He or she shall visit each
company on a regular basis at least weekly, make a minute inspection of
its apparatus, ascertain its condition and report the same monthly to
the City Manager. For all purposes involving the functions of his\her
office, he or she shall have free access at all times to the houses and
buildings of the fire companies constituting the Fire Department and
shall be furnished by each company with a key to the door to its
apparatus room.
C. In accordance with Article XXI, Section 2107 of the Third Class City
Code of the commonwealth,94 the Fire Chief shall be ex officio Fire
Marshal of the City and shall have all powers and duties as set forth
therein.
94.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 37107.
§ 115-11 COATESVILLE CODE § 115-13
112:246
§ 115-13. Election of Deputy Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief;
order of succession.
§ 115-14. Duties of Deputy Fire Chief; qualifications.
A. There is hereby created the position of Deputy Fire Chief, who shall
serve as first in command after the Fire Chief and shall be a volunteer
firefighter selected by his or her fire company as hereinafter provided.
In the absence of the Fire Chief, the Deputy Fire Chief shall assume the
full responsibilities, duties and powers of the Fire Chief. The Deputy
Fire Chief shall exercise the normal responsibilities, duties and powers
as hereinafter set forth.
B. There is hereby created the position of Assistant Fire Chief, who shall
serve as second in command after the Fire Chief and the Deputy Fire
Chief and shall be a volunteer firefighter selected by his or her fire
company as hereinafter provided. In the absence of the Fire Chief and
the Deputy Fire Chief, the Assistant Fire Chief shall assume the full
responsibilities, duties and powers of the Fire Chief. The Assistant Fire
Chief shall exercise the normal responsibilities, duties and powers as
hereinafter set forth.
C. In the event of a vacancy in either Deputy Fire Chief or Assistant Fire
Chief, the company which appointed the person who vacated the
position shall nominate a qualified person to serve the balance of the
unexpired term. Upon the termination or expiration of said term, the
company rotation in filling the positions shall continue unaffected by
the vacancy. [Amended 1-11-1993 by Ord. No. 911-92; 3-28-1994
by Ord. No. 967-94]
D. In the event that the person designated by a company to fill either the
Deputy Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief position is not qualified to
serve in the position and if the nonappointing company has a person
who would be qualified to fill that position, the nonappointing company
shall make the appointment for the position. Such an appointment shall
be an interim appointment, and the person so appointed shall serve in
the appointed position until the company whose regular turn it was to
nominate the position has an individual qualified to fill the position. At
such time, the company whose turn it is to fill the position shall appoint
its appointee to that position for the remainder of the unexpired term of
the position. The alternating three-year rotation will not be affected by
such appointments. [Amended 1-11-1993 by Ord. No. 911-92;
3-28-1994 by Ord. No. 967-94]
A. The Deputy Fire Chief shall act in behalf of the Fire Chief in his or her
absence. He or she shall assist the Fire Chief in all efforts of fire
prevention, suppression, education and training activities. He or she
will be the staff liaison officer between the volunteer firefighters and
the City administration and shall recommend to the Fire Chief such
activities he or she may deem prudent and necessary for training,
recruitment and morale of volunteers, maintenance of equipment,
§ 115-13 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 115-14
112:247
§ 115-15. Duties of Assistant Fire Chief; qualifications.
§ 115-16. Duties and qualifications of paid fire drivers.
purchase of new equipment by the City and the preparation of the
annual budget to be submitted to the City Manager. For all purposes
involving the functions of his or her office, he or she shall have free
access at all times to the houses and buildings of the fire companies
constituting the Fire Department and shall be furnished by each
company with a key to the door to its apparatus room. He or she shall
perform such other duties as may be designated by the Fire Chief and
as may be set forth in the job description prepared by the Fire Chief
and approved by the City Manager. The Deputy Fire Chief shall also be
a member of the Advisory Fire Committee hereafter created.
B. The Deputy Fire Chief shall have been a member in good standing in his
or her respective fire company for a least 10 succeeding years. He or
she shall have completed the minimum training courses in fire fighting,
including fire prevention, fire suppression and fire management. He or
she shall possess demonstrated qualities of leadership and be well
versed in the Fire Prevention Code and the laws and ordinances of the
City, state and federal governments pertaining to fire prevention,
suppression and management. He or she shall possess such other
qualifications as set forth in aforesaid job description approved by the
City Manager.
A. The Assistant Fire Chief shall act in behalf of the Deputy Fire Chief in
his or her absence and in behalf of the Fire Chief in the absence of both
the Fire Chief and the Deputy Fire Chief. He or she shall assist the
Deputy Fire Chief as requested in carrying out the duties of the Deputy
Fire Chief. He or she shall be responsible for all water supply
operations during a fire suppression. For all purposes involving the
functions of his or her office, he or she shall have free access at all times
to the houses and buildings of the fire companies constituting the Fire
Department and shall be furnished by each company with a key to the
door to its apparatus room. He or she shall perform such other duties as
may be designated by the Fire Chief and the Deputy Fire Chief and as
may be set forth in the aforesaid job description approved by the City
Manager. [Amended 11-26-1990 by Ord. No. 868-90]
B. The Assistant Fire Chief shall have been a member in good standing in
his or her respective fire company for a least seven succeeding years.
He or she shall have completed the minimum training courses in fire
fighting, including fire prevention and suppression. He or she shall
possess demonstrated qualities of leadership and be well versed in the
Fire Prevention Code and the laws and ordinances of the City, state and
federal governments pertaining to fire prevention, suppression and
management. He or she shall possess such other qualifications as may
be set forth in aforesaid job description approved by the City Manager.
§ 115-14 COATESVILLE CODE § 115-16
112:248
§ 115-17. Advisory Fire Committee.
A. There shall be as many full-time, paid fire drivers and part-time fire
drivers as may, from time to time, be approved by City Council and
appointed by the City Manager upon recommendation of the Fire Chief.
They shall be directly responsible to the Fire Chief in the performance
of their duties.
B. The fire driver shall have direct responsibilities for the proper
maintenance of all fire apparatus owned by the City and shall maintain
the firehouse to which he or she is assigned. He or she shall report to
the Fire Chief immediately any problems or concerns he or she may
have regarding the proper operation of the fire apparatus and any
problems concerning the fire station. He or she shall keep the Fire
Chief advised of any requirements for the safe and efficient operation of
the fire equipment. He or she shall be fully trained in the operation of
all fire apparatus and shall be the apparatus operator during the
suppression of a fire. He or she shall be acutely familiar with the Fire
Prevention Code and the laws and ordinances of the City, state and
federal governments and shall make inspections for enforcement of
said codes and laws as directed by the Fire Chief. He or she shall
perform such other duties as may be required by the Fire Chief and as
set forth in the job description prepared by the Fire Chief and approved
by the City Manager and shall continue in compliance with all written
rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Fire Chief and
approved by the City Manager.
C. The fire driver shall be in excellent physical condition and shall have
been an active firefighter for at least three succeeding years before
appointment to the position with a minimum of Fire Fighting I. He or
she shall be fully trained and meet all qualification requirements for
each fire apparatus he or she is to operate. He or she shall have
completed minimum training requirements for firefighter and shall
possess at least a Class II Pennsylvania driver's license. He or she shall
have such other qualifications as set forth in the aforesaid job
description.
A. There is hereby created an Advisory Fire Committee, which shall advise
the City Council, City administration and Fire Department on matters
pertaining to fire prevention, suppression and management. The
Committee shall be a liaison between the fire companies and the
community at large and shall recommend such matters it may feel
necessary for the protection and welfare of the citizens and the
volunteers of the Fire Department. The Advisory Committee shall
participate and advise in the preparation of the annual budget to be
submitted to the City Manager. The Fire Chief, however, shall be
responsible for making the final budget recommendation to the City
Manager.
B. The Advisory Fire Committee shall review qualifications and
recommend the appointment of the Deputy and Assistant Fire Chiefs. It
§ 115-16 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 115-17
112:249
shall be the liaison between their respective fire companies and the
City and shall monitor and attempt to resolve any problems within
the companies. Should it not be able to resolve a problem, it shall
consult with the City Manager for assistance. The Committee shall also
review and make the final decision on any grievances submitted by any
volunteer.
C. There shall be seven members of the Advisory Fire Committee. The
Deputy Fire Chief shall be a member and shall serve during the term of
his or her office as Deputy Fire Chief. Each fire company shall appoint
two members from its active membership, who shall serve at the
pleasure of the fire company. The remaining two members of the
Advisory Fire Committee shall be appointed by the City Council as
citizens at large and shall serve for a period of three years and may
succeed themselves as desired by the City Council. The members of the
Advisory Fire Committee shall serve without compensation.
D. After appointment, the Fire Chief shall call the initial meeting of the
Advisory Fire Committee and shall preside until a Chairperson has been
duly elected from its membership, after which said Chairperson shall
take office. There shall also be a Vice Chairperson elected from the
membership. Thereafter, election of Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
shall be held in January 1990 and each succeeding year. The Fire Chief
shall serve as secretary and shall prepare and disseminate the minutes
of each meeting. The Fire Advisory Committee shall set the times and
dates of their meetings, which shall be held no less than quarterly.
E. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Advisory Fire Committee absent from three or
more consecutive regular meetings of the Advisory Fire Committee
without an approved leave of absence granted by the City Council
after public hearing and prior written notice thereof shall be
removed from the Advisory Fire Committee by the City Council of
the City of Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the Advisory Fire Committee absent from 20% or
more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Advisory Fire
Committee within any one-year period shall be notified in writing
by the City Manager acting on behalf of the City Council of the
attendance requirements of this subsection. Any member of the
Advisory Fire Committee who is absent from 20% or more of the
regularly scheduled meetings within a one-year period shall
thereafter be removed for cause from such position by the City
Council with prior written notice after public hearing unless such
member resigns in writing or waives the public hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the Advisory Fire Committee may be removed for
cause as determined by the City Council after public hearing and
prior written notice thereof.
§ 115-17 COATESVILLE CODE § 115-17
112:250
§ 115-18. Applicability of civil service regulations.
All employees of the Fire Department of the City of Coatesville, excluding
the Fire Chief, Deputy Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief, shall be subject
to civil service regulations of the City of Coatesville in addition to the civil
service provisions provided in the Third Class City Code.
§ 115-19. Compliance with civil service regulations.
Except the three positions named in § 115-18, appointments to and
promotions in the Fire Department shall be made according to qualifications
and fitness, to be ascertained by examinations which, so far as practicable,
shall be competitive.
§ 115-20. Civil service board.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Advisory Fire Committee without cause by the
City Council when authorized by state law, City Charter or City
ordinance.
A. The Civil Service Commission of the City of Coatesville shall also serve
as the civil service board for the paid employees of the Coatesville Fire
Department subject to civil service. The civil service board shall consist
to three citizens of the City of Coatesville, who shall be appointed by the
City Council for four-year terms or until their successors are appointed
and qualified.
B. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the civil service board absent from three or more
consecutive regular meetings of the civil service board without an
approved leave of absence granted by the City Council after public
hearing and prior written notice thereof shall be removed from the
civil service board by the City Council of the City of Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the civil service board absent from 20% or more of
the regularly scheduled meetings of the civil service board within
any one-year period shall be notified in writing by the City Manager
acting on behalf of the City Council of the attendance requirements
of this subsection. Any member of the civil service board who is
absent from 20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings
within a one-year period shall thereafter be removed for cause from
such position by the City Council with prior written notice after
public hearing unless such member resigns in writing or waives the
public hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the civil service board may be removed for cause as
determined by the City Council after public hearing and prior
written notice thereof.
§ 115-17 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 115-20
112:251
§ 115-21. Adoption of civil service regulations.
The Civil Service Commission shall make rules and regulations providing
for examinations for positions subject to civil service in the Fire Department
and for appointments and promotions therein and for such other matters
as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Part 1. Due notice of
the contents of such rules and regulations and any modifications thereof
shall be given by mail, in due season, to appointing officers affected thereby.
Such rules and regulations and modifications thereof shall also be printed
for public distribution.
§ 115-22. Probationary period.
§ 115-23. Powers and duties of Civil Service Commission.
The Civil Service Commission shall have such powers and duties and
prescribed in the Third Class City Code and amendments thereto.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the civil service board without cause by the City
Council when authorized by state law, City Charter or City
ordinance.
A. All original appointments to any positions in the Fire Department,
which are subject to civil service, shall be for a probationary period of
six months. During such probationary period, the appointee shall not be
denied any rights or benefits that the appointee would otherwise be
entitled to under any collective bargaining agreement. At any time
during the probationary period, the appointee may be dismissed for just
cause, in the manner provided in the Third Class City Code.
B. If, at the close of such probationary term, the conduct or capacity of the
probationer has not been satisfactory to the appointing officer, the
probationer shall be notified, in writing, that he or she will not receive
permanent appointment, whereupon his or her employment shall cease;
otherwise, his or her retention in the service shall be equivalent to his
or her permanent appointment.
§ 115-20 COATESVILLE CODE § 115-23
112:252
Part 2
[Adopted 1-14-2F0ir1e3 PBreyvOerndt.i oNno. 1397-201395]
ARTICLE III
Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
§ 115-24. Standards adopted.
In accordance with the Third Class City Code, the City of Coatesville situate
in Chester County, Pennsylvania, hereby adopts the International Fire Code,
2009 Edition (published by the International Code Council) as the Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Coatesville, save and except such portions as
are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which three copies have
been and now are on file in the office of the Fire Chief and the same are
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length herein,
subject to the deletions, modifications or amendments set forth hereinafter.
This adoption shall include all appendix chapters and all relative reference
standards not adopted or restricted under the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act (Act 45 of 1999),96 unless such standards are adopted in
accordance with the provisions provided for municipal amendment to the
Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
§ 115-25. Scope.
The intent of this code is to regulate those health, safety and welfare
issues in legally existing buildings that are critical to the safe occupancy of
said buildings and issues that are critical to the safety of the community.
This article shall not apply to new construction that is otherwise regulated
or under construction under permits issued under the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act (Act 45 of 1999). All provisions of the International
Fire Code referenced herein regulating new construction, additions,
alterations or repairs under the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act are
hereby excluded from enforcement under this article. This code shall
regulate and govern the safeguarding of property from fire and explosion
hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous
substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life
or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Fire Code on file in the office of the Fire Chief of the City of
Coatesville are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as
if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in § 115-26 of this article. The fees and
regulations may be modified by resolution of City Council.
95.Editor’s Note: This Ordinance Also Repealed Former Part 2, Fire Prevention, Adopted
11-22-1993 By Ord. No. 946-93, As Amended.
96.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 7210.101 et seq.
§ 115-24 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 115-26
112:253
§ 115-26. Amendments to standards.
The Fire Prevention Code (International Fire Code) hereby adopted is
amended as follows:
A. Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Fire
Prevention Code of the City of Coatesville," hereinafter referred to as
"this code."
B. Section 103.1, General, is amended to read as follows:
Section 103.1 General. The Bureau of Fire is established within the
jurisdiction under the direction of the fire code official. The function
of the Bureau of Fire shall be the implementation, administration and
enforcement of this code. As the phrase "Bureau of Fire" is substituted
for the model code nomenclature "Department of Fire Prevention" each
and every reference in this code to "Department of Fire Prevention"
shall be amended and replaced with the term "Bureau of Fire.
C. Section 103.2, Appointment, is amended to read as follows:
Section 103.2 Appointment. The code official shall be substituted to
replace references to "fire code official" as set forth in the model code
so that all references in the model code to "fire code official" shall be
amended and replaced with "code official." Further, the code official(s)
as just defined shall consist of the Fire Chief of the City of Coatesville
and any duly appointed assistant code official(s) as well as all career
firefighters employed by the City. Any code official as identified above
must qualify for such designation by having been trained to no less
than IFSAC/Pro-Board Fire Inspector I Certification or equivalent as
determined by the Fire Chief.
D. New Section 105.3.9, Payment of permit fee, is added by amendment to
read as follows:
Section 105.3.9 Payment of permit fee. The fees for permits for
all required under this code shall be as set forth in the fee schedule
established in Chapter 108, Fees, of the City of Coatesville, which such
fees shall be established by resolution of City Council.
E. New Section 105.3.10, Fee refunds, is added by amendment to read as
follows:
Section 105.3.10. Fee refunds. The code official shall not be
authorized to refund fees upon the written request of the applicant
if such request is made later than 30 days after the issuance of the
permit.
F. Sections 109.3 and 111.4 are amended with the following changes as
noted below:
§ 115-26 COATESVILLE CODE § 115-26
112:254
Section 109.3: Insert "summary offense," "$1,000" and "90 days" in
the locations in brackets in this code.
Section 111.4: Insert "$300" and "$1,000" in the locations in brackets
in this code.
G. Section 307.1 prohibiting open burning is replaced with a new Section
307.1 (governing outdoor burning) and a new Section 307.1.1A
(enacted to address illegal burning) is enacted by amendment to read
as follows:
Section 307.1.1 Outdoor burning. Outdoor burning, bonfires, and
recreational fires are prohibited in the City without a permit. Portable
outdoor fireplaces may be used in accordance with the fire prevention
code.
Section 307.1.1 Illegal burning. If a fire call is generated due to
any illegal open burning, the owner of the property on which such
illegal burning occurred shall pay the Bureau of Fire a fee of not less
than $100 for the response. In addition, if any services are rendered
to extinguish any illegal burn, the property owner shall be held
responsible to pay the City a sum based on the apparatus response fee
schedule in Chapter 108, but which additional amount will not be less
than the $100 illegal burn fee.
H. Section 307.4.3, portable outdoor fireplaces, is amended by the removal
of the "exception" and the following quoted language is removed in its
entirety and deleted:
"Exception: Portable outdoor fireplaces used at one- and two-family
dwellings."
I. Section 3304, Explosive materials storage and handling, is amended by
a new Section 3304.1 prohibiting the storage of explosives and
explosive materials within the City of Coatesville; and all other
subsections of Section 3304 (Subsections 3304.2 through 3304.10.7)
are deleted. The remaining Section 3304.1, as amended, states as
follows:
Section 3304.1.1: Storage. The storage of explosives and explosive
materials is prohibited within the corporate limits of the City of
Coatesville.
J. The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2009
International Fire Code are hereby established by amendment to add
the following quoted language as noted:
Section 3404.2.9.6.1 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class
I and Class II liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is
prohibited): "See § 115-5 of City Code (storage of flammable liquids)
which is controlling and is interpreted as applied to Class I and Class II
liquids."
§ 115-26 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 115-26
112:255
§ 115-27. Conflicts with statutory provisions.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the
commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations
or other ordinances of the City of Coatesville, as the case may be, shall
control where the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the
provisions of this Part 2. The code shall control in all cases where the state
requirements or the requirements of other ordinances of this City are not as
strict as those contained in this Part 2.
§ 115-28. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this Part 2, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and/or codes in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
Part 2, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and codes and
not as new enactments. The provisions of this Part 2 shall not affect any
act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
§ 115-29. Severability.
If any portion of this article shall be determined to be unconstitutional,
illegal or unenforceable, then the portion and only that portion of this article
which is deemed to be unconstitutional, illegal or unenforceable shall be
severed from the remainder of this article and all other terms thereof shall
remain in full force and effect.
§ 115-30. Effective date.
This article shall be effective 30 days after publication following final
adoption in accordance with the City Charter and the Third Class City
Code.97
Section 3406.2.4.4 (geographic limits in which the storage of Class
I and Class II liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is
prohibited): "See § 115-5 of City Code (storage of flammable liquids)
which is controlling and is interpreted as applied to Class I and Class II
liquids."
Section 3505.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of flammable
cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited): "See § 115-5 of
City Code (storage of flammable liquids) which is controlling and is
interpreted as applied to flammable cryogenic fluids)."
Section 3804.2 (geographic limits in which the storage of liquefied
petroleum gas is restricted for the protection of heavily populated or
congested areas): "See § 115-5 of City Code (storage of flammable
liquids) which is controlling and is interpreted as applied to liquefied
petroleum gas."
§ 115-26 COATESVILLE CODE § 115-30
112:256
97.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 35101 et seq.
§ 115-30 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 115-30
112:257

ARTICLE IV
Recovery of Expenses; False Alarms
[Added 1-14-2013 by Ord. No. 1398-2013]
§ 115-31. Background and findings.
Pursuant to Section 210198 of the Third Class City Code, Act of June 23,
1931, P.L. 932, No. 317, as amended, the City Council of the City of
Coatesville provides fire protection within the City through the Fire
Department of the City of Coatesville. The City wishes to receive
reimbursement for any and all costs and/or expenses incurred by the Fire
Department of the City of Coatesville which may be obtainable by the
said Fire Department by the submission of claims submitted solely to the
individual property owners' insurance carrier - and recognizing that it is
a finding of the City Council of the City of Coatesville that the individual
property owners may maintain insurance coverage within their casualty
insurance policies, homeowners' policies and/or other applicable policies
that will provide reimbursement to the City of Coatesville for fire fighting
and other services rendered to the individual property owners' properties in
response to any emergency services request.
§ 115-32. Procedures for seeking reimbursement.
The City is hereby authorized and directed, by and through its officers
and authorized representatives, to ascertain what insurance coverages may
be applicable and available under any given circumstance, and to take all
necessary and affirmative steps to apply for and receive reimbursement
from any insurance carriers where a property owner is or may be insured
to reimburse the City for any cost and/or expense incurred for services,
supplies and/or equipment used for or provided to the property owner by
the Fire Department of the City of Coatesville.
§ 115-33. Limitations against billing property owners.
Under no circumstances shall any property owner ever receive a bill from
the City for fire protection or other services provided by the Fire
Department of the City of Coatesville except in cases of false alarms and
fires intentionally set by the property owner.
§ 115-34. False alarms defined.
A false alarm is any call to the Bureau of Fire or to any other emergency
resource requiring a response by personnel as follows:
A. Any such call made in a malicious or mischievous manner or with a
malicious or mischievous manner.
B. A call to respond to a system malfunction or trouble alarm.
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 37101.
§ 115-31 FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS § 115-34
112:259
§ 115-35. False alarms to be charged to building owners.
§ 115-36. Costs and fines set by resolution.
The costs of services, equipment and supplies for which reimbursement as
well as fines for false alarms are to be set by resolution of City Council.
The resolutions for the costs of services, equipment and supplies will be
established based upon an analysis of the costs for such services, including
an administrative charge of 5%.
§ 115-37. Interpretation.
This Article IV of Chapter 115 of the City Code shall be liberally construed
to accomplish its purpose to compensate and/or reimburse the City of
Coatesville from insurance proceeds only for costs and/or expenses incurred
while providing service pursuant to the duties imposed upon the City and
incurred while providing services for the Fire Department of the City of
Coatesville.
C. A call to respond to an elevator alarm without actual entrapment.
D. Unintentional calls such as testing, fire drills or repeated nuisance
alarms.
E. Other calls of similar nature not described above.
A. The building owner of which a fire alarm is transmitted where a fire
alarm company, sprinkler company or other contractor which, or whose
employee, subcontractor or technician causes a false fire response,
shall pay to the City of Coatesville Bureau of Fire a false-alarm fee per
the City's fee schedule, established by resolution of City Council.
B. This shall include false alarms transmitted by the owner or his/her
authorized agent or tenant.
§ 115-34 COATESVILLE CODE § 115-37
112:260
Chapter 119
FLAG, COLORS AND SEAL
§ 115-37 FLAG, COLORS AND SEAL § 115-37
119:261

ARTICLE I
Flag and Colors
[Adopted 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 845-89 as Ch. 21 of the 1989
Code]
§ 119-1. Official colors designated.
The official colors of the City of Coatesville shall be royal blue and gold.
§ 119-2. Description of official flag.
The official flag of the City of Coatesville shall measure four (4) feet on the
staff and six (6) feet on the fly, and the design thereof shall consist of three
(3) stripes running with the fly, the middle stripe to be gold and the top and
bottom stripes to be royal blue, the middle stripe being twice the width of
the top and bottom stripes, and in the center of said middle stripe shall be
placed the Seal of the City of Coatesville in royal blue, the diameter of said
Seal to be three-fourths (3/4) the width of the middle stripe.
§ 119-3. Business or commercial use of flag prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to imprint or cause to be placed on or attached to any
such flag any advertisement or insignia of a commercial nature, or to use
the same for business or commercial purposes.
§ 119-4. Violations and penalties.99
Any person violating the provisions of § 119-3 of this Article shall, upon
conviction in summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than six hundred dollars ($600.) for each offense or to suffer imprisonment
in the jail of Chester County for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or
both such fine and imprisonment.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 119-1 FLAG, COLORS AND SEAL § 119-4
119:263

ARTICLE II
Seal
[Adopted 10-10-1989 as Ord. No. 845-89 as Ch. 56 of the 1989
Code]
§ 119-5. Seal established; description.
The corporate Seal of the City of Coatesville, shall have inscribed thereon
in circular form the words "City of Coatesville, Pennsylvania," and within
the circle so formed shall be placed characters emblematic of the City of
Coatesville and the words "Incorporated 1915."
§ 119-6. Impression of Seal.
The impression of said Seal as prepared shall be made upon the page upon
which this Article shall be recorded, as a matter of permanent record.
§ 119-7. Unauthorized use.100
Unauthorized use of the Seal shall be prohibited.
§ 119-8. Violations and penalties.101
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this Article shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not more than
six hundred dollars ($600.) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90)
days, or both.
100. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
101. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 119-5 FLAG, COLORS AND SEAL § 119-8
119:265
Chapter 124
(RESERVED)
Chapter 132
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 19.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 115.
Street and sidewalks — See Ch. 193.
§ 132-1. Authority to abate; cleanup costs.
The Fire Department is authorized to clean up or abate the effects of any
hazardous material deposited upon or into property or facilities of the city;
and any person or persons who intentionally or negligently caused such
deposits or spills shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred by
the Fire Department as a result of such cleanup or abatement activity. The
remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies
provided by law.
§ 132-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COSTS INCURRED BY THE FIRE DEPARTMENT — Includes, but shall not
be limited to, the following: actual labor costs of city personnel, including
workman compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead,
cost of equipment operation, cost of materials obtained directly by the city,
and cost of any contract labor and materials.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any substance or materials in a quantity or
form which, in the determination of the Fire Chief or his or her authorized
representative, poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to life, health
or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, and shall include, but not be limited to, such substances
as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or
gases, poisons, etiological or biological agents and flammable and corrosive
agents.
§ 132-3. Authority to recover costs limited.
The authority to recover costs under this chapter shall not include fire
suppression services which are normally provided by the Fire Department.
Chapter 136
§ 119-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 132-3
124:266
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 102.
Fees — See Ch. 108.
Fire protection and prevention — See Ch. 115.
Mechanical standards — See Ch.156.
Plumbing — See Ch. 176.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 185.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
197.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 136-1. Short title.
The short title of this chapter shall be the "Coatesville Housing Code."
§ 136-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the indicated meanings:
APPROVED — In accordance with regulations established by the Codes
Department.
BASEMENT — A portion of any dwelling located partly underground but
having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
BUILDING CODE — The Coatesville Building Code.
CELLAR — A portion of any dwelling having half or more than half of
its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining
ground.
CODE — The Coatesville Housing Code and the regulations adopted under
it.
CODES DEPARTMENT — The Codes Department or any authorized
representative thereof.
DWELLING — A building or structure, except temporary housing, which is
wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human
occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, foyers, pantries, communicating
corridors, stairways, closets, basement recreation rooms and storage
spaces.
§ 132-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS § 136-2
132:267
HOTEL — A building or structure containing five or more rooming units,
where the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations,
and which:
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any dwelling or part thereof containing two
or more dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Any persons, including an owner or operator, living and
sleeping in a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPENABLE AREA — The part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any persons having charge, care, management or control of
any dwelling or part hereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
OWNER — Any persons who, alone, jointly or severally with others, holds
legal or equitable title to any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling units or
rooming unit.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
PLUMBING CODE — The statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and the ordinances of the City of Coatesville providing rules, regulations
and requirements for the construction of plumbing, house drainage and
sanitary sewers and any reenactments, supplements and amendments
thereto.
PLUMBING or PLUMBING FIXTURES — Water heating facilities, water
pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing
machines, catch basins, drains, vents and other similar supplies and
fixtures, together with all connections to water or sewer lines.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings and
structures thereon.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling or that part thereof containing one or
more rooming units, in which space is let to three or more persons.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking
or eating purposes.
SUPPLIED — Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator at
his or her expense.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and is not attached
A. Makes at least 50% of its rooming units available to transient guests.
B. Maintains a register for registration of guests.
Provides twenty-four-hour service both for the receiving and assistance
of guests.
C.
§ 136-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 136-2
132:268
to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on the same
premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — Any dwelling containing two dwelling units.
YARD — All ground, lawn, court, walk, driveway or other open space
constituting part of the same premises as a dwelling.
§ 136-3. Basic equipment and facilities.
No persons shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, hotel, dwelling unit or rooming
unit which does not comply with the following minimum standards for basic
equipment and facilities:
§ 136-4. Light, ventilation and heat.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, hotel, dwelling unit or rooming
unit which does not comply with the following minimum standards for light,
ventilation and heating:
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room, separate from
the habitable rooms, which affords privacy and which is equipped with
a flush water closet.
B. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a lavatory basin
located in the same room as the required flush water closet.
C. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a room, separate from
the habitable rooms, which affords privacy to a person in the room and
which is equipped with a bathtub or shower.
D. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a kitchen sink.
E. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by
this code shall be properly connected with hot- and cold-water lines.
The hot-water lines shall be connected with supplied water-heating
facilities which are capable of heating water to such a temperature as
to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required
kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower at a temperature of
not less than 120º F even when the heating facilities required by this
code to heat the premises are not in operation.
F. All plumbing fixtures required by this section shall be properly
connected to an approved water system and to an approved sewerage
system.
G. Every multifamily dwelling shall have approved common garbage or
trash storage or garbage disposal facilities.
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window facing directly to
the outdoors. The minimum total window area of every sleeping room
§ 136-2 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS § 136-4
132:269
with 100 square feet or less of floor area shall be 10% of the floor
area. The minimum total window area of every sleeping room with more
than 100 square feet of floor area shall be 10 square feet, plus 5% of
each square foot of floor area over 100 square feet. The minimum total
window area of every other habitable room shall be 7% of the floor
area. For the purposes of this section, where a living room faces onto
a glass-fronted porch, the porch shall be considered as a part of the
living room if the total window and open area between the porch and
the living room is at least 7% or as approved by the Codes Department
as affording adequate artificial lighting.
B. Every habitable room shall have at least one window which can be
easily opened and which faces directly to the outdoors. The minimum
openable area for such room shall be 4% of the floor area for every
sleeping room, and 3% of the floor area for every other habitable room
and every basement recreation room except where there is some other
device approved by the Codes Department as affording adequate
ventilation.
C. Every bathroom and water-closet compartment shall have at least one
window facing to the outdoors and have a minimum openable area of
4% of the floor area of such room except where there is supplied an
exhaust fan venting directly to the outside or some other device
approved by the Codes Department as affording adequate ventilation.
D. Whenever a window of a room faces a wall or other portion of any
abutting structure which is located less than three feet from the
window, and the wall or other portion of the abutting structure extends
to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, the window shall not be
counted in calculating window area or openable area.
E. A skylight window is a window for the purpose of this section except in
the case of a kitchen, living room or a sleeping room with more than 80
square feet in floor area.
F. Every public hall and stairway in every multifamily dwelling and
rooming house shall be adequately lighted at all times. In a two-family
dwelling, an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when
needed by conveniently located light switches shall be permitted. Every
public hall and stairway in every two-family dwelling, multifamily
dwelling and rooming house shall be adequately ventilated.
G. Every dwelling within 300 feet of a power line shall be supplied with
electricity. Within such dwelling:
(1) Every habitable room shall contain at least two separate floor- or
wall-type electric convenience outlets, or one such convenience
outlet and one supplied ceiling-type electric light fixture;
(2) Every water-closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace
room and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or
wall-type electric light fixture; and
§ 136-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 136-4
132:270
(3) Every outlet and fixture shall be properly installed and maintained
in good and safe working condition.
H. Heating facilities.
(1) Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are capable of
safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
water-closet compartments within its walls to a temperature
adequate for the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
such dwelling. All heating equipment employing flame with the use
of gasoline as a fuel shall be prohibited.
(2) Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with a central heating system
capable of maintaining a minimum indoor temperature of 70º F at a
distance of three feet above floor level when the outside
temperature is 0º F. All dwelling units shall be capable of providing
required heat from September 1 to June 1.
(3) Portable kerosene-fueled heaters.
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection, the following
definitions shall be applicable:
DWELLING — Any residential building, except multifamily
dwellings as defined in § 136-2 of the Code of the City of
Coatesville.
LISTED — Having been evaluated with respect to reasonably
foreseeable hazards to life and property by a nationally
recognized testing or inspection agency, such as Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., and authorized as being reasonably safe for
its specific purpose; and shown in a list published by such
agency and/or bearing the mark, name and/or symbol of such
agency as indication that it has been so authorized. Such
evaluation shall include but not be limited to evaluation of the
requirements hereinafter set forth.
PORTABLE KEROSENE-FUELED HEATER — Any non-flueconnected,
self-contained, self-supporting, kerosene-fueled
heating appliance equipped with an integral reservoir,
designed to be carried from one location to another.
(b) Use of portable kerosene-fueled heaters. Listed portable
kerosene heaters may be used in dwellings, provided that they
meet the following requirements:
[1] The heater must have labeling affixed thereto such as to
caution and inform concerning:
[a] Provision of an adequate source of ventilation when
the heater is in operation;
[b] Use of only suitable fuel for the heater;
§ 136-4 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS § 136-4
132:271
[c] Proper manner of refueling;
[d] Proper placement and handling of the heater when in
operation; and
[e] Proper procedures for lighting, flame regulation and
extinguishing the heater.
[2] The heater must be packaged with instructions such as to
inform concerning proper maintenance and operation.
[3] The heater must be constructed with a low center of
gravity and minimum tipping-angle of 33º from the vertical
with an empty reservoir.
[4] The heater must have an automatic safety shutoff device or
inherent design feature which eliminates fire hazards in
the event of tip over and must otherwise conform to the
standards set forth in National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) No. 31.
[5] The heater must not produce carbon monoxide at rates
which create a hazard when the heater is operated as
intended and instructed.
[6] The dwelling shall be provided with a minimum of one
approved smoke detector sensing visible or invisible
particles of combustion installed in the room and in a
manner and location consistent with its listing. When
actuated, the detector shall provide an alarm suitable to
warn the occupants within the building.
[7] The dwelling shall be provided with at least one portable
fire extinguisher which meets the following minimum
requirements:
[a] Contains a minimum of five pounds of extinguishing
agent.
[b] Contains one of the following extinguishing agents
only: bromotrifluoromethane (Halon 1301),
bromochlorodifluoromethane (Halon 1211) carbon
dioxide, and dry chemical types, carbon dioxide
extinguishers may not be equipped with metal horns.
[c] Tested and listed by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.,
or Underwriters' Laboratories of Canada.
[8] Portable kerosene-filled heaters shall not have a maximum
fuel capacity in excess of five United States gallons of fuel
when used in any dwelling.
(c) Storage of combustible liquid fuels.
§ 136-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 136-4
132:272
§ 136-5. Minimum standards for safety from fire.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, hotel, dwelling unit or rooming
unit which does not comply with the following standards for safety from fire:
[1] Combustible or flammable liquid fuels shall be stored only
in Underwriters' Laboratory, Inc., tested and listed selfclosing
safety containers.
[2] No container shall be used with a capacity of more than
two United States gallons of combustible liquid fuel.
[3] No container shall be used with a capacity of more than
one United States gallon of any flammable liquid.
[4] Containers shall be used exclusively for only one type of
fuel and shall be clearly labeled as to its contents.
[5] No more than two gallons of any combustible liquid nor
more than one gallon of any flammable liquid shall be
stored or used within any dwelling, provided that this
limitation shall not apply to fuel in approved steel fuel-oil
tanks used solely for the fuel supply for oil-fired central
heating systems.
A. No dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be located within a building
containing any establishment handling, dispensing or storing
flammable liquids, unless separate means of egress is provided and
maintained for any such dwelling unit or rooming unit.
B. Every dwelling unit and every rooming unit shall have safe means of
egress leading to safe and open space at ground level.
C. No storage room or storage locker in the dwelling unit or rooming unit
shall be used for storage of junk, rubbish or waste.
D. There shall be at least two means of egress from each story above the
second story of every multifamily dwelling and of every rooming house
when the third story is occupied for dwelling or rooming purposes. Any
basement used as a dwelling unit shall not count as a story for the
purpose of this section. [Amended 4-14-2014 by Ord. No.
1431-2014]
(1) However, as of the effective date of this amendatory ordinance, an
exception is established to the above-quoted language, and the
property owner of any two-family dwellings shall be permitted to
use the property for rental purposes provided that the building is
equipped with interconnected multistation smoke detectors
incorporated as follows; one on each floor, one in every common
area on each floor (i.e., basement, cellar, stairway, vestibule, etc.),
all of which are operational as approved by a building inspector.
§ 136-4 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS § 136-5
132:273
§ 136-6. Minimum standards for space, use and location.
No person shall occupy or shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling,
rooming house, hotel, dwelling unit or rooming unit which does not comply
with the following minimum standards for space, use and location:
Additionally, as part of this exception, the property shall also have
an emergency and rescue opening of a net of 5.7 feet with a
minimum net clear height of 24 inches and net clear opening
width of 20 inches when the third story is occupied for dwelling
or rooming purposes. Absent strict compliance with these
requirements, the exception will not apply and the provisions of
§ 136-5D recited above are controlling.
(2) Additionally, as of the effective date of this amendatory ordinance,
the property owner of a three- or more unit dwelling shall be
permitted, as a temporary exception to the above-quoted language,
to use the property for rental purposes provided that the building is
equipped with an automatic fire alarm system installed to provide
for smoke detectors in all common areas that sound throughout the
building when activated. Additionally, as part of this temporary
exception, the property shall also have an emergency rescue
opening of a net of 5.7 square feet with a minimum net clear height
of 24 inches and net clear opening width of 20 inches when the
third story is occupied for dwelling or rooming purposes.
Compliance with the above-stated requirements shall only be
temporary; and within 24 months of the effective date of this
amendatory ordinance, the property owner shall be required to
establish two means of egress as set forth in § 136-5D recited above
or, where there is a maximum occupant load of 20 or less, equip the
building throughout with an automatic sprinkler system which shall
be treated as the equivalent of a second means of egress.
These amendments to § 136-5D apply only to properties in
existence at the time of the enactment of this ordinance.102
E. Every dwelling shall have a hard-wired battery backup smoke detector
in the basement.
F. Every dwelling shall have a minimum two and one-half-pound ABC fire
extinguisher tested and listed by Underwriters Laboratory, Inc., or UL
of Canada mounted 42 inches from kitchen floor.
G. An emergency escape window shall have a sill height of no more than
44 inches above the floor with a minimum opening area of 5.7 feet. The
net opening shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height and 20 inches in
width. These windows shall be operational from the inside of the room
without the use of keys, tools or special knowledge.
102. Editor's Note: Amendatory ordinance was enacted 4-14-2014.
§ 136-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 136-6
132:274
§ 136-7. Minimum standards for safe and sanitary maintenance.
No persons shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, hotel, dwelling unit or rooming
unit which does not comply with the following minimum standards for safe
and sanitary maintenance:
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of habitable
floor area for the first occupancy, at least 100 square feet of additional
habitable floor area for each of the next three occupancies, and at least
75 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional
occupant.
B. In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by
more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor
area for each.
C. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area.
However, closet area and hall area within the dwelling unit, where
provided, may count for not more than 10% of the required habitable
floor area. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall
have a ceiling height of at least seven feet; and the floor area of any part
of any room where the ceiling height is less than 4 1/2 feet shall not be
considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of
the room to determine maximum permissible occupancy.
D. For the purpose of this section, a person under one year of age shall not
be counted as an occupant.
E. No cellar shall be used for living purposes.
F. No basement shall be used for living purposes unless:
(1) The floors and walls are substantially watertight;
(2) The total window area, total openable area and ceiling heights are
in accordance with this code; and
(3) The required minimum window area of every habitable room is
entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area,
not including stairwells or accessways.
A. Every foundation, exterior wall and exterior roof shall be substantially
weather tight, watertight and rodent proof; shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
B. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof;
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to
use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to
be placed thereon.
§ 136-6 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS § 136-7
132:275
§ 136-8. Minimum standards for cooking equipment.
No owner, operator, or occupant shall furnish or use any cooking equipment
which does not comply with the following minimum standards:
C. Every window, exterior door and basement or cellar door and hatchway
shall be substantially weather tight, watertight and rodent proof, and
shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
D. Every inside and outside stair, porch and any appurtenance thereto
shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use
may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair.
E. Every plumbing fixture shall be properly installed and maintained in
sound mechanical condition, free from defects, leaks and obstructions.
F. Every water-closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially
impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a
clean and sanitary condition.
G. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this code, and every chimney and smoke pipe, shall be so
constructed and installed that it will function safely and effectively, and
shall be maintained in sound working condition.
H. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain thorough drainage
and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
I. The use or storage of any upholstered furniture, including mattresses,
manufactured primarily for indoor use shall be prohibited on any front,
rear or side yard visible from any public space, sidewalk, street or
highway. The use of such furniture as aforesaid shall also be prohibited
on any unenclosed porch which is situated on any parcel in the City of
Coatesville.
J. The placement of bulk items such as upholstered furniture and
mattresses cannot be placed out to the exterior of the property more
than two days prior to any regular scheduled pickup day.
K. The Codes Department will notify the property owner with written
notice of any violation concerning the storage of any upholstered
furniture in violation of this section, including any illegal storage of bulk
trash items.
A. Every piece of cooking equipment shall be so constructed and installed
that it will function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in
sound working condition. All cooking equipment employing flame with
the use of gasoline shall be prohibited.
B. Portable cooking equipment employing flame with the use of gasoline or
kerosene as fuel for cooking is prohibited.
§ 136-7 COATESVILLE CODE § 136-8
132:276
§ 136-9. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
Where in this code the obligation for observance is not otherwise clearly
designated, the respective responsibility of owner, operator and occupant is
as follows:
C. Portable cooking equipment such as barbecue grills cannot be placed
on any porch, balcony or area where a roof structure is located except
for single-family and detached dwellings.
A. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall
maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling,
dwelling unit and yard which he occupies and controls; and shall be
responsible for his own misuse of areas and facilities available in
common.
B. Every owner or operator of a two-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling,
rooming house or hotel shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition
the shared or public areas of the dwelling and yard.
C. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all
rubbish, ashes, garbage and other organic waste in a clean and sanitary
manner by placing it in approved storage or disposal facilities which are
safe and sanitary. Every occupant shall provide such facilities for and
within his or her dwelling unit and shall maintain them in a clean and
sanitary manner. The owner or operator of a multifamily dwelling shall
be responsible for the clean and sanitary maintenance of common
storage or disposal facilities. He or she shall be responsible, further, for
placing out for collection all common garbage and rubbish containers,
except where such facilities are for the sole use of an occupant, under
which circumstances it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to
place these containers out for collection.
D. Every owner or operator of every rooming house or hotel shall dispose
of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in supplied
and approved storage or disposal facilities which are safe and sanitary.
E. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
in it or in the yard. In a two-family dwelling or a multifamily dwelling,
the occupant shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his
or her dwelling unit is the only one infested. When, however, infestation
is caused by failure of the owner or operator to maintain a dwelling in a
rodent proof or substantially insect-proof condition, extermination shall
be the responsibility of the owner or operator.
F. Every owner or operator shall be responsible for extermination of any
insects, rodents or other pests whenever infestation exists in two or
more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public
areas of any two-family dwelling or any multifamily dwelling.
§ 136-8 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS § 136-9
132:277
G. Every owner or operator of a rooming house or hotel shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
in it or in the yard.
H. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all supplied facilities,
including plumbing fixtures and cooking equipment, in a clean and
sanitary condition, and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care of their proper use and operation.
I. As provided in § 136-4H(2), every owner or operator of every two-family
dwelling, multifamily dwelling, rooming house and hotel shall supply
adequate heat to every habitable room therein except where there are
separate heating facilities for each dwelling unit, which facilities are
under the sole control of the occupant of such dwelling unit.
J. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, equipment or
utility which is required by this code to be removed, shut off or
discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him or her,
except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary when
actual repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary
emergencies.
K. Every dwelling of six or more dwelling units in which the owner or
operator does not reside shall have a full-time or part-time janitor as
deemed necessary by the Codes Department.
L. A contract effective as between owner and operator, operator and
occupant, or owner and occupant, with regard to compliance
hereunder, shall not relieve any party of his or her direct responsibility
under this code.
M. Every owner or operator of a multifamily dwelling or rooming house
shall advise the occupant in writing, either by insertion in the lease
between the parties or otherwise, of the maximum number of occupants
permitted in the occupied premises under this code.
N. Every person, whether he or she is the owner or rental agent for the
owner, leasing any dwelling unit having a vacancy shall, prior to or at
the time of said vacancy, notify the Codes Department of the fact that a
vacancy has occurred or is about to occur. Upon receipt of such notice,
the Codes Department shall, within three days, inspect said dwelling to
determine whether or not said dwelling meets the requirements of the
Housing Code. If said dwelling fails to meet the requirements of said
code, the Codes Department shall notify the owner or his or her agent,
detailing specifically the nature of the violation, and shall place a copy
of said notice upon said dwelling, and the same shall not be reoccupied
until the violations noted shall have been corrected. If the dwelling
meets the requirements of the Housing Code, the Codes Department
shall furnish the owner or rental agent with a certificate of compliance.
No dwelling unit shall be occupied without such certificate. An
inspection fee as provided in Chapter 108, Fees, per dwelling unit shall
be paid by the owner or rental agent for each such inspection.
§ 136-9 COATESVILLE CODE § 136-9
132:278
§ 136-10. Minimum standards for rooming houses and hotels.
No person shall operate a rooming house or hotel or shall let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit unless such rooming house or rooming unit
complies with the following minimum standards:
O. Every dwelling of 13 or more units in which the owner or operator does
not reside shall have a full-time manager/building superintendent.
P. Every owner or operator of a rental structure that has two units or more
shall be responsible in making sure that the common entrance
doorways are secured so as not to allow for visual freedom of the
entranceway.
Q. In cases where the owner of a rental dwelling resides outside of Chester
County, Pennsylvania, the owner shall designate a resident agent who
shall reside within Chester County, Pennsylvania. That registered
agent's name, street and mailing address, and telephone number must
be included on the application for a leasing license and on all other
documents filed with the City. The registered agent shall be jointly and
severally responsible with the owner for: [Added 4-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 1380-2012]
(1) The upkeep and maintenance of the premises;
(2) Compliance with this chapter and all other codes regulating the
premises; and
(3) Acceptance of service of process and of all notices under this
chapter or any other relevant codes.
(4) Maintaining a current register of all tenants and other persons with
a lawful right of occupancy in a rental dwelling, identifying said
parties by rental unit with name and address and date of residency.
A. Every rooming house, hotel and every rooming unit shall be in
compliance with the minimum standards set forth by the following
sections of this code: § 136-3F (minimum standards for hot- and coldwater
lines, water heating facilities and continuation of service; § 136-4
(minimum standards for light, ventilation and heating); § 136-5
(minimum standards for safety from fire); § 136-6 (minimum standards
for space, use and location); § 136-7 (minimum standards for safe and
sanitary maintenance); and the subsections of § 136-9 which set forth
responsibilities of an owner or operator of a rooming house and hotel.
B. Every rooming house or hotel shall be equipped with at least one flush
water closet, one lavatory basin and one bathtub or shower for each
three persons or fraction thereof within the rooming house or hotel,
including members of the family of the owner or operator if they share
the use of the facilities. All such facilities shall be properly connected to
approved water and sewerage systems. No such facilities located in a
basement or cellar shall count in computing the number of facilities
§ 136-9 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS § 136-10
132:279
§ 136-11. Licensing of rooming houses and hotels.
required by this subsection, except when approved by the Codes
Department.
C. Every flush water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower required by Subsection B shall be located within the rooming
house or hotel in a room or rooms which:
(1) Afford privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms.
(2) Are accessible from a common hall and without going outside the
rooming house.
(3) Are not more than one story removed from the rooming unit of any
occupant intended to share the facilities.
D. Where bedding, bed linen or towels are supplied, the owner or operator
shall maintain the bedding in a clean and sanitary manner, and he or
she shall furnish clean bed linen and towels at least once each week and
prior to the letting of any room to any occupant.
A. No person shall operate a rooming house or hotel unless he or she has
obtained from the Codes Department a license to operate such rooming
house or hotel.
B. Every person applying for a license shall supply such information as the
Codes Department requires and shall pay an annual license fee as
provided in Chapter 108, Fees, for each rooming unit. All annual license
fees shall be paid on or before January 1 of the year in which the fee is
due. There shall be a ten-percent penalty levied on any fee paid after
March 31 of the year in which the fee is due. In addition to any other
penalties, the fee is doubled if not paid by March 31. [Amended
4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1429-2014]
C. The Codes Department shall not issue a license unless the rooming
house or hotel for which the license is requested is in compliance with
this code. Every rooming house will pay a base inspection fee as set
forth in Chapter 108, Fees, for the inspection of such structure and use
with the inspection being completed on or before January 31 and June
30 of said year.
D. Every license shall specify the maximum number of occupants allowed
to occupy the rooming house or hotel.
E. Every license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
rooming house or hotel.
F. Every rooming house or hotel license shall remain in force from January
1 to December 31 of the current calendar year, unless sooner revoked
as provided in Subsection H.
G. No license required by this section shall be transferable.
§ 136-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 136-11
132:280
§ 136-12. Licensing of multifamily dwellings.
H. Whenever the Codes Department determines that there exists any
violation of this code, the Codes Department shall notify the owner or
operator in writing that unless the notice of violation is complied with,
the rooming house or hotel license may be revoked. After the expiration
of the time for compliance as stated on the notice of violation, a
reinspection shall be made to determine compliance. If the violation has
not been corrected, the Codes Department may revoke the rooming
house or hotel license and in such event shall serve written notice upon
the owner or operator of such action.
I. All delinquent and previous years' solid waste and/or City taxes must be
paid in full before a rental license can be issued.
J. The property owner and/or rental management company shall be jointly
and severally liable for allowing occupancy of any rental unit, without
licensing of same and without inspection of same, and shall be assessed
a penalty of $500 for the first offense in a calendar year, a penalty of
$750 for the second offense in a calendar year and a penalty of $1,000
for a third offense in a calendar year, each such penalty to be added to
the licensing fee and for the unit at issue. Separate violations (lack of a
license or lack of prior inspection) shall be subject to a penalty of $250
per incident and shall not be cumulative. [Added 4-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 1429-2014; amended 5-11-2015 by Ord. No. 1455-2015]
A. No person shall operate a multifamily dwelling unless he has obtained
from the Codes Department a license to operate such multifamily
dwelling.
B. Every person applying for a license shall supply such information as the
Codes Department requires and shall pay an annual license fee as
provided in Chapter 108, Fees, for each dwelling unit. All annual license
fees shall be paid on or before January 1 of the year in which the fee is
due. There shall be a ten-percent penalty due on any fee paid after
March 31, together with interest accrued at the rate of 1 1/2% per
month on the total amount due, including penalty. In addition to any
other penalties, the fee is doubled if not paid by March 31. [Amended
4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1429-2014]
C. The Codes Department shall, upon the receipt of a new application for a
license, immediately inspect the multifamily dwelling, and in the event
that said multifamily dwelling is in compliance with this code, the Codes
Department shall issue the license applied for.
D. In the event that said multifamily dwelling is not in compliance with this
code, the Codes Department shall notify said applicant, in writing, and
shall specify the noncompliance with this code. Upon the completion of
said changes, the Codes Department shall issue the license applied for.
§ 136-11 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS § 136-12
132:281
§ 136-13. Leasing license.
E. Every license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
multifamily dwelling.
F. Every multifamily dwelling license shall remain in force from January 1
to December 31 of the current calendar year.
G. No license required by this section shall be transferable.
H. Whenever the Codes Department determines that there exists any
violation of this code, it shall serve notice and may notify the owner or
operator, in writing, that, unless the notice of violation is complied with,
the multifamily dwelling license may be revoked. After the expiration of
the time for compliance as stated on the notice of violation, a
reinspection shall be made to determine compliance. If the violation has
not been corrected and no appeal is pending, the Codes Department
may revoke the multifamily dwelling license and in such event shall
serve written notice upon the owner or operator of such action.
I. Any person whose multifamily license has been revoked or whose
application for a license to operate a multifamily dwelling has been
denied may appeal to the Board as provided in § 136-16 of this code.
J. All delinquent and previous years' solid waste and City taxes must be
paid in full before a rental license can be issued.
K. The property owner and/or rental management company shall be jointly
and severally liable for allowing occupancy of a rental unit without
licensing and inspection and shall be assessed a penalty of $500 for the
first offense in a calendar year, a penalty of $750 for the second offense
in a calendar year, and a penalty of $1,000 for a third offense in a
calendar year, each such penalty to be added to the licensing fee and for
the unit at issue. [Added 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1429-2014]
A. No person shall lease a dwelling to another unless a license has been
obtained from the Codes Department.
B. Every person applying for a license shall supply such information as the
Codes Department requires and shall pay an annual license fee as
provided in Chapter 108, Fees, for each dwelling unit. All annual license
fees shall be paid on or before January 1 of the year in which the fee is
due. There shall be a ten-percent penalty levied on any fee paid after
March 31 of the year in which the fee is due. In addition to any other
penalties, the fee is doubled if not paid by March 31. [Amended
4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1429-2014]
C. The Codes Department shall, upon a new application for a license,
immediately inspect the dwelling and, in the event that said dwelling is
in compliance with this Code, the Codes Department shall issue the
license. At such time as there is a change of residency, such change
shall require the need for a reinspection, and, at all times, the list of
§ 136-12 COATESVILLE CODE § 136-13
132:282
§ 136-14. Inspection of and access to dwellings.
residents shall be supplied to the Codes Department identifying by
names all residents within the apartment and their dates of residency
in accordance with the duties of maintaining a current register as
required by § 136-9Q. [Amended 4-9-2012 by Ord. No. 1380-2012]
D. In the event that said dwelling is not in compliance with this code, the
Codes Department shall notify said applicant, in writing, and shall
specify the noncompliance with this code. Upon the completion of said
changes, the Codes Department shall issue the license applied for.
E. Every license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
dwelling.
F. Every dwelling license shall remain in force from January 1 to
December 31 of the current calendar year.
G. No license required by this section shall be transferable.
H. Whenever the Codes Department determines that there exists any
violation of this code, it shall serve written notice and may notify the
owner or operator, in writing, that, unless the notice of violation is
complied with, the dwelling license may be revoked. After the
expiration of the time for compliance as stated on the notice of
violation, a reinspection shall be made to determine compliance. If the
violation has not been corrected and no appeal is pending, the Codes
Department may revoke the dwelling license and in such event shall
serve written notice upon the owner or operator of such action.
I. Any person whose license has been revoked or whose application for a
license to operate a dwelling has been denied may appeal to the Board
as provided in § 136-16 of this code.
J. All delinquent and previous years' solid waste and City taxes must be
paid in full before a rental license can be issued.
K. The property owner and/or rental management company shall be jointly
and severally liable for allowing occupancy of a rental unit without
licensing and inspection and shall be assessed a penalty of $500 for the
first offense in a calendar year, a penalty of $750 for the second offense
in a calendar year, and a penalty of $1,000 for a third offense in a
calendar year, each such penalty to be added to the licensing fee and for
the unit at issue. [Added 4-14-2014 by Ord. No. 1429-2014]
A. The Codes Department is authorized and directed to make inspections
on weekdays between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., upon display of proper
identification, to determine compliance with this code.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or a rooming unit shall
grant to the owner or operator thereof or his or her agent or employee
or any person with whom the Codes Department has contracted under
§ 136-13 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS § 136-14
132:283
§ 136-14.1. Mandatory residential rental inspection. [Added
2-23-2009 by Ord. No. 1317-2009]
§ 136-17 of this code free access to it at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making repairs or alterations to effect compliance with this
code and with any notice or order issued under this code.
A. Declaration of purpose. The City Council finds that the establishment of
a mandatory residential rental inspection program for rental units is
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by ensuring
the proper maintenance of such housing, by identifying and requiring
correction of substandard housing conditions, and by preventing
conditions of deterioration and blight that could adversely affect
economic conditions and the quality of life in the City.
B. Definitions. The following words and phrases, whenever used in this
section shall be construed as defined:
APPLICABLE LAWS — Includes, but is not limited to, the City's Housing
Code, the City Zoning Ordinance,103 other City ordinances, and other
laws or regulations relating to the health or safety of City residents or
the public.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The City of Coatesville Building Official.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — The certificate issued evidencing
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
CITY — The City of Coatesville, Pennsylvania.
DEFICIENCY — Any failure by a unit subject to this chapter to comply
with applicable laws.
OCCUPANT — An individual, partnership, corporation or association or
agent of any of them lawfully residing in a unit.
OWNER — The owner of record as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll or such owner's authorized agent.
RENTAL UNIT — A unit occupied by or intended for occupancy by other
than the owner of the unit.
UNIT — A dwelling unit within the City, including single-family homes,
duplexes, and multifamily dwellings, motels, hotels and similar living
accommodations.
C. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all rental
units.
D. Compliance with business license requirements. Every owner of rental
units carrying on the business of operating rental units subject to this
section or on whose behalf the business of operating such rental units is
carried out must comply with the business license requirements of the
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 224, Zoning.
§ 136-14 COATESVILLE CODE § 136-14.1
132:284
Coatesville Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, the business
privilege license requirements prescribed in that title.
E. Certificate of compliance requirement. Owners of rental units subject to
this chapter must file a written application with the Building Official
and obtain a valid certificate of compliance for each rental unit prior to
applying for or retaining a business license pursuant to this code.
Applications for certificates of compliance may be obtained from the
Codes Department. To be considered for approval, applications for
certificates of compliance must be complete in accordance with this
chapter and any applicable regulations adopted pursuant to this
chapter and include the current fee specified in regulations adopted
pursuant to this chapter.
F. Initial inspection. Within 20 working days of the time an application for
certificate of compliance submitted to the Building Official is complete
in accordance with this chapter, or within such extended time for
inspection as the Building Official may specify, the Building Official
shall cause the unit or units specified in the application to be inspected.
The Building Official shall issue a certificate of compliance for units that
comply with applicable laws.
G. Complaint-based inspections. Nothing contained herein shall prevent or
restrict the authority of the City's code enforcement officials to inspect
any apartment, house or hotel, or the premises thereof, in response to a
citizen complaint alleging code violations or other violations of law at
such an apartment, house or hotel, and to pursue all Code enforcement
remedies permissible under this Code or other laws following such a
complaint-based inspection of a rental property.
H. Mandatory residential rental inspections. Every owner of a rental unit
located within the City shall permit the City's inspection of the
apartment and the property on which such unit is located, following
notice from the City. The building inspector, or his or her designee, shall
cause each unit to be inspected once every two years to ensure
compliance with all applicable City ordinances or other laws relating to
housing, including the substandard housing provisions of the Housing
Code contained in Chapter 136 of this Code.
I. Re-inspections. A unit that exhibits a deficiency or deficiencies shall be
subject to re-inspections and subject to Chapter 108, Fees.
J. Notice of inspection. The building inspector, or his or her designee,
shall give a minimum of 30 days' advance written notice of the date and
time of the periodic inspection to the owner of the unit. Such notice
shall provide the address and phone number where additional
information concerning the inspection may be obtained. Notice to the
unit's owner shall be mailed by first class mail to the owner's last known
address as it appears in the records of the county assessor.
K. Inspection consent. Owners shall make every effort to make units
available for City inspection. If owners do not consent to City entry for
§ 136-14.1 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS § 136-14.1
132:285
inspection pursuant to this chapter, the Building Official may not force
or otherwise attempt to gain entry and may issue appropriate violation
notice.
L. Certificate of compliance contents. Certificates of compliance issued
pursuant to this chapter shall specify the date of issuance, the legal use
and occupancy of the unit, the unit address, the name of the unit owner
to whom the certificate is issued, and that the unit complies with
applicable laws so far as could be determined by inspection.
M. Validity of applications and certificates of compliance. Applications for
certificates of compliance are valid for 90 days from the time the
application is complete in accordance with this chapter, or a longer time
approved by the Building Official. Owners that fail to correct
deficiencies within 90 days of the time the application is complete in
accordance with this chapter, or within a longer time approved by the
Building Official in accordance with this chapter must reapply. Such
reapplications must satisfy all requirements of this chapter applicable
to new applications, including payment of the current fee. Certificates
of compliance issued pursuant to this chapter shall remain valid for two
years from the date of issuance.
N. Deficiencies. The Building Official shall provide the owner with written
notice of each deficiency disclosed by inspection pursuant to this
chapter. Certificates of compliance may not be issued until all
deficiencies disclosed by inspection pursuant to this chapter are
corrected. Unit owners shall be subject to re-inspections and reinspection
fees as set forth in Chapter 108, Fees.
O. Violations. If an inspection of a unit or its premises, conducted pursuant
to this chapter, reveals any violations of applicable City ordinances or
other laws relating to such rental units, including the housing
provisions of the Housing Code contained in Chapter 136 of the
Coatesville Municipal Code, the violation must be cured within 60 days
or designated time by the Code Official. If the violation remains upon
re-inspection, the City's code enforcement officials may seek any
remedies permitted by law, including obtaining an inspection warrant,
denial or revocation of a rental and business license pursuant,
abatement proceedings, as well as other civil or criminal proceedings.
P. Administrative regulations. The Building Official is authorized and
directed to promulgate administrative regulations pertaining to the
implementation and enforcement of this chapter. Such administrative
regulations shall not take effect unless and until they are approved by a
resolution duly adopted by the City Council following a public hearing
thereon.
Q. Voluntary inspection requests. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to prohibit an owner from voluntarily requesting an
inspection pursuant to this chapter to determine whether a unit
complies with applicable laws, even though such inspection may not be
§ 136-14.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 136-14.1
132:286
§ 136-15. Board of Housing Appeals.
required pursuant to this chapter. Such voluntary inspection requests
shall be subject to all of the provisions of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, the provisions governing applications and fees.
R. Penalties. Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
infractions.
S. Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the determination concerning a
certificate of compliance application under this chapter may appeal to
the Board of Housing Appeals within 10 days. Such appeals are
procedural only and limited to the issue of whether the City has
followed the procedures established by this section.
T. Immediate health and safety threats. Nothing in this section shall limit
the City's ability to inspect properties and issue citations for propertyrelated
conditions that may constitute an immediate health or safety
threat.
A. The City Council shall appoint a Board of Housing Appeals consisting of
three members who shall be residents of the City. The members who are
first appointed shall serve for terms of one, two and three years,
respectively, from the date of their appointment as shall be specified at
the time of their appointment. Thereafter, the term of office shall be
three years. A member shall hold office until his or her successor has
been appointed. The members shall select from among themselves a
Chairman.
B. The Board of Housing Appeals is a board of limited powers. Although its
function is primarily to provide for reasonable interpretation of the
provisions of this code, the Board shall have the power to make
variance and grant extensions of time in cases where strict enforcement
of this code would cause undue or unnecessary hardship. The Board
may, in specific cases, authorize such variances to the provisions or
requirements of this code as will not be contrary to the public interest.
(1) In applying to the Board for such variance, the applicant must
show:
(a) That his or her property was acquired in good faith.
(b) That, by reason of existing topographic conditions or by reason
of other peculiar and exceptional conditions pertaining to a
specific piece of property, literal enforcement of the provisions
or requirements of this code would cause undue or
unnecessary hardship. A claim or even proof merely of a more
profitable use, if the variance were granted, is not in itself
evidence of such hardship.
§ 136-14.1 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS § 136-15
132:287
(2) No variance to the provisions or requirements of this code shall be
authorized by the Board unless this Board finds that all of the
following facts and conditions of unnecessary hardship exist:
(a) The hardship arises from unique circumstances applying to the
applicant's property which are not the general condition in the
neighborhood.
(b) The hardship is not self-inflicted by the applicant.
(c) The strict application of the provisions of this code would
impose an unreasonable restraint or unnecessary hardship on
the use of the property inconsistent with the general purpose
and intent of this code.
(d) The granting of the variance will not injure adjacent property.
C. In deciding the appeals, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made.
D. The Board shall fix a time and place for the hearing of appeals and such
hearings shall be scheduled within 15 days after filing the notice of
appeal. Notice of the time and place of hearing shall be sent by mail to
the applicant or to his or her attorney of record, and such hearing shall
not be less than six days after the mailing of the notice.
E. The Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
F. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at
such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman or, in his
or her absence, the Acting Chairman may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to
the public.
G. The owner of any rental unit that will not be used as a rental unit during
any part of the year must file an affidavit of nonrental use before
January 1 of the year after purchase or before transfer of ownership to
the new owner or they will be charged for a rental license. The new
owner must apply for a rental license before being used as a rental unit.
H. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Board of Housing Appeals absent from three or
more consecutive regular meetings of the Board of Housing
Appeals without an approved leave of absence granted by the City
Council after public hearing and prior written notice thereof shall
be removed from the Board of Housing Appeals by the City Council
of the City of Coatesville.
§ 136-15 COATESVILLE CODE § 136-15
132:288
§ 136-16. Notices and appeals; fees.
(2) Any member of the Board of Housing Appeals absent from 20% or
more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Board of Housing
Appeals within any one-year period shall be notified in writing by
the City Manager acting on behalf of the City Council of the
attendance requirements of this subsection. Any member of the
Board of Housing Appeals who is absent from 20% or more of the
regularly scheduled meetings within a one-year period shall
thereafter be removed for cause from such position by the City
Council with prior written notice after public hearing unless such
member resigns in writing or waives the public hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the Board of Housing Appeals may be removed for
cause as determined by the City Council after public hearing and
prior written notice thereof.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Board of Housing Appeals without cause by the
City Council when authorized by state law, City Charter or City
ordinance.
A. When the Codes Department determines that there exists a violation of
any provision of this code, it shall give written notice of such violation to
the violator.
B. The notice of violation shall specify the violation which exists and a
reasonable time within which to correct it. The notice may also describe
a course of remedial action which will effect compliance with this code.
C. Any person aggrieved by a decision or an action of the Codes
Department with reference to license revocation may appeal to the
Board of Housing Appeals for a review of the decision in accordance
with procedures prescribed by the Board of Housing Appeals. If this
appeal is filed within 10 days after giving notice of the decision or
action of the Codes Department, compliance with a notice of violation
shall not be required when the appeal is pending before the Board,
except as provided in Subsection E.
D. After the expiration of the time for compliance as stated on the notice of
violation, a reinspection shall be made to determine compliance; if the
violation has not been corrected, the Codes Department shall order the
violation corrected as specified in § 136-18 of this code or shall institute
prosecution of the violation, or both. However, the Codes Department
may grant a reasonable extension of time for compliance in cases of
hardship.
E. Whenever the Codes Department finds that there exists any violation of
this code which creates an emergency requiring immediate correction
to protect the health or safety of any occupancy of a dwelling or the
§ 136-15 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL SPILLS § 136-16
132:289
§ 136-17. Abatement of violations.
When, upon reexamination after the expiration of the time for compliance,
the Codes Department finds that the violation has not been corrected, and
when the Codes Department finds that the continuation of such violation
constitutes a public nuisance, it may itself or by contract correct the
violation, charge the cost thereof to the violator and, with the approval
of the City Solicitor, collect such cost by lien and/or otherwise as may be
authorized by law.
§ 136-18. Designation of dwellings as unfit for human habitation;
appeal.
§ 136-19. Regulations.
The Codes Department is authorized to make regulations, subject to the
approval of City Council, interpreting the provisions of this chapter as may
be appropriate to effectuate the administration and enforcement of this
code.
§ 136-20. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other sanction or remedial procedure provided, any
person who violates any provision of this code shall, upon conviction in
summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
and the cost of prosecution for each offense, to be collected as other fines
and costs are by law collectible, and in default of payment thereof, shall
public, it may issue a notice of violation reciting the existence of the
emergency and requiring necessary action to be taken immediately.
F. A fee as provided in Chapter 108, Fees, payable in advance shall be paid
for each appeal of a decision of the Codes Department to the Board of
Housing Appeals.
A. Whenever the Codes Department finds that any dwelling constitutes a
serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or to the public
because it is dilapidated, unsanitary, vermin infested or lacking in the
facilities and equipment required by this code, it shall designate such
dwellings as unfit for human habitation. Such designation shall be
posted on the dwelling and shall specify the reason. No person shall
remove such notice except as provided in Subsection B.
B. Any dwelling so designated as unfit for human habitation shall be
vacated within 30 days or a reasonable time as specified by the Codes
Department and shall not again be used for human habitation until the
hazard has been eliminated and the Codes Department has removed the
designation and given written approval for occupancy.
C. Any person aggrieved by a designation of unfitness for human
habitation may appeal to the Board as provided in § 136-16 of this code.
§ 136-16 COATESVILLE CODE § 136-20
132:290
be imprisoned for not more than 90 days and, further, shall pay two times
the appropriate inspection fee. Continuing violation as to any premises of
the same provision after notice from the Department shall be a separate
violation for each day.
§ 136-21. Conflict of ordinances; higher standards to prevail.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or code
of this municipality or law, rule or regulation of the State of Pennsylvania,
the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any
case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any other ordinance or code of this municipality or law, rule or
regulation of the State of Pennsylvania which establishes a lower standard
for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people,
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to prevail and such other
ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that
they may be found in conflict with this chapter.
Chapter 142
IMPROVEMENT POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 185.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 193.
Subdivisions and land development — See Ch.
197.
§ 142-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
UNDEVELOPED AREAS — Any portion of the city where there are no
ordained streets and no sanitary sewer or storm sewer lines installed at the
time of the adoption of this chapter.
§ 142-2. Policies as to street and sewer improvements established.
The City of Coatesville does hereby establish the following policies as to
streets, sanitary sewer and storm sewer improvements in undeveloped
areas of the city:
A. Sanitary sewers shall be constructed by the developer at his or her own
expense in accordance with approved plans and specifications of the
city, and upon connection with the existing sanitary sewer system of the
city, shall become the property of the city.
§ 136-20 IMPROVEMENT POLICIES § 142-2
142:291
§ 142-3. Extension of sewer lines outside city boundaries.
Extension of sewer lines outside the boundaries of the city shall be done
in the manner and upon such terms as City Council may by ordinance
establish, but in no event shall any part of said cost be borne by the city.
§ 142-4. Interpretation.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to invalidate or alter existing
agreements made and executed between the city and any other municipality
or private developer.
Chapter 145
INSURANCE
B. Storm sewers, if required, shall be constructed by the developer at his
or her own expense in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the city and subject to inspection by the city. Upon
connection with the storm sewer system of the city, they shall become
the property of the city.
C. Streets. The developer shall pay for and construct curbs and sidewalks
upon such lines and grades as are approved by the City Engineer and in
accordance to specifications established by the city. The developer shall
also, at his or her own expense, construct the street or streets in
accordance with the city's specifications, before the street or streets
are ordained.
§ 142-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 142-4
145:292
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
§ 145-1. Title.
This Article may be known and cited as the "Fire Insurance Escrow
Ordinance."
§ 145-2. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIRE LOSS or CLAIM FOR FIRE DAMAGE — Any loss occurring after the
effective date of this Article and covered under a policy of fire insurance,
including any endorsement or riders to the policy.
§ 145-3. Purpose.
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has enacted Act 98 of 1992, effective
September 7, 1992, amending the Insurance Company Law of 1921, to
provide procedures for the payment of certain fire loss claims. The Council
of the City of Coatesville finds it necessary and advisable, and declares the
purpose of this Article to be to deter the commission of arson and related
crimes, to discourage the abandonment of property, to prevent urban blight
and deterioration and to provide for the collection of delinquent municipal
taxes, assessments, penalties and user charges against real estate by
adopting this Article pursuant to Section 508 of the Insurance Law of 1921
to provide for the payment of proceeds from certain fire loss claims to the
city.104
§ 145-4. Designated officer.
The Finance Director or such official's designee (hereinafter, the municipal
officer) is hereby appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to
carry out all responsibilities and duties of the municipality stated herein.
§ 145-5. Certificate required prior to payment of claim.
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insurer")
doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of a
named insured for the fire damage to a structure located within the City of
Coatesville, (hereinafter the "municipality"), where the amount recoverable
for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds seven thousand
five hundred dollars ($7,500.), unless the insurer and the named insured
comply with the provisions of this Article.
§ 145-6. Transfer of proceeds to city; escrow payment costs.
104. Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 145-1 INSURANCE § 145-6
145:293
A. Where, pursuant to Section 508(B)(1)(ii) of Act 98 of 1992,105 the
Finance Director issues a certificate and bill for delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties and user charges against the property and also
the total costs, if any, incurred by the city for the removal, repair or
securing of a building or other structure on the property, the insuring
agent shall transfer to the Finance Director an amount from the
insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes, assessments, penalties,
charges and costs as shown on the bill, which amount shall be applied
or credited by the city to payment of the items listed on the bill.
B. Where, pursuant to Section 508(B)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992,106 the
Finance Director issues a certificate indicating that there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real
property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured;
provided, however, that if the loss as agreed upon by the named insured
and the issuing agent equals or exceeds sixty percent (60%) of the
aggregate limits of the liability on all fire policies covering the building
or structure, the following procedures must be followed:
(1) Amount to be transferred.
(a) The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds
to the designated officer of the city in the aggregate of two
thousand dollars ($2,000.) for each fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.), and each fraction of that amount, of the claim; or
(b) If, at the time of proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the insuring agent, the named insured has
submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of
removing, repairing or securing the building or other
structure, the issuing agent shall transfer to the city from the
insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate.
(2) The transfer of proceeds shall be on a pro-rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
structure.
(3) After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, and the designated officer shall return
the amount of the funds transferred to the city in excess of the
estimate to the named insured, if the city has not commenced to
remove, repair or secure the building or other structure.
(4) Upon receipt of proceeds under this subsection, the city shall do
the following:
(a) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate
fund to be used solely as the security against the total costs of
105. Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(ii).
106. Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b)(1)(i)
§ 145-6 COATESVILLE CODE § 145-6
145:294
§ 145-7. Regulations.
The City Council may by resolution adopt procedures and regulations to
implement Act 98 of 1992 and this Article and may by ordinance fix
reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or services provided
pursuant to Section 508107 and this Article, including but not limited to
issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspection and opening
separate fund accounts.
removing, repairing or securing the building or structure
which are incurred by the city. Such costs shall include without
limitation, any engineering, legal or administrative costs
incurred by the municipality in connection with such removal,
repair or securing of the building or any proceedings related
thereto.
(b) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the city with the name and address of the
named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the
name and address of the named insured, the designated officer
shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds have
been received by the city and notify the named insured that the
procedures under this subsection shall be followed.
(c) When repair, removal or securing of the building or structure
has been completed in accordance with all applicable
regulations and orders of the city and the required proof of
such completion received by the designated officer, and the
city has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing, the fund shall be returned to the named insured. If
the city has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of
the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the
fund, and if excess funds remain, the city shall transfer the
remaining funds to the named insured.
(d) To the extent that interest is earned on the proceeds held by
the city pursuant to this subsection and the proceeds not
returned to the named insured, such interest shall belong to
the city. To the extent that proceeds are returned to the named
insured, interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed
to the named insured at the time that the proceeds are
returned.
(5) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limit the ability of
the city to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the city and the named
insured from entering into an agreement that permits transfer of
funds to the named insured if some other reasonable disposition of
the damaged property has been negotiated.
107. Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 145-6 INSURANCE § 145-7
145:295

ARTICLE II
Fire Insurance Certificates
§ 145-8. Materials to be furnished to insurer.
The municipal officer shall, upon the written request of the named insured
specifying the tax description of the property, name and address of the
insurer and the date agreed upon by the insurer and the named insured as
the date of the receipt of a loss report of the claim, furnish the insurer either
of the following within fourteen (14) working days of the request:
§ 145-9. Determination of delinquency.
A tax, assessment, penalty or user charge becomes delinquent at the time
and on the date a lien could otherwise have been filed against the property
by the municipality under applicable law.
§ 145-10. Payment of claim.
Upon the receipt of a certificate pursuant to § 145-8A of this Article, the
insurer shall pay the claim on the named insured with the policy terms.
§ 145-11. Payments to municipality from proceeds.
Upon the receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to § 145-8B of this Article,
the insurer shall return the bill to the municipal officer and transfer to the
municipal officer an amount for the insurance proceeds necessary to pay
the taxes, assessments, penalties, charges and costs as shown on the bill, or
the full amount of the insurance proceeds, whichever is the lesser amount.
A. A certificate, or at the discretion of the municipality, a verbal
notification, which shall be confirmed in writing by the insurer to the
effect that, as of the date specified in the request, there are no
delinquent taxes, assessment, penalties or user charges against the
property and that, as of the date of the municipal officer's certificate or
verbal notification, the municipality has not certified any amount as
total costs incurred by the municipality for the removal, repair or
securing of a building or other structure on the property; or
B. A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties and user charges against the property as of the
date specified in the request that have not been paid as of the date of
the certificate and also showing, as of the date of the municipal officer's
certificate, the amount of the total costs, if any, certified to the
municipal officer that have been incurred by the municipality for the
removal, repair or securing of a building or other structure on the
property. For the purposes of this subsection, the municipality shall
provide to the municipal officer the total amount, if any, of such costs, if
available, or the amount of costs known to the municipality at the time
of the municipal officer's certificate.
§ 145-8 INSURANCE § 145-11
145:297
The municipality shall receive the amount and apply or credit it to payment
of the items shown on the bill.
§ 145-12. Recovery of deficiencies.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency.
§ 145-13. Transfer of proceeds to municipal officer.
The transfer of proceeds to the municipal officer shall be on pro-rata basis
by all insurers with applicable policies of insurance providing protection for
fire loss.
§ 145-14. Violations and penalties.108
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this Article shall be subject to a penalty of up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.) or a period of imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90)
days, or both, per violation.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 145-11 COATESVILLE CODE § 145-14
145:298
Chapter 149
LAUNDRIES AND DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 102.
Fire protection and prevention — See Ch. 115.
Plumbing — See Ch. 176.
Sewers — See Ch. 185.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 149-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following
meaning:
COIN-OPERATED LAUNDRIES and COIN-OPERATED DRY-CLEANING
ESTABLISHMENTS — Establishments or places of business conducted for
the purpose of dry-cleaning, washing, drying and laundering clothes and
other washable materials that may be brought to said establishment or
place of business by customers and wherein the work is done in machines,
coin-operated or otherwise, located on the premises, by the customers
themselves or by or under the supervision of the owners or operators of
said establishment or place of business for said customers, and shall include
a "laundromat," "wash-o-mat" and similar names and types under which
laundering of the self-service type is carried on; provided, however, that the
foregoing shall not be construed to include the conventional laundry or drycleaning
establishment where the services provided are performed by the
owner or by his or her employees.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, association, organization, firm and
partnership, as well as an individual.
§ 149-2. License required; application; conditions of issuance;
expiration; fees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a coin-operated laundry or
coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment in the city without having first
obtained a license therefor. Application for a license shall be filed with
the Codes Clerk. Said application shall state the name and address of the
person who will operate the coin-operated laundry or coin-operated drycleaning
establishment, the exact location of the premises and the size
of the premises where said coin-operated laundry or coin-operated drycleaning
establishment will be operated and, if the operator is not the owner
of the premises, the name and address of the owner. The consent of the
owner of the premises shall be endorsed on the application. A separate
application and license shall be required for each establishment. Each
license shall expire on December 31 of each year. No license shall be issued
unless the premises in which the coin-operated laundry or coin-operated
§ 145-14 LAUNDRIES AND DRY-CLEANING § 149-2
149:299
dry-cleaning establishment is to be operated comply in all respects to the
requirements and provisions of the regulations of the Fire Department,
County Health Department, Building Code, Plumbing Code and Zoning
Ordinance of the city. The annual license fee shall be at the rate of $1
for each coin-operated washing or dry-cleaning machine installed, provided
that the minimum fee shall be $25 for each establishment.
§ 149-3. Health and sanitation requirements.
The entire premises devoted to the operation of the coin-operated laundry
or coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment and all machines used in
connection therewith shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. The
floor shall be kept clean and dry. The premises shall be adequately
ventilated and provided with sufficient natural or artificial light. The walls
of said premises shall be covered with nonabsorbent paint, cement or other
impervious material. All plumbing work shall at all times conform to the
provisions of the Plumbing Code of the city and shall always be kept in
a good condition and state of repair. Said coin-operated laundry or coinoperated
dry-cleaning establishment shall be operated in such a manner as
to always comply in all respects with the requirements and regulations of
the Fire Department, County Health Department, Building Code, Plumbing
Code and Zoning Ordinance of the city.
§ 149-4. Noise and vibrations restricted.
No machinery used in the operation of a coin-operated laundry or coinoperated
dry-cleaning establishment shall be operated in such manner as
to cause unnecessary or unreasonable noise or vibration to the annoyance
of residents in the surrounding neighborhood or to the detriment of the
well-being of the neighborhood or to buildings and premises in the
neighborhood.
§ 149-5. Attendant required during certain hours.
No coin-operated laundry or coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment shall
be permitted to remain open from the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 am. unless
an attendant is on the premises during these hours of operation.
§ 149-6. Additional rules and regulations authorized.
The City Council is hereby authorized to adopt by resolution any additional
rules and regulations for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as
the provisions of this chapter, and the penalty for the violation thereof shall
be the same as the penalty for the violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 149-7. Discharge of water; effluents.
No water from the operation of the coin-operated laundry or coin-operated
dry-cleaning establishment shall be discharged into the storm sewer of the
city but shall only be discharged into the sanitary sewer of the city. Any and
§ 149-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 149-7
149:300
all effluent discharged from the coin-operated laundry or coin-operated drycleaning
establishment shall meet the standards and regulations of the city.
§ 149-8. Inspections.
The Codes Department and Fire Department of the city shall, at least once
a year, check each licensed premises to see that the business is being
conducted and operated within the provisions of this chapter. The city may
make more frequent inspections in its discretion.
§ 149-9. Suspension or revocation of license.
Licenses granted hereunder may be suspended or revoked at any time by
the City Council upon conviction of the holder thereof of a violation of any
provisions of this chapter.
§ 149-10. Violations and penalties.
§ 149-11. Severability.
If any section, clause, sentence or provision of this chapter shall be found
to be unconstitutional or invalid, the remaining sections, clauses, sentences
and provisions hereof shall not be affected thereby but shall be and remain
in full force and effect.
Chapter 151
LIFESAFETY STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82. Fire prevention — See Ch. 115.
§ 151-1. Standards adopted. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96; 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 1171-2001]
The City of Coatesville hereby adopts, for the purpose of establishing
minimum requirements that will provide a reasonable degree of safety from
fire in buildings and structures, the life safety code known as the "NFPA
Life Safety," current edition, as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, of which three copies have been and now are filed in the
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $600 and in default thereof shall be
sentenced to serve not more than 30 days in prison.
B. Each day's continuance of such violation after conviction shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
§ 149-7 LIFESAFETY STANDARDS § 151-1
151:301
office of the Codes Department and the same are hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
§ 151-2. Construal of provisions.
The Life Safety Code adopted hereby is not intended to replace or repeal
Chapter 82, Building Construction, or Chapter 115, Fire Prevention, of the
City of Coatesville but is intended to be a supplement thereto in all matters
contained in Part 2 thereof.
§ 151-3. Enforcement and penalties.
The administrative enforcement and penalties for violation of the Life Safety
Code adopted hereby shall be as provided in Chapter 82, Building
Construction, of the Code of the City of Coatesville.
§ 151-4. Conflicts with statutory provisions.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the
commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations,
or other ordinances of the City of Coatesville, as the case may be, shall
control where the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the
provisions of this chapter. The code shall control in all cases where the state
requirements, or the requirements of other ordinances of this City, are not
as strict as those contained in this chapter.
§ 151-5. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those
ordinances and/or codes in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and codes and
not as new enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any
act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
Chapter 153
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 66.
Curfew — See Ch. 92.
Drugs — See Ch. 97.
Graffiti — See Ch. 124.
Nuisances — See Ch. 164.
§ 151-1 COATESVILLE CODE § 153-1
153:302
§ 153-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the following meanings:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE, DRUG, DEVICE AND COSMETIC ACT — The
Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act, Act of April 14, 1972,
P.L. 223, No. 64, 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
CONVICTION — For the purposes of this chapter, a conviction includes a
plea of guilty, nolo contendere, adjudication pursuant to the Juvenile Act, 42
P.S. § 6301 et seq., and any other participation in a diversionary program
established under the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act
or Section 5902 of the Crimes Code.109
KNOWN DRUG USER, POSSESSOR OR SELLER — A person who:
KNOWN PROSTITUTE, PROMOTER or PROVIDER OF PROSTITUTION —
A person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been
convicted in any court within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of any act
violating Section 5902 of the Crimes Code, Act of December 6, 1972, P.L.
1482, No. 334, § 1, as amended from time to time,110 prohibiting prostitution
and its provision and solicitation.
§ 153-2. Drug-related loitering.
Has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted
in any court within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of possessing
any drugs as set forth in the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and
Cosmetic Act or substantially similar laws of any other state or the
United States;
A.
Displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage,
including, by way of example only, needle tracks; or
B.
Possesses or displays drug paraphernalia as defined in the Controlled
Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act.
C.
A. A person is guilty of drug-related loitering when he or she remains or
wanders about in a public place and repeatedly beckons to, or
repeatedly stops, or repeatedly attempts to stop or repeatedly attempts
to engage passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to
stop motor vehicles, or repeatedly interferes with the free passage of
other persons with the intent to use, possess or sell a controlled
substance in violation of the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and
Cosmetic Act.
B. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such intent is manifested are:
109. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
110. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 153-1 LOITERING § 153-2
153:303
§ 153-3. Prostitution-related loitering.
§ 153-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
summary conviction, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) nor
more than six hundred dollars ($600.) and/or be imprisoned for a term not
to exceed ninety (90) days for each offense.
(1) Such person is a known drug user, possessor or seller, as defined in
this chapter.
(2) Such person is at a location frequented by persons who use,
possess or sell drugs or is by public repute known to be an area of
unlawful drug use and trafficking.
(3) Such person behaves in such a manner as to rouse a reasonable
suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in
an unlawful drug-related activity, including, by way of example
only, such person as a lookout.
(4) Such person repeatedly passes to or receives from a passerby,
whether on foot, in a motor vehicle or on a bicycle, money or small
objects in a secretive fashion.
(5) Such person hides or disposes of such money or small objects upon
the appearance of a police officer.
A. A person is guilty of prostitution-related loitering if he or she remains or
wanders about in a public place and repeatedly beckons to, or
repeatedly stops, or repeatedly attempts to stop, or repeatedly attempts
to engage passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to
stop motor vehicles, or repeatedly interferes with the free passage of
other persons with the intent to commit prostitution, or promote
prostitution or patronize a prostitute in violation of Section 5902 of the
Crimes Code.111
B. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such intent is manifested are:
(1) Such person is a known prostitute, promoter or provider of
prostitution as defined in this chapter.
(2) Such person is at a location frequented by prostitutes, promoters or
providers of prostitution or is by public repute known to be an area
of unlawful prostitution-related activity.
(3) Such person behaves in such a manner as to rouse a reasonable
suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in
an unlawful prostitution-related activity.
111. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 153-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 153-4
153:304
Chapter 156
MECHANICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Licensing of building contractors — See Ch.
84.
Buildings and land with substantial
violations — See Ch. 87.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 102.
Fees — See Ch. 108.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 115.
Lifesafety standards — See Ch. 151.
Plumbing — See Ch. 176.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
§ 156-1. Standards adopted. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96; 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 1171-2001]
The City of Coatesville hereby adopts, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing the safe installation and maintenance of all
mechanical equipment, the mechanical codes known as the "International
Mechanical Code," 2000 Edition; "International Fuel Gas Code," 2000
Edition, and "International Energy Conservation Code," 2000 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., save and except such
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which three
copies have been and now are filed in the office of the Codes Department
and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein. From the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the City
of Coatesville.
§ 156-2. Amendments to standards.
The Mechanical Code hereby adopted is amended as follows:
A. Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows:
Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the
"Mechanical Code of the City of Coatesville," hereinafter referred to
as "this code."
B. Section 106.5, Periodic Inspections, is amended to read as follows:
[Amended 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 1171-2001]
Section 106.5. Periodic Inspections. The fees for all periodic
inspections shall be as established, from time to time, by the City
Council as set forth in Chapter 108 of the City Code.
C. Section 106.5.2, Fee Schedule, is amended to read as follows:
[Amended 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 1171-2001]
§ 153-4 MECHANICAL STANDARDS § 156-2
156:305
§ 156-3. Conflicts with statutory provisions.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the
commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations,
or other ordinances of the City of Coatesville, as the case may be, shall
control where the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the
provisions of this chapter. The code shall control in all cases where the state
requirements, or the requirements of other ordinances of this city, are not
as strict as those contained in this chapter.
§ 156-4. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and/or codes in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and codes and
not as new enactment. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any
act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any
offense under the authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
Section 106.5.2. Fee schedule. The fees for all mechanical work
shall be as provided, from time to time, by the City Council as set
forth in Chapter 108 of the City Code.
D. Section 108.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read as follows:
[Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96; 8-13-2001 by Ord. No.
1171-2001]
Section 108.4. Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provisions of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements hereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair
mechanical equipment or systems in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Code Enforcement Officer,
or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code
shall be, upon conviction, sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000
plus costs or to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
E. Section M-117.2, Unlawful Continuance, is amended to read as follows:
Section M-117.2. Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall
continue any work in or about the structure after having been served
with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be, upon
conviction, sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 156-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 156-4
156:306
Chapter 161
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 72.
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Firearms, weapons and fireworks — See Ch.
112.
Nuisances — See Ch. 164.
Parks — See Ch. 169.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 172.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 161-1. Purpose.
The Council, finding that excessive levels of sound are detrimental to the
physical, mental and social well-being of the residents, as well as to their
comfort, living conditions, general welfare and safety and being, therefore,
a public health and welfare hazard, hereby declares it to be necessary to
provide for the greater control and more effective regulation of excessive
sound and the sources of excessive sound within the city.
§ 161-2. Title.
This chapter shall also be known as the "Coatesville Noise Control
Ordinance."
§ 161-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. All terminology used in this chapter and not defined below shall be in
conformance with the applicable publications of the American National
Standards Institute [ANSI S1.1 1960 (R1971) and its revisions] or its
successor body.
B. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall
have the meanings herein given, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
AMBIENT NOISE — The all-encompassing noise associated with a
given environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many
sources near and far.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound-pressure level in decibels
as measured on a sound-level meter using the A-weighting network.
The level so read is designated dB(A).
CONSTRUCTION OPERATION — The erection, repair, renovation,
demolition or removal of any building or structure and the excavation,
filling, grading and regulation of lots in connection therewith.
DECIBEL (dB) — A unit for measuring the sound-pressure level, equal
to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the
§ 156-4 NOISE § 161-3
161:307
pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is
twenty (20) micropascals [twenty (20) micronewtons per square meter].
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving
actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed for the purpose of
preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage
threatened or caused by an emergency.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Sound of short duration, usually less than one
(1) second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of
"impulsive sound" include explosions, drop-forge impacts and the
discharge of firearms.
MUFFLER or SOUND-DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — A device designed or
used for decreasing or abating the level of sound escaping from an
engine or machinery system.
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes
or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on
humans.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which:
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality
of a state or any political subdivision of a state. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, "person" includes the
individual members, partners, officers and managers or any of them of
partnerships and associations and, as for corporations, the officers and
managers thereof or any of them.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLE — Any self-propelled airborne,
waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed
to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane, boat,
car or rocket.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon which are
owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
PURE TONE — Any sound which can be heard as a single pitch or a
set of single pitches. For the purpose of this chapter, a "pure tone"
shall exist if the one-third-octave band sound pressure level in the band
(1) Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals.
(2) Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities.
(3) Endangers or injures personal or real property.
Is in excess of the sound levels by zoning districts established in
§ 161-5.
(4)
§ 161-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 161-3
161:308
§ 161-4. Prohibitions; prima facie violations.
with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound-pressure
levels of the two (2) contiguous octave bands by five (5) dB for center
frequencies of five hundred (500) hertz and above and by eight (8)
dB for center frequencies between one hundred sixty (160) and four
hundred (400) hertz and by fifteen (15) dB for center frequencies less
than or equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) hertz.
PROPERTY LINE (BOUNDARY) — An imaginary line drawn through
the points of contact of adjoining lands, apartments, condominiums,
townhouses and duplexes owned, rented or leased by different persons,
a demarcation or a line of separation of properties, and also, for any
two (2) or more buildings sharing common grounds, the line drawn
midway between any two (2) such buildings. All areas devoted to public
rights-of-way shall be deemed to be across the "property line." For the
purpose of this definition, the "property line" includes all points on a
plane formed by projecting the "property line" in a manner deemed
appropriate by the enforcing police officer.
REAL PROPERTY — All land, whether publicly or privately owned,
whether improved or not improved, with or without structures,
exclusive of any areas devoted to public rights-of-way.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces
that causes compression and rarefraction of that medium, or the
superposition of such propagated oscillation which evokes an auditory
sensation. The description of "sound" may include any characteristics
of such "sound" including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND LEVEL — The weighted sound-pressure level obtained by the
use of a sound-level meter and frequency-weighting network, such as
A, B or C, as specified in the American National Standards Institute
Specifications for Sound-Level Meters (ANSI s1.4-1971, or the latest
revision thereof). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated,
the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument which includes a microphone,
amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter
and any applicable weighting network used to measure sound-pressure
levels, which meets or exceeds the requirement for a Type I or Type
II sound-level meter as specified in ANSI Specification sl.4-1971. The
manufacturer's published indication of compliance with such
specifications shall be prima facie evidence of such compliance.
ZONING DISTRICTS — The land use districts established by Chapter
224, Zoning, and all subsequent amendments.
A. Noise disturbance prohibited. No person shall make, continue or cause
to be made or continued any noise disturbance, nor shall any person
suffer, allow or permit any noise disturbance to be made or continued
§ 161-3 NOISE § 161-4
161:309
from or at any property, whether real or personal, that is subject to such
person's right to control.
B. Specific prohibitions. The following acts and the causing thereof are
declared to be noise disturbances and therefore in violation of this
chapter:
(1) Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices.
Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any
radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound
amplifier, automobile radio, automobile stereo, high-fidelity
equipment or similar device which produces, reproduces or
amplifies sound:
(a) At any time in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance
across a property line (boundary), or between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. so as to be plainly audible across a property
line (boundary).
(b) In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a
property line (boundary) or at fifty (50) feet from such device,
whichever is less, when the device is operated in or on a motor
vehicle or hand carried, on a public right-of-way or public
space.
(c) In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any
person other than the operator of the device, when operated by
any passenger or a common carrier.
(2) Yelling and shouting, etc. Engaging in loud or raucous yelling,
shouting, hooting, whistling or singing:
(a) On the public streets between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m.; or
(b) At any time or place in such a manner as to create a noise
disturbance.
(3) Construction.
(a) Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or
equipment used in construction operations, drilling or
demolition work:
[1] Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following
day on weekdays and Saturdays or at any time on Sundays
or legal holidays, such that the sound therefrom creates a
noise disturbance across a residential real property line
(boundary), except for emergency work; or
[2] At any other time such that the sound level at or across a
real property line (boundary) exceeds eighty-five (85)
dB(A) for a period of one (1) hour.
§ 161-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 161-4
161:310
(b) This section shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools
subject to Subsection B(4) hereof.
(4) Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden
tool, snowblower or similar device used outdoors in residential
areas (see § 161-5A, Table I) between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. so as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential
property line (boundary).
(5) Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or
other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance across a residential property line (boundary). This
section shall not apply to municipal or utility services in or about
the public right-of-way.
(6) Animals and birds. Owning, possessing, harboring or controlling
any animal or bird which howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes
other sounds continuously and/or incessantly for a period of ten
(10) minutes or makes such noise intermittently for one-half (1/2)
hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of the
day or night, regardless of whether the animal or bird is situated in
or upon private property; provided, however, that the time the
animal or bird is making such noise, no person is trespassing or
threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the
animal or bird is situated or for any other legitimate cause which
teased or provoked the animal or bird.
(7) Powered model vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across
a residential property line (boundary) between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(8) Street sales. Offering for sale or selling by shouting or outcry or by
any other amplified or unamplified sound within any residential or
commercial area (see § 161-5A, Table I) except between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. and at no time in such a manner as to
violate § 161-5A.
(9) Tampering.
(a) The removal or rendering inoperative by any person, other
than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement, of
any muffler or sound dissipative device or element of design or
noise label of any product.
(b) The intentional moving or rendering inaccurate or inoperative
of any sound-monitoring instrument or device positioned by or
for the Police Department, provided that such device or the
§ 161-4 NOISE § 161-4
161:311
§ 161-5. Sound level by zoning districts.
immediate area is clearly labeled in accordance with noise
control regulations to warn of the potential illegality.112
(c) The use of a product which has had a muffler or sounddissipative
device or element of design or noise label removed
or rendered inoperative with knowledge that such action has
occurred.
(10) Vehicle, motorboat or aircraft repairs, and testing. Repairing,
rebuilding or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat or
aircraft in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential real property line (boundary).
C. Motor vehicle prohibitions.
(1) Motor vehicle and motorcycles on public rights-of way. No person
shall operate or cause to be operated a public or private motor
vehicle or motorcycle or any equipment attached to such a vehicle
on a public right-of-way at any time in such a manner that the
sound level emitted by the motor vehicle or motorcycle or any
equipment attached to such a vehicle exceeds the level set forth in
Title 67, Chapter 450, of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Regulations (Established Sound Levels).
(2) Standing motor vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached
to such a vehicle for a period longer than fifteen (15) minutes in any
hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic
congestion, anywhere within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any
residence, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across
a residential property line (boundary).
(3) Unnecessary horn blowing. No person shall at any time sound the
horn or other warning device of a vehicle except when absolutely
necessary as a warning while actually driving such vehicle.
(4) Sound trucks. No person shall operate sound-amplifying equipment
mounted on or attached to any motor vehicle at any time in such
manner as to exceed the maximum permissible motor vehicle noise
emissions as set forth in Subsection C(1) of this section.
D. Prima facie violation. The noise from any of the aforesaid prohibited
acts that disturbs two (2) or more residents who are in general
agreement as to the times and durations of the noise and who reside in
separate residences, including apartments and condominiums, located
across a property line (boundary) from the property on which the
source of the noise is generated shall be prima facie evidence of a noise
disturbance.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 161-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 161-5
161:312
A. Maximum permissible sound levels by zoning districts. No person shall
operate or cause to be operated any source of sound in such a manner
as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in the
zoning designations category in Table I hereof when measured at or
across the property line (boundary) from the noise source. Any sound
source that produces sound in excess of those levels shall constitute a
noise disturbance.
Table I
Sound Levels by Zoning Districts
Zoning District of
the Property on
Which the Noise
Source Is Located
Sound-Level Limit
8:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
[dB(A)]
9:00 p.m. to 8:00
a.m.
[dB(A)]
Residential (RN-1,
RN-2, RN-3, RN-4 and
RN-5)
57 52
Commercial (C-1, C-2
and C-3)
67 62
Industrial (I-1 and I-2) 77 77
B. When exceeded. The sound-level limits set forth in Subsection A, Table
I, hereof shall be exceeded when any one (1) or more, of the following
occur:
(1) The sound at any one (1) point in time exceeds any of the
established zone limits in Subsection A, Table I, hereof by a
measured sound level of fifteen (15) dB(A).
(2) The sound exceeds any of the established zone limits in Subsection
A, Table I, hereof by a measured sound level of ten (10) dB(A) for a
cumulative total of one (1) minute or more out of any ten-minute
period.
(3) The sound exceeds, except in the Industrial District, any of the
established zone limits in Subsection A, Table I, hereof by a
measured sound level of three (3) dB(A) continually for a period of
five (5) minutes or a total of five (5) minutes out of any ten-minute
period.
C. Ambient sound. In the event that the background ambient sound levels
in an area of suspected noise disturbance exceeds the levels set forth in
Subsection A, Table I, hereof, the sound level of the intrusive sound
source shall be measured with the ambient background sound level
being substituted as the Table I sound-level limit.
D. Where measured. For the purposes of this section, sound shall be
measured at or beyond the property line (boundary) of the property on
which the noise source is located.
§ 161-5 NOISE § 161-5
161:313
§ 161-6. Exemptions.
The following sounds are exempted from the provisions of this chapter:
E. Pure tone and impulsive sound. For any source of sound which emits a
pure tone or impulsive sound, the limits set forth in Subsection A, Table
I, hereof shall be reduced by five (5) dB(A).
F. Adjustment for nonconforming uses. Any noise which occurs on
property which, according to Chapter 224, Zoning, is being used in a
legally nonconforming manner and which noise relates to such use shall
be judged as if the property bore a zoning designation under which the
use would be conforming.
G. Measuring instruments. All sound measurements shall be made on a
sound-level meter calibrated in the manner required by the
manufacturer's specifications.
H. Exemptions from sound-level limits. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to:
(1) Activities covered by § 161-4B(3) and (4) or any emergency
signaling device used because of an emergency.
(2) Interstate railway locomotives and cars.
(3) Motor vehicles.
A. Amplified announcements. Electronically amplified announcements at
athletic events.
B. Blasting. Blasting under permit, which blasting may occur only between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, unless
specifically authorized by such permit.
C. Concerts, etc. Band concerts, block parties, church carnivals or other
performances or similar activities publicly or privately sponsored and
presented in any public or private space outdoors, provided that:
(1) Such activities do not produce sound fifteen (15) dB(A) in excess of
the sound levels set forth in § 161-5A, Table I; and
(2) Such activities do not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m.
D. Emergency work. Sounds caused by the performance of emergency
work or by the ordinary and accepted use of emergency apparatus and
equipment.
E. Municipal and utility services. Sounds resulting from the repair or
replacement of any municipal or utility installation in or about the
public right-of-way.
§ 161-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 161-6
161:314
§ 161-7. Variances; Noise Control Board.
F. School and public activities. Sounds not electronically amplified,
created by organized school-related programs, activities, athletic and
entertainment events or other public programs, activities or events,
other than motor vehicle racing events.
G. Warning devices. Sounds made by warning devices operating
continuously for three (3) minutes or less, except that, in the event of an
actual emergency, the time limitation shall not apply.
A. Variances.
(1) Authority. The Noise Control Board shall have the authority to
grant variances, consistent with the provisions of this section, after
public hearing, upon application of any person who owns, controls
or operates any sound source which does not comply with the
provisions or standards of this chapter.
(2) Application. The application shall state the standard, provisions or
section from which the variance is being sought and the period of
time and reasons for which the variance is sought. It shall contain
information which demonstrates that bringing the sources of sound
or activity for which the variance is sought into compliance with
this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the
applicant, and it shall contain any other supporting information
which may reasonably be required.
(3) Public notification. Public notice of an application and the date,
time and place of the public hearing to be held thereon for a
variance shall be given by publishing notice thereof in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city at least once, not less than three
(3) days prior to the scheduled public hearing and by, if practicable,
conspicuously posting the premises that is the source of the sound
for which the variance is sought.
(4) Hearing. The Board shall hold a public hearing to decide variance
applications presented to it. Any person who claims to be affected
by allowance of the variance may become a party to the hearing.
(5) Review standards. In determining whether to grant or deny the
application, the Board shall balance the hardship to the applicant
versus the adverse impact to the public health, safety and welfare
and shall consider at a minimum the following conditions:
(a) The physical characteristics of the emitted sound.
(b) The times and duration of the emitted sound.
(c) The geography, zone and population density of the affected
area.
(d) Whether the public health and safety is endangered.
§ 161-6 NOISE § 161-7
161:315
§ 161-8. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the City of Coatesville Police Department.
(e) Whether the sound source predates the receiver(s).
(f) Whether compliance with the standard(s) from which the
variance is sought would produce hardship without equal or
greater benefit to the public.
(6) Decision. The Board shall render a written decision in granting or
denying the application for variance and, if denied, shall state the
reasons therefor. The Board's decision shall be made available to
the applicant and any other person who requests it in writing. In
granting a variance the Board may attach reasonable conditions,
including but not limited to placing a time limit on the permitted
activity and/or establishing a time schedule within which the
source of sound or activity for which the variance was sought must
be brought into compliance with this chapter. Where the grant of
variance is conditioned, the variance shall not become effective
until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance
with any condition of the variance shall terminate it and subject the
person holding it to those provisions of this chapter regulating the
source of sound or activity for which the variance was granted.
Variances may be granted for a period of up to one (1) year. The
person obtaining the variance may reapply for additional variance
periods under terms set forth by the applicant and the Board.
(7) Appeals. Appeal from an adverse decision of the Board shall be
made to the Court of Common Pleas of Chester County.
B. Special variances. The Chief of Police or his or her designee may, upon
application and guided by the standards for review set forth in
Subsection A(5) hereof, grant special variances for infrequent events or
activities which do not exceed twenty-four (24) hours in duration. Such
special variances are not renewable except by action of the Board
pursuant to Subsection A hereof. The Board shall hear and decide all
appeals from the denial of a special variance, the practice and
procedure thereon to be in accordance with Subsection A hereof.
C. Noise Control Board. The Noise Control Board, for the purposes of this
chapter, shall be the Zoning Hearing Board, which Board shall have full
authority to carry out the duties of the Noise Control Board, as set forth
in this chapter. All applications to the Board shall be filed through the
Zoning Officer and shall be accompanied by an application fee as
provided in Chapter 108, Fees. The hearing shall be held not more than
thirty (30) days following the filing of the application and the decision
thereon rendered within forty-five (45) days of the last hearing in the
case before the Board.113
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 161-7 COATESVILLE CODE § 161-9
161:316
§ 161-9. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 164
NUISANCES
§ 164-1. Nuisances enumerated.
The Council of the City of Coatesville hereby declares that the following
constitute public nuisances to be abated in accordance with the provisions
herein and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
§ 164-2. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner or occupier of any lot,
tract or parcel of land in the City of Coatesville to cause or permit any
nuisance, as defined in this chapter, to be created or remain upon such
premises, and it shall be the duty of such owner or occupant to abate and
remove any such nuisance and/or cease any activity or pursuit creating such
nuisance.
§ 164-3. Enforcement; notice.
Whenever the Chief of Police and the City Manager of the City of Coatesville
shall have determined that a nuisance exists on any city lot, tract or parcel
of land or that a nuisance has been created by any activity or pursuit on
any such lot, tract or parcel of land, a written notice shall be served upon
A. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction in summary proceedings, pay a fine of not more than
six hundred dollars ($600.) or a period of imprisonment not exceeding
ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each offense,
to be collected as other fines and costs are by law collectible. Each day
during which a continuing violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.114
B. This chapter and the foregoing penalties shall not be construed to limit
or deny the right of the city or any person to such equitable or other
remedies as may otherwise be available with or without process of law.
A. All articles, acts or things whatsoever caused, kept, maintained or
permitted by any person to the injury, inconvenience or annoyance of
the public; and
B. All pursuits followed or engaged in or acts done by any person to the
injury, annoyance or inconvenience of the public, including the
conducting of an otherwise lawful business in a manner which produces
annoyance and injury to the public.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 161-9 NUISANCES § 164-3
164:317
the owner or occupant or their agent having control thereof to abate such
nuisance. This notice shall:
§ 164-4. Service of notice.
Any notice required to be given under the provisions of this chapter may be
delivered by any officer or agent of the City of Coatesville or by registered
mail addressed to the owner or occupier of the premises upon which the
nuisance exists or is created. The date of the receipt of notice, if personally
served, or the date indicated on the return receipt, if sent by registered
mail, shall be deemed the time of notice.
§ 164-5. Abatement by city.
In the event that such nuisance has not been abated within the period
specified, then the Chief of Police and/or City Manager of the City of
Coatesville may cause such nuisance to be abated forthwith by any
appropriate means or may institute proceedings in a court of equity.
§ 164-6. Emergencies.
Whenever an emergency is determined by the Chief of Police and the City
Manager of the City of Coatesville to exist, which requires immediate action
to protect the public health, safety or welfare, the Chief of Police or City
Manager may issue an immediate order directing the owner, occupant or
other person in charge of the city lot, tract or parcel of land on which such
nuisance exists or has been created to take such action as is necessary to
correct or abate the emergency.
§ 164-7. Violations and penalties.115
In addition to the authority given city officials hereinbefore, any refusal
on the part of any person or persons duly served with notice shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter, and upon conviction of such violation in
summary proceedings, such person or persons may be fined not more than
six hundred dollars ($600.) or imprisoned for a period not exceeding ninety
(90) days, or both. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
A. Be in writing.
B. Set forth the nature of such nuisance and that same constitutes a
nuisance existing upon or created upon such property.
C. Describe the premises where the nuisance is alleged to exist or to have
been committed or created.
D. Specify a period of ten (10) days for the abatement of said nuisance.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 164-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 164-8
164:318
§ 164-8. Effect on other provisions or proceedings.
The provisions of this chapter shall not repeal, amend or modify other
provisions of the Code of the City of Coatesville relating to the same or
similar subject matter.
Chapter 169
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and Recreation Commission — See Ch.
33.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 66.
Animals — See Ch. 72.
Bicycles — See Ch. 76.
Trees — See Ch. 79.
Curfew — See Ch. 92.
Drugs — See Ch. 97.
Fees — See Ch. 108.
Firearms, weapons and fireworks — See Ch.
112.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 115.
Loitering — See Ch. 153.
Noise — See Ch. 161.
Nuisances — See Ch. 164.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 172.
Solid waste — See Ch. 190.
Special events — See Ch. 192.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 218.
§ 169-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Coatesville Ordinance
Regulating Conduct in Public Parks."
§ 169-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Coatesville.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Municipal Operations.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other area in the City owned or used by the City and devoted to
active or passive recreation.
§ 164-8 NUISANCES § 169-2
164:319
§ 169-3. Park property.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
VEHICLE — Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered or selfpropelled.
The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or
description. Exceptions are made for baby carriages and "vehicles" in
the service of the City parks.
A. Buildings and other property.
(1) Disfiguration and removal. No person in a park shall willfully mark,
deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any
buildings; bridges; tables; benches; fireplaces; railings; pavement
or paving materials; waterlines or other public utilities or parts or
appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent; monuments, stakes, posts or other
boundary markers; or other structures or equipment, facilities or
park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.
(2) Restrooms and washrooms. No person in a park shall fail to
cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and
sanitary condition. No person over the age of six years shall use the
restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
(3) Removal of natural resources. No person in a park shall dig or
remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil,
rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down timber or other wood or
materials or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or
other means or agency.
(4) Erection of structures. No person in a park shall construct or erect
any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or
temporary in character, or run or string any public service utility
into, upon or across such lands, except on special written permit
issued hereunder.
B. Trees, shrubbery and lawns.
(1) Injury and removal. No person in a park shall damage, cut, carve,
transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the
flowers or seeds of any tree or plant, nor shall any person attach
any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person
shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas or, in any other
way, injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(2) Climbing trees, etc. No person in a park shall climb any tree or
walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings,
fences or gun carriages or upon any other property not designated
or customarily used for such purposes.
§ 169-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 169-3
164:320
§ 169-4. Sanitation.
§ 169-5. Traffic.
(3) Hitching of animals. No person in a park shall tie or hitch an animal
to any tree or plant.
C. Wild animals, birds, etc.
(1) Hunting. No person in a park shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten,
kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal,
reptile or bird; nor shall he or she remove or have in his or her
possession the young of any wild animal or the eggs or nest or the
young of any reptile or bird; nor shall he or she collect, remove,
have in his or her possession, give away, sell or offer to sell or buy
or offer to buy or accept as a gift any specimen alive or dead of any
of the group of tree snails. Exception to the foregoing is made in
that snakes known to be deadly poisonous, such as rattlesnakes,
moccasins, coral snakes or other deadly reptiles, may be killed on
sight.
(2) Feeding. No person in a park shall give or offer or attempt to give to
any animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious
substances.
A. Pollution of waters. No person in a park shall throw, discharge or
otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain,
pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any
park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such
waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may
result in the pollution of said waters.
B. Refuse and trash. No person in a park shall have brought in or shall
dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes,
cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other trash. No such
refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any
park, nor shall it be left anywhere on the grounds thereof but shall be
placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided. Where
receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence
and properly disposed of elsewhere.
A. State motor vehicle laws apply. No person in a park shall fail to comply
with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws, in
regard to equipment and operation of vehicles, together with such
regulations as are contained in this chapter and other ordinances.
B. Enforcement of traffic regulations. No person in a park shall fail to obey
all traffic officers and park employees, such persons being hereby
authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever
needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads immediately
§ 169-3 NUISANCES § 169-5
164:321
adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these regulations
and such supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently by
the Director.
C. Obey traffic signs. No person in a park shall fail to observe carefully all
traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking
and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and
property.
D. Operation confined to roads. No person in a park shall drive any vehicle
on any area except the paved park roads or parking areas or such other
areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary
parking areas by the Director.
E. Parking. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
(1) Designated areas. No person in a park shall park a vehicle in other
than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall
be in accordance with the posted directions thereat and with the
instructions of any attendant who may be present.
(2) Night parking. No person in a park shall leave a vehicle standing or
parked at night except in legally established parking areas.
(3) Emergency procedure. No person in a park shall fail to immediately
notify an attendant of an emergency in the nature of a breakdown
requiring the assistance of a tow truck, mechanic or other person.
F. Bicycles.
(1) Confined to roads. No person in a park shall ride a bicycle on other
than a paved vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. A
bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over
any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for
pedestrian use.
(2) Operation. No person in a park shall ride a bicycle other than on
the right-hand side of the road paving as close as conditions permit,
and bicycles shall be kept in single file when two or more are
operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at all times operate their
machines with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all
turns, pass to the right of any vehicle they are overtaking and pass
to the right of any vehicles they may be meeting.
(3) Rider prohibited. No person in a park shall ride any other person on
a bicycle.
(4) Designated racks. No person in a park shall leave a bicycle in a
place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is a
space available.
§ 169-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 169-5
164:322
§ 169-6. Recreational activities.
(5) Immobile. No person in a park shall leave a bicycle lying on the
ground or pavement or set against trees or in any place or position
where other persons may trip over or be injured by it.
(6) Night operation. No person in a park shall ride a bicycle on any
road between 30 minutes after sunset and before 30 minutes
before sunrise without the lights as required by the Vehicle Code.
[Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
A. Bathing and swimming.
(1) Designated areas. No person in a park shall swim, bathe or wade in
any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such
waters and at such places as are provided therefor and in
compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may be
hereafter adopted; nor shall any person frequent any waters or
places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or
bathing or congregate thereat when such activity is prohibited by
the Director upon a finding that such use of the water would be
dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
(2) Certain hours. No person in a park shall frequent any waters or
places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing or
congregate thereat except between such hours of the day as shall
be designated by the Director for such purposes for each individual
area.
(3) Structure on beach. No person in a park shall erect, maintain, use
or occupy on or in any beach or bathing area any tent, shelter or
structure of any kind unless there shall be an unobstructed view
into said tent, shelter or structure from at least two sides; nor shall
any guy wire, rope or extension or exterior brace or support be
connected or fastened from any such structure to any other
structure, stake, rock or other object outside thereof.
(4) Costume. No person in a park shall allow himself or herself to be so
covered with a bathing suit as to indecently expose his or her
person. No person shall appear in a bathing costume at any place in
the parks except within the limits of designated bathing places or
areas, and all bathing costumes shall conform to commonly
accepted standards. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
(5) Bathhouses. No person in a park shall dress or undress on any
beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in such bathing
houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose.
B. Boating, designated areas. No person in a park shall bring into or
operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motor-powered or
not, upon any waters.
§ 169-5 NUISANCES § 169-6
164:323
C. Hunting and firearms. No person in a park shall hunt, trap or pursue
wildlife at any time. No person shall use, carry or possess firearms of
any description or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any
other forms of weapon potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to
human safety or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank
cartridges, or any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas
from beyond park boundaries is forbidden.
D. Picnic areas and use.
(1) Regulated. No person in a park shall picnic or lunch in a place other
than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the
authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to
prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort
and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions
given to achieve this end.
(2) Availability. No person in a park shall violate the regulation that use
of the individual fireplaces, together with tables and benches,
follows generally the rule of first come, first served.
(3) Nonexclusive use; applications; damages. [Amended 11-13-2000
by Ord. No. 1145-2000]
(a) No person in the park shall be permitted to use any portion of
the picnic area for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area
and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are
crowded.
(b) Any organization wanting to utilize any specific area of our
City-owned parks must fill out an application from the City's
Parks and Recreation Coordinator, which can be done at City
Hall. The application must be filled out completely and
submitted to the City for approval. Once approved, this event
will be logged into the Parks and Recreation calendar book.
The City will levy a maintenance fee which will be found in
Chapter 108. It is the responsibility of the applicant to make
sure that the picnic area is cleaned after the event has taken
place, with all trash being placed in bags for the Public Works
to pick up on their next scheduled work day.
(c) Any organization wanting to use the recreation room at Ash
Park must follow the necessary application process and pay the
maintenance fee found in Chapter 108, along with a security
deposit.
(d) Any person or organization that causes any unnecessary
damage to any facility will be subject to all repair costs, along
with criminal prosecution if necessary.
§ 169-6 COATESVILLE CODE § 169-6
164:324
§ 169-7. Behavior.
(4) Duty of picnicker. No person in a park shall leave a picnic area
before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash, in
the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other
refuse, is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no
such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be
carried away from the park area by the picnicker, to be properly
disposed of elsewhere.
E. Camping. No person shall set up tents, shacks or any other temporary
shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave
in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to
be used or that could be used for such purpose, such as house trailer,
camp trailer, camp wagon or the like.
F. Games. No person in a park shall take part in or abet the playing of any
games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects, such as balls,
stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes, except in areas set apart for
such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively
dangerous games, such as football, baseball and quoits, is prohibited,
except on the fields and courts or areas provided therefor. Rollerskating
shall be confined to those areas specifically designated for such
pastime.
G. Horseback riding. No person in a park shall ride a horse except on
designated bridle trails.
A. Intoxicating beverages.
(1) Prohibition. No person in a park shall have brought alcoholic
beverages, nor shall any person drink alcoholic beverages at any
time in the park.
(2) Drunkenness. No person in a park shall have entered or be under
the influence of intoxicating liquor.
B. Fireworks and explosives. No person in a park shall have brought or
have in his possession or set off or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets or other
fireworks or explosives of flammable material or discharge them or
throw them into any such area from land or highway adjacent thereto.
This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article
that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be
dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints.
C. Domestic animals. No person in a park shall have been responsible for
the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into areas other than
automobile parking concourses and walks immediately adjacent thereto
and in such other areas as may be clearly marked by signs bearing the
words "Domestic Animals Permitted in This Area." Nothing herein shall
be construed as permitting the running of dogs at large. All dogs in
§ 169-6 NUISANCES § 169-7
164:325
those areas where such animals are permitted shall be restrained at all
times on adequate leashes not greater than 15 feet in length.
D. Reservation of facilities. No person in a park shall occupy any seat or
bench or enter into or loiter or remain in any pavilion or other park
structure or section thereof which may be reserved and designated by
the Council for the use of the opposite sex. Exception is made for
children under six years of age.
E. Dress. No person in a park shall appear at any place in other than
proper clothing. With the exception of the restricted bathing areas,
"properly clothed" shall be construed to prohibit the wearing of trunks
or clothing that does not cover the upper portion of the body.
F. Alms. No person in a park shall solicit alms or contributions for any
purpose, whether public or private.
G. Fires. No person in a park shall build or attempt to build a fire except in
such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Director. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted
matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other
flammable material within any park area or on any highway, road or
street abutting or contiguous thereto.
H. Closed areas. No person in a park shall enter an area posted as "Closed
to the Public," nor shall any person use or abet the use of any area in
violation of posted notices.
I. Games of chance. No person in a park shall participate in or abet any
game of chance.
J. Going onto ice. No person in a park shall go onto the ice on any of the
waters, except such areas as are designated as skating fields, and
provided that a safety signal is displayed.
K. Loitering and boisterousness. No person in a park shall sleep or
protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas or engage in
loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language
or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a breach of
the public peace.
L. Exhibit permits. No person in a park shall fail to produce and exhibit
any permit, from the Director, he claims to have upon request of any
authorized person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose
of enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule.
M. Interference with permittees. No person in a park shall disturb or
interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or
participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
N. All smoking and tobacco products are banned and strictly prohibited in
public parks within the City limits and under the City's jurisdiction; they
shall be 100% smoke free. Smoking and tobacco products are described
§ 169-7 COATESVILLE CODE § 169-7
164:326
§ 169-8. Merchandising, advertising and signs.
as: all cigars, pipes, cigarettes and chewing tobacco are strictly
prohibited. Cigarettes shall be defined to include vapor cigarettes, ecigarettes,
and all alternatives. A person who violates this subsection
commits a summary criminal offense and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of no more than $250. [Added 3-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 1448-2015]
A. Vending and peddling. No person in a park shall expose or offer for sale
any article or thing, nor shall he station or place any stand, cart or
vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such article or
thing. Exception is here made as to any regularly licensed
concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the
Director.
B. Advertising. No person in a park shall announce, advertise or call the
public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire.
C. Signs. No person in a park shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any
sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any
person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public
lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park.
D. The City Council may allow, by specific authorization, a nonprofit
organized sports league to install advertising signs on the fencing that
surrounds the playing field designated for its particular use. Any such
authorization by the City Council to allow advertising signs in Cityowned
parks would be for the sole purpose of raising funds that are for
the direct support of the league's activities. Coordination of the
installation of advertising signs, once authorization has been granted
by the City Council to a league requesting approval, would be the direct
responsibility of the City Manager or his or her designee. The following
conditions apply to any authorization granted. [Added 7-8-1996 by
Ord. No. 1019-96]
(1) No sign installed shall exceed 16 square feet in size. Further, signs
are to be installed on the inside of the fencing surrounding the
playing field with the advertising on the sign facing the inside of
the playing field.
(2) The City Manager or his or her designee will determine the
compliance of any sign to be installed prior to its installation.
(3) Liability and maintenance for any sign(s) installed will be the sole
responsibility of the league to whom authorization has been
granted.
(4) At the direction of the City Manager or his or her designee to
remove any installed sign, the sign must be removed by the
responsible league within 10 calendar days of the directive to
remove the same.
§ 169-7 NUISANCES § 169-8
164:327
§ 169-9. Park operating policies.
(5) Any sign not removed within 10 days of a directive to do so will be
removed by the City, and a penalty of $10 will be assessed against
the responsible league.
(6) No political advertising or any advertising of any tobacco product
or alcoholic beverage is allowed on any sign installed under the
authorization granted by the City Council.
A. Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be
open to the public every day of the year during designated hours. The
opening and closing hours for each individual park shall he posted
therein for public information.
B. Closed areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to
the public by the Director at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, daily or otherwise, and
either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Director shall find
reasonably necessary.
C. Lost and found articles. The finding of lost articles by park attendants
shall be reported to the Director, who shall make every reasonable
effort to locate the owners. The Director shall make every reasonable
effort to find articles reported as lost.
D. Permit. A permit shall be obtained from the appropriate Director before
participating in certain park activities.
(1) Application. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall
file an application with the appropriate Director. The application
shall state:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(c) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(d) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
(e) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(f) Any other information which the Director shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
be issued hereunder.
(2) Standards for issuance. The Director shall issue a permit
hereunder when he or she finds that:
(a) The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of
the park.
§ 169-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 169-9
164:328
§ 169-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Any person convicted of violating the chapter shall, upon summary
conviction, be subject to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and the costs for
each offense or to imprisonment in the Chester County Jail for a period not
exceeding 90 days, or both, such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 172
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
(b) The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare,
safety and recreation.
(c) The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(d) The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the City.
(e) The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour required in the application.
(3) Appeal. Within 14 days after receipt of an application, the City
Manager shall apprise an applicant in writing of his or her reasons
for refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right
to appeal in writing within 14 days to the City Council, which shall
consider the application under the standards set forth in
Subsection D(2) hereof and sustain or overrule the City Manager's
decision within 21 days. The decision of the City Council shall be
final.
(4) Effect of permit. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and
regulations and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same
were inserted in said permits.
(5) Liability of permittee. The person or persons to whom a permit is
issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by
any person whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or
persons to whom such permit shall have been issued.
(6) Revocation. The City Manager shall have the authority to revoke a
permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or upon
good cause shown.
§ 169-9 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 169-10
172:329

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 172-1. Purpose.
It is the desire of the City Council of Coatesville to regulate the peddling,
soliciting and distribution of certain materials and related activities within
the City of Coatesville. The City further desires that persons engaged in
such activities shall be required to obtain a license in order that the identity
of those persons may be established; so that general regulations may be
more effectively enforced for the protection and maintenance of the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; and to prevent dishonest
business practices and the dishonest solicitation of funds in the city.
§ 172-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who distributes or causes to be distributed
on any street or public place within the city any handbill, advertisement,
circular, card, pamphlet or printed material of any kind other than a
regularly delivered newspaper, magazine or periodical.
LEGAL HOLIDAY — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
MERCHANDISE — All goods; wares; food; meat; fish; ice cream; fruit;
vegetables; magazines; periodicals; printed materials; farm products;
services and order or contracts for services, home improvements or
alterations; and anything that may be sold or distributed by peddlers,
solicitors or distributors, as defined herein.
PEDDLER — Any person who goes from house to house, from place of place
or from street to street, traveling by foot, automotive vehicle or any other
type of conveyance, carrying or transporting merchandise for the purpose
of selling and delivering the merchandise to customers.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes from house to house, from place of
place or from street to street, traveling by foot, automotive vehicle or any
other type of conveyance, soliciting, taking or attempting to take orders for
the sale of merchandise or services of any kind for future performance or
delivery, whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such sales or
orders, or who engages in such activities from a stationary location on any
street or in any other public place. The term "solicitor" shall also include
"canvasser" or any person who goes from door to door as described above
for the purpose of soliciting contributions or who collects funds from a
stationary location on any street or other public place.
§ 172-3. Application for license.
§ 172-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 172-3
172:331
§ 172-4. License fee and deposit.
A. It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or distributor to sell, offer
for sale or distribute any merchandise, printed material or services or
to solicit contributions, gifts, pledges of money or any other thing of
value or to conduct surveys or distribute samples by visitation to
private residences or on public streets or sidewalks in the city without
first submitting an application for a license to the Codes Department,
on a form to be furnished by the city containing the following
information:
(1) The full name of the applicant.
(2) The applicant's date of birth.
(3) The permanent home address and local address of the applicant.
(4) The name and address of his employer or principal.
(5) The nature of the business activity in which the applicant wishes to
engage and a description of the merchandise to be sold or the
service to be performed.
(6) The length of time the applicant wishes to engage in such activity.
(7) If a vehicle is to be used, a description of such vehicle, the
operator's license number and vehicle license number.
(8) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime, felony, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal
ordinance, the nature of the offense and the penalty assessed
therefor.
B. No application for a license under this chapter shall be granted for any
activity requiring a permit or other approval of the Chester County
Health Department unless the permit or other approval has been issued
to the applicant by the Health Department prior to the submission of an
application to the city. The city shall require proof of all required Health
Department permits and approvals at the time of the receipt of any
application under this chapter.
C. Where a person makes application for himself and one or more helpers,
all applicable information specified above shall be given for each helper,
and an individual license shall be required for each helper.
A. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a license fee,
payable to the City of Coatesville in accordance with the following fee
schedule as provided in Chapter 108, Fees.116
B. Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a deposit fee,
payable to the City of Coatesville, in accordance with the schedule as
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 172-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 172-4
172:332
§ 172-5. Investigation; issuance of identification card.
§ 172-6. Hours.
No person licensed under this chapter shall engage in any activities herein
at any time except as follows:
§ 172-7. Standards of conduct.
Every person to whom a license has been issued shall, in the conduct of his
or her activity, comply with the following standards of conduct:
provided in Chapter 108, Fees. [Amended 10-12-1993 by Ord. No.
936-93117]
C. The deposit fee shall be refunded to the applicant upon termination of
the license period and upon the return of the licensee's photo
identification card to the Codes Department. The deposit fee shall be
forfeited if the licensee is found to have violated any portion of this
chapter and has his or her license suspended.
A. Promptly upon receiving an application for a license, the Codes
Department shall cause such application and applicant to be
investigated by the Police Department. In the event that such
investigation should indicate that the granting of such license would or
might be injurious to the public interest or to the public health, safety
or morals of the citizenry, the City Manager shall have and is hereby
given the power and authority to refuse to issue such license. In any
instance where the Chief of Police should deem it necessary or
advisable to secure and check the fingerprints of any such applicant,
refusal of such applicant to voluntarily furnish such fingerprints shall
constitute, in and of itself, sufficient and valid grounds for refusal to
issue such permit.
B. A license will not be issued to any person who has been convicted of a
felony, misdemeanor or a crime of any kind involving moral turpitude,
and such person shall not be allowed to engage in peddling or soliciting
in the city.
C. For approved applicants, the Codes Department will issue a photo
identification care to the applicant within 10 days from the filing of the
application. An identical photo identification card shall be kept on file at
the city office.
A. From October 1 through May 31: from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., prevailing
time, Monday through Saturday.
B. From June 1 through September 30: from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, Monday through Saturday.
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 172-4 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 172-7
172:333
§ 172-8. Suspension of license.
A. The licensee shall carry his or her identification card at all times and
exhibit it upon request to any police officer or official of the city or to
any citizen upon request.
B. The licensee shall be the sole possessor of his or her identification card
and shall immediately report its loss to the Codes Department. He or
she shall not cause or permit his or her identification card to be altered
or defaced in any way.
C. The licensee shall not enter or attempt to enter any dwelling or
otherwise remain upon any private property without the invitation or
permission of the occupant or property owner and shall immediately
leave any premises upon request of the occupant or property owner.
D. The licensee shall not permit the throwing or discarding of any paper,
debris or other such items upon public or private property or upon the
public streets or sidewalks of the city.
E. The licensee shall not conduct his or her business activity at any
geographical location within the city which is deemed by the Codes
Department, Chief of Police or other city official to be hazardous to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic or which otherwise significantly
obstructs the movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
F. No licensee shall peddle or distribute obscene printed material or
merchandise or that which advocates unlawful conduct.
G. The licensee shall not be guilty of any false pretense or
misrepresentation, and, particularly, he or she shall not represent his or
her license to be an endorsement of himself or herself or his or her
goods or services or of the goods or services of his or her employer.
H. The licensee shall be prohibited from hawking or crying his or her
wares upon any public street or sidewalk in the city, and he or she shall
be prohibited from using any loudspeaker, horn or any device for
announcing his or her presence which could be considered a
disturbance of the peace.
I. The licensee shall immediately surrender his license to the Codes
Department upon suspension or revocation thereof.
A. Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended at any time by
the Codes Department for violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or for the giving of false or misleading information on any
application for a license hereunder or for the applicant or licensee
having been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude after
issuance of such license or for the licensee having been convicted of
disorderly conduct under any law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any ordinance of the City of Coatesville.
§ 172-7 COATESVILLE CODE § 172-8
172:334
§ 172-9. Exemptions.118
The following persons shall be exempt from the licensing requirements
of this chapter (although registration with the Codes Department shall be
required):
B. No part of a license fee or deposit fee shall be refunded to any person
whose license has been suspended. Notice of suspension may be given
in any manner reasonably calculated to apprise the licensee of the
suspension of his license.
A. Persons soliciting contributions on behalf of organizations or nonprofit
corporations exempt from the provisions of or duly registered pursuant
to the Charitable Organization Reform Act of 1986, 10 P.S. § 161.1 et
seq., as amended, who, while soliciting, possess a card or other written
evidence of their appointment or authority to solicit for said
organization or corporation.
B. Any charitable, religious or philanthropic organization which shall
conduct solicitations or sales of personal property when the proceeds
thereof shall be applied to the payment of expenses thereof and/or to
the charitable, religious or philanthropic cause.
C. Any school, political or civic organization, benevolent society, service
club or organization, not for profit, whose principal office is located in
the city.
D. Farmers engaged in selling only the produce of their own farms or any
person delivering bread and bakery products or milk and dairy
products.
E. Persons who have been licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
to engage in certain activities, including but not limited to real estate,
insurance and securities brokers and salesmen.
F. Persons conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law or a sale
required by statute or by order of any court.
G. Authorized persons carrying satisfactory identification engaged in
making surveys or collecting information for the federal, state, county
or city government or any agency thereof. Also exempt shall be
authorized persons carrying satisfactory identification engaged in
making surveys or collecting information for bona fide educational or
quasi-governmental agencies, if each activity has been previously
approved by the City Council.
H. Boys and girls under the age of 16 years, who take orders for and
deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy and the like or who
represent the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts or similar organizations and
take orders for and deliver cookies and the like.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 172-8 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 172-10
172:335
§ 172-10. Appeals.
Any person whose application has been denied or whose license has been
suspended or revoked shall be entitled to appear with legal representation,
if he or she so desire, before the City Council at a regular or special meeting
and be heard on behalf of a request for approval or reinstatement of said
license.
§ 172-11. Violations and penalties.119
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus
costs of prosecution, or to imprisonment in the county jail for a period of
not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 172-12. Restrictions.
Peddling, soliciting or other activities regulated by this chapter shall not be
permitted in the following locations:
§ 172-13. Vending at fixed location.
§ 172-14. Special events.
A. In the city business district, which shall be defined as along East
Lincoln Highway, the entire length of U.S. Route 30 within the city
limits.
A. Any person licensed under this chapter or exempt under § 172-9 hereof
shall not occupy any fixed location upon any private property, street or
alley of the city for the purpose of engaging in the business aforesaid,
with or without any stand or counter.
B. Notwithstanding any such prior approval, the city police, City Manager
or their authorized designee may require any such licensee to abandon
any location which is hazardous to traffic or passersby or which
otherwise significantly obstructs the movement of traffic or passersby
or otherwise upon the request of the owner of any location on which
such person is situate.
A. A "special event" is defined as any event sponsored by any public,
private, civic, nonprofit, profit or municipal group for which permits to
sell goods, merchandise, food or other wares are sold or issued solely
for the specific duration of the event. Any licensee under this chapter
shall not automatically be entitled to a special event permit. Rather, any
licensee under this chapter shall still be required to comply with the
terms and conditions applicable to special event licensees as those
terms and conditions are set by the organizer of the special event.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 172-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 172-14
172:336
B. Organizers of any special event that shall permit peddling or the sale of
goods, merchandise, food or other wares solely for the duration of the
event shall apply to the Codes Department for a special event group
license. This license shall be issued only to the event organizer or
organization, and it shall be valid only for the duration of the special
event. [Added 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 936-93]
§ 172-14 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 172-14
172:337

ARTICLE II
Transient Retail Merchants
§ 172-15. License required.
Every person, whether principal or agent, entering into or desiring to
begin a transient retail business within the City of Coatesville for the sale
of any goods, ware or merchandise and who hires a place or occupies
any room, apartment, store, building, structure or outdoor place whatever
within the city for the exhibition and/or sale of such goods, wares or
merchandise shall, before commencing such sale, obtain a license from the
Codes Department.
§ 172-16. License fee. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
The fee to be paid for such license shall be as provided in Chapter 108,
Fees, for each month or fractional part thereof and shall be collected by
the Codes Department before he or she shall issue any license under the
provisions of this article. Such license shall be renewed monthly by the
Codes Department upon payment of the license fee herein provided.
§ 172-17. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to apply to farmers
selling their own produce; the sale of goods, wares and merchandise
donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to
any charitable or philanthropic; or any manufacturer or producer in the sale
of bread or bakery products, meat and meat products or milk products.
§ 172-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article by failing
to secure the license required thereby or to renew such license, as the
case may be, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $600 and costs of prosecution or to imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment,
provided that each day's violation of any of the provisions of this article shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 172-15 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 172-18
172:339

ARTICLE III
Handbills and Posters
§ 172-19. Application requirements and investigation; length of
time posted.
§ 172-20. Standards of conduct.
The standards of conduct set forth in § 172-7 shall similarly apply to person,
organizations and activities regulated by this article.
§ 172-21. Distribution and posting regulations.
A. Any person desiring to engage in or carry on the posting of bills,
erection of signs, distribution of handbills or other articles for
advertising purposes shall be subject to the application requirements
and application review standards set forth in §§ 172-3 and 172-5,
respectively. In addition, such applicants shall further describe in detail
the handbill or items to be distributed and the areas to be covered by
distribution. This information, as well as that set forth in § 172-5, shall
be taken into account by the Codes Department in the determination as
to whether to issue such permit.
B. No such permit or any bill or sign permitted to be erected or posted
thereby shall be in effect or be permitted to be posted or erected for a
period of longer than 10 days from the date of issuance.
C. The distribution of all political posters and handbills for the purpose of
electoral campaigning within the city, can be initiated for 30 days from
the permit date as issued by the Codes Department. All posters and
handbills must be removed from the public right-away within 10 days of
the designated election day. [Added 11-24-1997 by Ord. No.
1059-97]
A. No handbill or sample or other article for advertising purposes shall be
cast, thrown or scattered or caused to be cast, thrown or scattered in or
upon any of the streets, sidewalks or other public places of the city or in
or upon any private yard, walkway, driveway or porch but shall be
delivered to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or
upon such private premises. No handbill or sample or other article for
advertising shall be delivered to any private premises if anyone thereon
so request or if there is placed on the premises, in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words "No
Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertising" or any similar
notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do
not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to
have any such handbills left upon such premises.
§ 172-19 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 172-22
172:341
§ 172-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus
cost of prosecution, or to imprisonment in the county jail for a period of
not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of
violations shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 172-22 COATESVILLE CODE § 172-22
172:342
Chapter 176
PLUMBING
§ 172-22 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 172-22
172:343

ARTICLE I
Plumbing Standards
[Amended 11-22-1993 by Ord. No. 945-93]
§ 176-1. Standards adopted. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96; 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 1171-2001]
The City of Coatesville hereby adopts, for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the design and installation of plumbing systems,
including administration, plumbing permits and penalties, the Plumbing
Code known as the "International Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., save and except such
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which three
copies have been and are now filed in the office of the Codes Department,
and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out
at length herein, and from the date on which this article shall take effect,
the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the design and installation of
plumbing systems within the corporate limits of the City of Coatesville.
§ 176-2. Amendments to standards. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord.
No. 1012-96; 8-13-2001 by Ord. No. 1171-2001]
The code hereby adopted is amended as follows:
A. Section 101.1, "Title," is amended to read as follows:
Section 101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the
"Plumbing Code of the City of Coatesville," hereinafter referred to as
"this code."
B. Section 106.6.2, "Fee Schedule," is amended to read as follows:
Section 106.6.2. Fee Schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall
be as indicated in the schedule of fees as adopted, from time to time,
by ordinance of the City of Coatesville as set forth in Chapter 108 of
the Code of the City of Coatesville pertaining to the schedule of fees
and charges.
C. Section 108.4, "Violation Penalties," is amended to read as follows:
§ 176-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 176-2
172:345
§ 176-3. Conflicts with statutory provisions.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the
commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations
1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this code or any provision of the BOCA National Building Code or
who shall fail to comply with any requirement thereof or who shall
erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation
of an approved plan or directive of the Building Inspector or a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of BOCA National
Building Code shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or imprisonment for not
more than 90 days. Every day that a violation of the code or
of the BOCA National Building Code continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
2. Any person, firm or corporation who shall erect, construct, alter
or repair a building or structure or who shall undertake any work
or activity requiring a permit under this article or under the
BOCA National Building Code without first obtaining the required
permits and who shall be convicted under this subsection of failing
to obtain the necessary permit shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
up to $500 and/or to imprisonment for not more than 90 days and
further shall pay two times the appropriate permit fee.
D. Section 114.3, "Unlawful Continuance," is amended to read as follows:
Section 114.3. Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall
continue any work in or about the structure after having been served
with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed
to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be, upon
conviction thereof, sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000, plus
costs, or to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment.
E. Section 305.6, "Freezing," is amended to read as follows:
Section 305.6. Freezing. Water service piping shall be installed
below recorded frost penetration but not less than 36 inches below
grade. In climates with freezing temperatures, plumbing piping in
exterior building walls or areas subjected to freezing temperatures
shall be protected against freezing by insulation or heat, or both.
F. Section 305.6.1, "Sewer Depth," is amended to read as follows:
Section 305.6.1. Sewer Depth. Building sewers that connect to
private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 36 inches
below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building
sewers shall be a minimum of 36 inches below grade.
§ 176-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 176-3
172:346
or other ordinances of the city, as the case may be, shall control where
the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of
this article. The code shall control in all cases where the commonwealth
requirements or the requirements of other ordinances of this city are not as
strict as those contained in this article.
§ 176-4. Continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this article so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and/or codes in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
article are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and codes and
not as new enactments. The provisions of this article shall not affect any
act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty to punish any
offense under the authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
§ 176-3 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 176-4
172:347

ARTICLE II
Administration; Licensing; Inspection
§ 176-5. Registration and licensing of plumbers.
From and after the passage of this article, it shall not be lawful for any
persons to carry on or work at the business of plumbing or house drainage
in the City of Coatesville until a certificate or license to engage in or
work at said business shall have been granted said persons by the Codes
Department of the City of Coatesville.
§ 176-6. Application for licenses and registration.
§ 176-7. License for institutions.
A person or persons certified as competent by the Board of Examiners may
be licensed as a master plumber and/or journeyman plumber for the care,
alteration or addition of the plumbing and drainage system of a designated
manufacturing or mercantile building, institution, hotel, apartment or
similar building or for the owner or owners of a group of residences or
buildings, where the continuous services of a master plumber are required
and receive a certificate or license, but in such case the person so licensed
shall not be permitted to do any plumbing or drainage work in any building
or buildings other than those owned by the institution or company for which
he or she is specifically licensed and he or she shall be required to comply
in every respect with all provisions of this article.
A. Applications for license; issuance. All and every person or persons with
three years or more of practical experience, which experience need not
be gained in Coatesville, engaged or engaging in the business or work
of plumbing, house and building drainage in said City of Coatesville,
shall apply in writing to said Codes Department for such certificate or
license, and if, after proper examination made by the Examiners, such
person or persons so applying shall be found competent, the same shall
be certified to the Codes Department, who shall thereupon issue a
certificate or license to such person or persons, which shall, for the
period of one calendar year or fractional part thereof next ensuing the
date of such examination, entitle him or her or them to engage in or
work at the business of plumbing, house and building drainage.
B. The applications for registration shall be made to the Secretary of the
Codes Department on forms provided by said Department. Said
application, after being properly filled out, shall, after the fee is paid
and receipt given therefor by said Secretary, be filed with the Plumbing
Inspector, who, being a member of the Board of Examiners, shall notify
the applicant of the time and place of holding examinations for
registration.
§ 176-5 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 176-8
172:349
§ 176-8. Board of Examiners; rules; examinations. [Amended
5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
The President of Council of the City of Coatesville is hereby authorized
to appoint a Board of Examiners, to consist of the Health Officer, the
Plumbing Inspector and two competent plumbers in no way connected
with the city government, who shall examine all applicants for license
under the provisions of this article. In case of a tie vote as to any master
or journeyman plumber applicant, the Director of the Codes Department
shall cast the deciding vote. The Board shall make all reasonable rules,
regulations and examinations, which shall be approved by said Codes
Department. An examination of any one member of a firm or corporation
therefor shall be deemed sufficient. Said person or persons, firm or
corporation engaged or engaging in the business of plumbing or house or
building drainage shall pay for each examination the sum as provided in
Chapter 108, Fees, and each journeyman or person engaged in the work
shall pay the sum as provided in Chapter 108, Fees, if such examination is
taken at a regular meeting of the Board of Examiners, which sum shall be
paid into the city treasury for the use of the City of Coatesville; provided,
however, that if such examination entails a special meeting of the Board
of Examiners, then the applicant, whether master plumber or journeyman
plumber, shall pay an examination fee as provided in Chapter 108, Fees.
The proper officers are hereby authorized to pay to the plumbers acting on
said Board the sum of $10 per day for each day of session thus actually
employed.
§ 176-9. Revocation of licenses.
Any master plumber's license or journeyman's license granted hereunder
may be revoked by the Codes Department for violation of any of the
provisions of these rules and regulations, for refusing or neglecting to
make the necessary corrections to work not approved by the Plumbing
Inspector or for any other sufficient cause, after a hearing before the Codes
Department at a time of which at least five days' notice shall be given to the
licensee. The Codes Department may, after hearing, upon reasonable cause,
revoke for a specified period. No master plumber or journeyman plumber
whose license has been revoked for cause may obtain another license for a
period of six months from the date of revocation of his or her license.
§ 176-10. Places of business; signs.
A. Every registered master plumber shall have a bona fide place of
business in the City of Coatesville and shall display on the front of his or
her or their place of business a sign, "Registered Plumber," bearing the
name or names of the person, firm or corporation, in letters not less
than three inches high.
B. Signs displayed on buildings not occupied as a bona fide place of
business (other than advertisements) of any registered master plumber,
firm or corporation must not be construed to permit or allow said
§ 176-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 176-10
172:350
§ 176-11. Business without registration prohibited.
No person other than a registered master plumber, as herein provided,
shall be allowed to carry on or engage in the business nor shall any person
or persons expose the sign of plumbing, house or building drainage or
any advertisement or display pertaining thereto (wholesale showrooms
excepted), unless he or she or they have first secured a license or certificate
and been registered in the office of the Codes Department of the City of
Coatesville, nor shall any person or persons other than a registered master
plumber or a registered journeyman plumber in his or her or their employ
(registered apprentices excepted) be allowed to alter, repair or make any
connection with any drain, soil, waste or vent pipe or any pipe connected
therewith or to repair or alter the location of any water pipe.
§ 176-12. Notice of removal; retirement; registration information.
Every registered master plumber, firm or corporation shall give immediate
notice of any change in his, her, their or its place of business and, upon his,
her, their or its retirement from business, shall surrender his, her, their or
its certificate of registry to the Codes Department; every person, firm or
corporation, in registering, shall give the full name or names of the person,
firm or officer's names if a corporation, for which he or she or they shall
register.
§ 176-13. Expiration of licenses; reregistration.
At the expiration of each calendar year, said certificate or license shall
be null and void. A licensed master or journeyman plumber desiring to
continue in or work at the business of plumbing, house and building
drainage for the ensuing year shall, between the first and 31st days of
December of each and every year, surrender said certificate or license to
the Codes Department who certified it and reregister his, her, their or its
name or names and business or home address upon such form or forms as
may, from time to time, be furnished by said Codes Department.
§ 176-14. Register of licenses; examination for reregistration not
required; fee. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
registered master plumber, firm or corporation to establish the same
privileges or benefits as registered master plumbers, firms or
corporations within the limitation of the City of Coatesville.
A. A reexamination will not be necessary for reregistration unless the
licensed master or journeyman plumber should have failed to make an
application for reregistration at the specified time. The sum as provided
in Chapter 108, Fees, shall be paid by master plumbers, firms or
corporations and journeymen plumbers for reregistration, which sum
shall be paid into the city treasury for the use of the city. A register of all
such applicants and the licenses or certificates issued shall be kept in
said Codes Department, which said register shall be open to the
§ 176-10 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 176-14
172:351
§ 176-15. Plumbing Inspector and Substitute Inspector.
inspection of all persons interested therein. Any person, firm or
corporation holding a license or certificate granted by any city,
borough, incorporated town or township of the first class of this
commonwealth to engage in or work at the business of plumbing and
drainage work, desiring to do plumbing or drainage work in the City of
Coatesville, shall, without complete examination, be registered before
entering upon such work, but such applicant shall be required to submit
to the Plumbing Inspector a statement as to certain facts showing
whether the applicant is competent to carry on the work, and the
Plumbing Inspector shall certify to the Codes Department as to the
competency of the applicant; provided, however, that such registration
shall be restricted and limited to such plumbing and drainage work as
he, she, they or it shall have contracted for at the time or registry. On
the completion of such contract or contracts, the registration of such
person, firm or corporation shall be null and void, and no further permit
shall be issued until he or she or they or it shall have first registered
his or her or its name or their names and addresses as hereinbefore
provided.
B. The fee for registration of any person, firm or corporation holding a
license or certificate approved by the Plumbing Inspector and granted
by any city (other than the City of Coatesville), borough, incorporated
town or township of the first class in Pennsylvania and for every
journeyman plumber shall be as provided in Chapter 108, Fees, and he,
she, they or it shall be restricted and limited to such plumbing and
drainage work as he, she, they or it shall have contracted for at the time
of registry. Any additional fee of like amount will be necessary before
another registration will be made.
A. The President of Council of the City of Coatesville is hereby authorized
and empowered to appoint a plumber who is actively engaged in the
plumbing business and who possesses the necessary qualifications as
provided in the Act of June 7, 1901, who shall be the Plumbing
Inspector of the City of Coatesville, to serve at the pleasure of the
President of Council of said city.
B. The President of Council shall, at the same time, on appointing a
Plumbing Inspector actively engaged in the plumbing business, appoint
a Substitute Inspector, who shall supervise, superintend and inspect the
work done by the regular Inspector or by the firm with which he or she
is connected in the course of its private business or when the regular
Inspector is unavailable.
C. The compensation of the Plumbing Inspector and Substitute Inspector
shall be paid from proper items of appropriation in the budget of the
City of Coatesville, in such amount as may from time to time be
prescribed by the Council.
§ 176-14 COATESVILLE CODE § 176-16
172:352
§ 176-16. Plans and specifications; inspections prior to connections.
[Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
There shall be a separate plan for each, building, public or private or any
addition thereto or alterations thereof, accompanied by the specifications
showing the location, size and kind of pipe, traps, closets and fixtures to
be used, which plans and specifications shall be filed with the Plumbing
Inspector, together with such other information as he or she may require.
Said plans and specifications shall be furnished by the architect, plumber
or owner and filed by the plumber. All applications for change in plans must
be made in writing. Plans filed for the correction of any complaint must be
designated the approximate time for the completion thereof for each plan
filed; and as a condition precedent to any sewer connections and water
sewer service connections, all individual fixtures, compartment appliances
or connections to soil stack, waste pipe, sewer or water service pipe shall
be inspected and approved by the Plumbing Inspector, for which services a
fee as provided in Chapter 108, Fees, per fixture, appliance or connection
shall be charged, which inspection fee shall be payable within or without
the corporate limits of the city.
§ 176-17. Filing of plans and specifications; approval or rejection.
Plumbers, before commencing the construction of plumbing work in any
building in said City of Coatesville (except in case of repairs, which are
here defined to relate to the mending of leaks in soil, vent or waste pipes,
faucets, valves and water supply pipes, and shall not be construed to permit
the replacing or installation of any fixtures, such as water closets, bathtubs,
washstands, sinks, refrigerator cases, soda or bar fixtures, etc., or the
respective traps for such fixtures), shall submit to the Plumbing Inspector
plans and specifications legibly drawn in ink, on blanks to be furnished by
the Codes Department. Where two or more buildings are located together
and on the same street and the plumbing work is identical in each, one will
be sufficient. Plans will be approved or rejected by the Plumbing Inspector
within 24 hours after their receipt; approval will not be given until all fees
have been paid.
§ 176-18. Supervision if sewer connections.
Whenever there is a line of sewer laid on any street or alley, all connections
and entrances from the main sewer to the building shall be made under
the supervision of the Plumbing Inspector. Unless Y- or T-branches already
exist in the sewer line and are available for use, cast-iron inserts, MD sewer
connections or equal must be used in making said connections.
§ 176-19. Homeowner's plumbing permit. [Added 12-10-2007 by
Ord. No. 1291-2007120]
A. Eligibility
120. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 176-19, Violations and penalties,
as § 176-19.1.
§ 176-16 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 176-19
172:353
(1) Homeowner's plumbing permit. Homeowners' permits, issued if a
home is not for sale or rent, are required for new construction,
renovation, and any work that requires a building permit.
Generally, homeowners' permits are not required for replacement
in kind. Only owner-occupants who perform the work themselves
qualify for homeowners' permits.
(a) A homeowner's permit is not authorized until a dwelling is on
the site or under construction. A homeowner shall not be
permitted to install their own gas lines, install HVAC, or
perform any heating duct work.
(b) A homeowner's permit issued for a mobile home on a leased lot
authorizes feeder installation for the mobile home itself and it
does not include the installation or repair of service
equipment.
(c) If a homeowner's permit is approved for a dwelling on a lot,
other structures on the same lot, such as a noncommercial
garage, are also covered unless otherwise prohibited.
(d) Applicants for homeowners' permits shall contact the City of
Coatesville Codes Enforcement Department to have the
plumbing work inspected and may contact the Department
with any questions about the plumbing code. Before installing
dry wall, applicants shall contact the Plumbing Code
Enforcement Officer for a "rough in" inspection.
(e) Permits shall be valid for six months from the date granted and
are not renewable.
B. Application requirements. Applicants shall submit the application with
the following items for processing:
(1) Proof of home ownership:
(a) A copy of the official, signed deed with Recorder of Deeds
stamp which has been recorded at the Chester County
Recorder of Deeds Office. If you need a copy, contact the
Chester County Courthouse, Market and High Streets, West
Chester, PA 19382, phone: (610) 344-6000; or
(b) A copy of the long-term lease, e.g. 99 years, if the site of the
dwelling is part of a community where title to the land is not
conveyed by deed to the homeowner; or
(c) A copy of the title to a mobile home; or
(d) A written contract of sale, signed by the parties, for a mobile
home that includes the names of the buyer, seller, contract
price, date of sale, and identification number of the mobile
home.
§ 176-19 COATESVILLE CODE § 176-19
172:354
§ 176-19.1. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord.
No. 1012-96]
(2) A copy of the homeowner's driver's license or other photo
identification.
A. Any person or persons who shall fail to comply with any of the
provisions of this article shall be liable, upon summary conviction, to a
fine of not more than $600 or to a period of imprisonment not exceeding
90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.
B. All prosecutions for violations of this article shall be by summary
proceeding brought in the name and for the use of the City of
Coatesville. All fines and penalties shall be paid to the Director of
Finance of the City of Coatesville, to apply to the general fund.
§ 176-19 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 176-19.1
172:355

ARTICLE III
Water Conservation
[Added 1-11-1993 by Ord. No. 912-92]
§ 176-20. General policy.
No water shall be provided to, supplied to or utilized for internal or external
use to or by any residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural,
recreational, governmental or public building or structure of any kind or
nature whatsoever, which is, after the effective date of this article,
constructed or remodeled and in which plumbing, water piping or water
fixtures are to be installed, extended or altered in anyway and for which
a permit for such construction or remodeling is to be obtained from the
city (or would be required but for an exemption from a permit requirement
for public or governmental agencies) unless the new, extended or altered
plumbing, water piping and/or other water using fixtures therein conform
to the requirements and standards of this article.
§ 176-21. Water conservation and performance standards for
plumbing fixtures and fittings.
§ 176-22. Special provisions.
The performance standards of this article shall not apply to fixtures and
fittings for emergency purposes, including but not limited to emergency
showers, aspirator faucets, blowout fixtures, etc., which, in order to perform
a specialized function, cannot meet the standards specified above.
A. Toilets, water closets and associated flushing mechanisms. The water
consumption of toilets, water closets, and/or other associated flushing
mechanisms shall not exceed an average of 1.6 gallons per flush cycle
over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80 pounds per square inch
(psi); and, in addition, all such fixtures shall perform in accordance with
the test requirements of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) A112.19.2M and ANSI A112.19.6M.
B. Urinals and associated flushing mechanisms. The water consumption of
urinals and associated flushing mechanisms shall not exceed an
average 1.5 gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from
20 to 80 psi. The fixtures shall perform in accordance with the
requirements of ANSI A112.19.2M and ANSI A112.19.6M.
C. Shower heads. The maximum discharge rate of shower heads shall not
exceed 3.0 gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures
from 20 to 80 psi. The fixtures shall perform in accordance with the test
requirements of ANSI A112.18.1M.
D. Faucets. Sink and lavatory faucet discharge rates shall not exceed 3.0
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
psi. The fixtures shall perform in accordance with the test requirements
of ANSI A112.18.1M.
§ 176-20 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 176-23
172:357
§ 176-23. Exemptions.
Any person or entity (through its duly authorized agent or representative)
may apply in writing to the City Council for an exemption from any provision
of this article, which said exemption may, but need not be, granted by the
City Council upon proof that some other device, system or procedure will
save as much (or more) water as those set forth therein or that compliance
with those set forth herein cannot be effectuated without undue hardship.
§ 176-24. Certifications.
The plumbing fixtures and fittings required by this article shall be certified
and labeled by the manufacturer as meeting the water conservation
performance standards of this article. All certifications shall be based on
independent test results and plumbing fixtures and fittings shall be labeled
in accordance with ANSI A112.18.1M and ANSI A112.19.2M.
§ 176-23 COATESVILLE CODE § 176-24
172:358
Chapter 180
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Buildings and land with substantial
violations — See Ch. 97.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 102.
Fire protection and prevention — See Ch. 115.
Improvement policies — See Ch. 142.
Lifesafety standards — See Ch. 151.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 156.
Nuisances — See Ch. 164.
Plumbing — See Ch. 176.
Sewers — See Ch. 185.
Solid waste — See Ch. 190.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
197.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 180-1. Standards adopted.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the City of Coatesville, being marked and designated as the
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Coatesville, in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation
and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office
of the City of Coatesville are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 180-2 of this chapter.
§ 180-2. Amendments to the text.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1. Insert: City of Coatesville.
B. Section 103.5. Insert: See Chapter 108, Fees, of the Code of the City of
Coatesville.
C. Section 106.3. Amend: by removing the words "misdemeanor or" in the
fourth line of existing code.
§ 176-24 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 180-2
172:359
D. Section 106.4. Amend: by removing the existing language under the
heading "Violation penalties." And replacing it with the following:
"A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this code, or fail to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be
prosecuted and shall, upon conviction in a Summary Proceeding before
a Magisterial District Judge be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$100 and not more than $1,000 per violation, plus costs of prosecution.
B. In addition to the enforcement of this code by a summary
proceeding as identified previously, if an action is brought at law or
in equity as identified in Section 106.5 of this code, then any person
who has violated or permitted the violations of the provisions of this
code, upon being found liable therefor in a civil action commenced
by Coatesville City, shall pay a judgment of not less than $1,000 per
violation, plus costs and attorney's fees incurred by Coatesville City.
C. Each day any violation exists and continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
D. If any summary proceeding or civil action brought pursuant to this
code results in a final determination without any appeal pending and
if the violation still exists, then the City of Coatesville, through its duly
authorized agent, shall be and is hereby empowered to correct the
violation by repair or otherwise.
E. All costs, expenses and attorney's fees incurred or expended by
the City of Coatesville for any repair, etc., relative to a violation as
is permitted in Subsection D above, together with an administrative
charge of 10%, may be charged as a municipal claim or lien against
the property at issue and with the rights to collect legal fees, costs and
interest thereon in accordance with the City Codes and Pennsylvania
Law.
F. In addition to the procedures provided under Section 109.2
governing temporary safeguards and elsewhere in this code, if the
code official determines that a property requires immediate protective
measures/repairs in order to protect the public (such as boarding-up
the property or mowing the lawn and removing or trimming overgrown
bushes and shrubs), then, when it has been determined that a property
owner is either not available to immediately effectuate the necessary
protective measures/repairs or the property owner refuses to do so
immediately, the code official shall be authorized to direct that the
needed protective measures/repairs be undertaken by public
employees or private contractors and the property owner shall be
responsible for the costs incurred with respect to such protective
measures/repairs and shall be required to pay the costs of same within
30 days, and in failing to do so, the property shall be made subject to
a municipal lien to cover the costs incurred for the protection of the
public safety and to correct the violations at issue together with an
administrative charge of 10% and other costs and fees permitted under
the Municipal Lien Law.
§ 180-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 180-2
172:360
G. With respect to violations of Section 302.4, Exterior Property Areas,
Weeds, or Section 302.14, Snow and Ice, the following alternative
citation process is available at the discretion of the code official as
follows:
Alternative citation process.
(1) Any person violating the provisions of Section 302.4 or 302.14
shall, at the discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $25 to be
paid within 10 days.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of Section 302.4 or 302.14
shall, at the discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $50 to be
paid after 10 days but within 20 days.
(3) Any violation of the provisions of Section 302.4 or 302.14 shall,
at the discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $75 to be paid
after 20 days, but before citation.
(4) Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid
shall, after 28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the
defendant. Thereafter, the prosecution shall proceed in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure,
and upon conviction for the offense, the defendant shall be
ordered to pay the maximum fine prescribed by law, together with
the costs of prosecution, and/or to be incarcerated in the county
prison for not more than five days."
E. Section 107.1 Amend: by removing the existing language and
replaced in its entirety with the following:
107.1 Notice to person responsible. Whenever the code official
determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds
to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the
manner prescribed in Section 107.2 and 107.3 to the property owner
for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for condemnation
procedures shall also comply with Section 108.3.
F. In Section 111, Means of Appeal, Subsection 111.1 Amend: by
removing the existing language and replacing in its entirety with the
following:
111.1. Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a
decision of the code official or notice or order issued under this code
shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Appeals for a review
of the decision in accordance with the procedures prescribed by the
Board of Appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is
filed within 10 days after the day of the decision, notice or order was
served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the
true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted hereunder have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully
apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by
other means.
§ 180-2 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 180-2
172:361
G. In Section 111, Means of Appeal, Insert: new Section 111.1.1 to
read in its entirety as follows:
111.1.1 Appeal fee. A fee of $50, payable in advance, shall be paid
for each appeal taken to the Board of Appeals from a decision of the
code official to defray some of the costs associated with the mailing of
notices, convening the Board and hearing the appeal.
H. In Section 202, General Definitions, add the following definitions:
Hazardous Waste. Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes
or liquid or gaseous wastes, which, because of the quantity involved,
concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may
cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population,
pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed
of or otherwise managed; or which is otherwise defined as hazardous
by any federal or state statute or regulation.
Amend the following definition of Rubbish as follows:
Rubbish. Add to the existing definition of "Rubbish" the following
additional words as an insert before the final words "and other similar
materials": "municipal waste and trash," Additionally, amend the
existing definition by adding the following sentence: "Rubbish shall
also include car parts, machinery and equipment, and parts of
machinery or equipment not in lawful use or operation unless such
car parts, machinery, equipment, etc., is stored and screened from the
view by the public."
Trash. All combustible and noncombustible waste materials except
garbage, including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke
and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood
excelsior, leather, grass clippings, leaves, shrubs, branches, yard
trimmings, Christmas trees, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass,
crockery, construction fill and debris, dust and similar materials.
I. Section 302.4. Insert: 10 inches.
J. Section 304.14. Insert: May 15 to September 1.
K. Section 602.3. Insert: September 1 to June 1.
L. Section 602.4. Insert: October 15 to April 15.
M. Section 3. The following sections are hereby added:
(1) Section 302.10. Storage of boats and travel trailers. No boats
or travel trailers shall be permitted to be stored on the premises in
plain view of the public (or placed on any public way).
(2) Section 302.11. Refrigerators and freezers. The owners of
refrigerators and freezers which are not in active service shall
§ 180-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 180-2
172:362
immediately have the door or doors removed or otherwise secured
to prevent access by any individual to the interior thereof.
(3) Section 302.12. Nuisance junkyards. Except as provided for in
other regulations, no premises shall be used or maintained as a
junkyard or dumping ground, or for the wrecking or disassembling
of automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind or of any
of the parts thereof, or for the storing of any equipment used by
contractors, excavators, constructors, builders or any other
persons engaged in the business of construction.
(4) Section 302.13. Rubbish, trash, recyclables, etc. All exterior
property and premises, including public ways, shall be maintained
so that trash containers and recyclable containers are set out for
trash removal (and recycling) no earlier than the night before the
assigned pick-up and promptly removed after trash removal and/or
recycling (i.e., the day of the assigned pick-up) and no foreign
objects shall be left visible in the exterior property and premises.
(5) Section 302.13. Snow and ice. Duty to remove snow and ice
(replaces and rescinds the provisions of City Code Chapter 193,
Article III, §§ 193-19 to 193-22).
A. It shall be the duty of the owner of all property to remove at his,
her, their or its expense snow or ice from the sidewalks abutting
said property so as to maintain a cleared space of not less than
2/3 of the width of the sidewalk within a period of 24 hours after
the cessation of any snowfall. Where snow and ice are removed
from sidewalks, private drives, parking lots and individual onstreet
parking areas, snow and ice may be placed or piled on the
curbside or the parking areas within eight feet of the curb. Snow
and ice from sidewalks, private drives, parking lots and individual
on-street parking areas shall not be placed or piled in the travel
lanes of the public streets or alleys.
(6) Section 308.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Add
additional sentence. "It is the intent of this provision to prohibit
mess and unsanitary conditions with respect to any property in the
City of Coatesville and the public ways associated with such
properties."
(7) Section 302.8 of the Code is amended to include unregistered and
uninspected vehicles and the Code language in Section 302.8 is
removed in its entirety and replaced with the following:
§ 180-2 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 180-2
172:363
§ 180-3. Effect of other regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulation of departments or agencies of the
Commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulations,
as the case may be, shall control where requirements thereof are more
restrictive than the provisions of this chapter.
§ 180-4. Existing rights not affected.
Nothing in this chapter or in the International Property Maintenance Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending
in any court, or any rights acquired, or any liability incurred or any cause
or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed as cited in § 180-2 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right
or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 180-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is,
for any reason, held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
unconstitutional, invalid or illegal, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council of the City of
Coatesville hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, and
each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact
that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases
be declared unconstitutional, invalid or illegal. Further, if any section or
provisions of this chapter is declared to be unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect the
constitutionality, legality or validity of this chapter as a whole, nor the
302.8 Motor vehicles. Except as provided in other regulations,
no currently inoperative, unlicensed, unregistered or uninspected
motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and
no vehicle shall at any time be in the state of major disassembly,
disrepair or in the process of being striped or dismantled. Painting
of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved
spray booth.
(8) Section 304.3 of the Code is amended by removal of Section 304.3
of the Code and replacing it in its entirety with the following:
Section 304.3 Premises identification. Buildings shall have
approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly
legible and visible from the street, alley or road in front of the
property and in the rear of each property. These numbers shall
contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be in
Arabic numbers or alphabet letters. Numbers and letters shall be
a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke
width of 0.5 inches (12.7 mm).
§ 180-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 180-5
172:364
constitutionality, legality or validity of any other section or provision of this
chapter other than the one so declared to be unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid.
§ 180-6. Inconsistent ordinance repealed.
All existing ordinances of the City or parts thereof inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed unless stated otherwise.
§ 180-7. Publication.
The City Secretary is hereby ordered and directed to cause this chapter
to be published as necessary in accordance with the City Code and
Pennsylvania Law.
§ 180-8. When effective.
This chapter and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders
and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full
force and effect according to law 30 days after advertisement subsequent to
its enactment.
Chapter 182
MUNICIPAL LIENS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 108.
§ 182-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all municipal claims allowed and authorized by
the law of the Commonwealth to be assessed by the City, including, but not
limited to liens for taxes and for municipal improvements, for the removal
of nuisances, and for water rents or rates, sewage rates, lighting rates and
power rates to the fullest extent authorized by law (hereinafter "delinquent
accounts"), whether heretofore or hereafter assessed or filed.
§ 182-2. Schedule of attorney fees.
The attached schedule of attorney fees121 is to be utilized and followed in
the assessment of attorney fees in the collection of any delinquent account
and the corresponding fees shall be added and included in the collection
of the same at the time of the filing of the municipal claim by or for the
City or as soon thereafter as may be convenient or proper. This schedule of
attorney fees (and itemization of fees and costs to be charged in collection
121. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-5 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 182-2
172:365
procedures) shall be subject to amendment from time to time as needed
hereafter by resolution of the City Council. The schedule attached hereto
shall constitute an adoption of a fee schedule of approved values found to
be reasonable for the services rendered.
§ 182-3. Notice.
Prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in connection with a delinquent
account, the City shall provide notice of the City's intention to assess or
impose attorney fees in connection with this chapter as may be required by
the Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207, No. 153, as amended or supplemented,
53 P.S. § 7106.
§ 182-4. Addition of interest.
In all proceedings where a municipal claim is filed as a lien against real
property for delinquent accounts which are the subject of this chapter,
interest equal to 10% per annum shall be assessed and accrue on the claim
from the date of the completion of the work after it is filed as a lien, and on
claims for taxes, water rents or rates, lighting rates or sewer rates, from the
date of the filing of the lien therefor; provided, however, that if a municipal
claim is filed arising out of a municipal project which required the City to
issue bonds to finance the project, interest shall accrue and be collectible on
such claim at the rate of interest of the bond issue or at the rate of 12% per
annum, whichever is less. No notice prior to the assessment or imposition of
interest as set forth herein shall be required. Such interest shall be added
to the municipal claim and collected therewith.
§ 182-5. Assessment of penalty.
§ 182-6. Severability.
Should any part or provision of this chapter be found to be illegal,
unenforceable or void, such shall not affect the remainder of this chapter
which shall remain fully binding, enforceable, and valid, and such illegal,
unenforceable or void part and/or provision shall be amended to the extent
necessary to conform with the law. The Council of the City hereby declares
its intention that it would have adopted this chapter had it not contained
such invalid, illegal or unenforceable part or provision, and that it would
have adopted this chapter had it contained such parts or provisions as
subsequently amended to conform to the law.
A. In all proceedings where a municipal claim is filed as a lien against real
property for delinquent accounts which are subject of this chapter, a
penalty equal to 5% of the delinquent account shall be added to the
municipal claim and collected therewith when the delinquent account
remains unpaid for 90 days after the assessment shall have been levied,
or as soon thereafter as may be convenient or proper.
B. No notice prior to the assessment or the imposition of a penalty as set
forth herein shall be required.
§ 182-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 182-7
172:366
§ 182-7. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such conflict.
§ 182-8. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon adoption hereof.
Chapter 184
RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE DISCLOSURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Housing standards — See Ch. 136.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
197.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 184-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Coatesville Residential
Real Estate Disclosure Ordinance."
§ 184-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter include but are not limited to:
A. Providing to persons (as defined herein) who may be prospective
purchasers of certain improved or unimproved residential property
accurate information about any limitations, easements, restrictions,
etc., on the property which they may acquire.
B. Describing the general nature of the residential subdivision and/or
residential land development in which residential property offered for
sale is located.
C. Providing a procedure to persons who are or may be prospective
purchasers of residential property located within a residential
subdivision and/or residential land development through which that
prospective purchaser can acknowledge that they understand the
nature and extent of limitations, easements, restrictions, etc., that are
located on their property and the ramifications of their acquiring the
property subject to the foregoing.
D. Identifying in the deed a cross reference to any relevant homeowners'
association documents.
§ 182-7 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 184-3
172:367
§ 184-3. Definitions and word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words used in this chapter
shall have the following meanings. The present tense includes the future
tense, the singular number includes the plural number, the plural number
the singular, and the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter
genders.
AGREEMENT OF SALE — An instrument through which legal title to
residential real property will be transferred from one person to another.
APPROVED FINAL PLAN — A subdivision and/or land development plan
prepared, reviewed, submitted and duly approved by Coatesville City
Council in accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Chester County, Pennsylvania, showing the plan number thereon
as given by the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County.
CITY — The City of Coatesville, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
CITY COUNCIL — The duly elected Council of the City of Coatesville,
Chester County, Pennsylvania.
DEVELOPER — The landowner (or any agent of the landowner) who
subdivides land for a residential subdivision or residential land development
or has acquired any property that is to be sold in lots and has previously
been subject to a residential subdivision or residential land development as
defined herein and which is being sold to a person for the initial residential
use of such lot.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner of land including the holder
of an option or contract to purchase.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land created by an approved
subdivision or land development plan (or as otherwise permitted by law) on
which is to be erected a structure of any nature to be used for residential
purposes.
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — Act 247 of 1968,122
as amended to the effective date of this chapter, and as may be amended
from time to time thereafter.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, company, corporation, association,
corporate political body, joint ownership or any other entity capable of
functioning in the context used in this chapter; the term "person" shall
include a "landowner" and "prospective purchaser" as used in this chapter.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Any structure having a roof, self-supported or
supported by walls, columns or air pressure, which is fixed to the ground,
whether permanently or otherwise, used or occupied or intended to be used
or occupied for residential purposes.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Any residential subdivisions or
residential land developments, as defined in this chapter.
122. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 184-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 184-3
172:368
RESIDENTIAL LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement of one lot or
two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for the purpose of
constructing a group of two or more structures to be used as residences,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or the division or allocation of
land and/or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants for the purpose of constructing
residential buildings, residential leaseholds, residential condominiums,
residential building groups, streets, common areas or other features.
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract
or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or
other divisions of land (including changes in existing lot lines) for the
purpose - whether immediate or future - of lease, partition by the court
for distribution to heirs or devises, transfer of ownership or residential
building or residential lot development. The term "residential subdivision"
shall include a "residential land development" as defined herein.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land; all
buildings or other improvements to real property are hereby declared to be
structures for purposes of this chapter.
§ 184-4. Disclosure requirements; deed references.
§ 184-5. Disclosure information required.
The information listed below shall be summarized by the developer of
a lot in a residential subdivision or residential land development. This
information shall be accurately summarized in a written narrative, and a
copy of the narrative shall be given by the developer to the prospective
purchaser. The conclusory paragraph of the written narrative shall contain a
statement - in capitalized, bold-faced, twelve-point typewritten print — that,
if requested by the prospective purchaser, the developer shall also provide
A. After the effective date of this chapter, any developer selling or
intending to sell a lot in any residential development, residential
subdivision or residential land development, whether such lot is
improved or unimproved, shall prominently display in the office or other
place where property sales are or may be transacted the approved final
plan for the residential development, residential subdivision or
residential land development.
B. The approved final plan shall be plainly visible to any prospective
purchaser of a residential lot, and shall include the record plan and all
other accompanying sheets approved with the record plan.
C. The deed from the developer to the initial purchaser shall be in a form
acceptable to the City Solicitor and shall contain a cross reference to
any relevant homeowners' association declaration and/or bylaws with
specific cross reference to any relevant book and page number where
same may be recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for
Chester County, Pennsylvania.
§ 184-3 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 184-5
172:369
to the prospective purchaser a copy of all sheets or plats comprising the
approved final subdivision or land development plan.
A. A description of all common areas, including but not limited to park
lands, walkways, streets, open space, etc., which are part of the
subdivision or which are adjacent to the lot to be sold.
B. All lot lines within the subdivision.
C. The uses (including accessory uses) permitted within the subdivision by
the City's then-current zoning ordinance, and all limitations,
easements, deed restrictions or other restrictions which affect
development of the lots and/or their use.
D. Whether a homeowners' association (or any functional equivalent)
exists and membership therein is required, in which event a copy of the
homeowners' agreement shall be provided. As noted previously in
§ 184-4C, the deed should contain a cross reference to any relevant
documents and the recording of same in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds in and for Chester County, Pennsylvania.
E. All applicable dimensional requirements for the uses and structures
permitted on each lot, including, by way of example but not by way of
limitation, building setback requirements, building coverage
limitations, impervious surface limitations, height limitations, etc.
F. All applicable dimensional requirements for accessory uses and
structures permitted on each lot, including, by way of example and not
by way of limitation, size, setback requirements, height limitations,
fencing requirements, etc.
G. The location of all easements in the residential development and a
description of the nature of the easements, including, by way of
example and not by way limitation, easements for sanitary sewers,
storm sewers, water lines, gas lines, underground pipes, detention
basins, retention basins, swales, etc. This description shall also include
a narrative of specific lots affected by the foregoing easements, and the
limitations which these easements impose upon any lot.
H. The location of all areas within the residential development and on each
lot therein which are classified as "wetlands" under the then-current
definition of "wetlands" with reference to federal, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and local requirements governing wetlands and the
limitation which any such definition imposes on the lot or the
development; the location of wetlands shall be highlighted by the crosshatching
of all affected areas on the approved final plan.
I. The location within the residential development and on each lot of
floodplain areas as defined by the City Zoning Ordinance,123 and the
limitations which govern floodplains on any lot.
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 224, Zoning.
§ 184-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 184-5
172:370
§ 184-6. Residential disclosure statements.
§ 184-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to proceedings before a Magisterial District Judge, and upon a
determination of that person's failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, that person shall be subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $600,
together with costs, including attorneys' fees.
§ 184-8. Severability.
If any section or provision of this chapter is declared by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall not affect the
constitutionality, legality, or validity of this chapter as a whole, nor the
constitutionality, legality or validity of any other section or provision of this
chapter other than the one so declared to be unconstitutional, illegal, or
invalid.
§ 184-9. Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
All existing Ordinances of the City of Coatesville or parts thereof which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed.
J. The location of stormwater drainage facilities, including, by way of
example but not by way of limitation, detention and retention basins,
stormwater runoff paths, and the prospective purchaser's responsibility
therefor.
A. Before signing any agreement of sale, any individual person who is or
may be the initial retail purchaser of an improved or unimproved lot in a
residential development residential subdivision or residential land
development shall complete the residential disclosure statement
attached to this chapter as Exhibit A124. For purposes of this subsection,
the term "person" shall mean a natural person or persons who may
acquire legal title to the lot through any form of tenancy, including but
not limited to fee simple, tenancy by the entireties, tenancy in common,
joint tenancy with right of survivorship, etc.
B. The developer shall give to the person who signs an agreement of sale
one duplicate original of the residential disclosure statement.
C. Within five days after its execution by the prospective purchaser, the
developer shall provide to the City Secretary one duplicate original
signed residential disclosure statement, and the developer shall
maintain an additional duplicate original signed residential disclosure
statement for a period of not less than five years after its execution.
124. Editor's Note: Exhibit A, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 184-5 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 184-10
172:371
§ 184-10. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective 30 days after publication following final
adoption in accordance with the City Charter and the Third Class City Code.
Chapter 185
SEWERS
§ 184-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 184-10
185:372
ARTICLE I
Connections
§ 185-1. Construction authorized.
The Council of the City of Coatesville, Pennsylvania, shall by ordinance
authorize the construction of such sewers as it may deem necessary for the
improvement of the sanitary conditions of said city and, therein, authorize
the letting of contracts therefor under such terms and conditions as it may
direct.
§ 185-2. Permit to connect.
The owner or owners of any property abutting on the line of said sewer
for which the tapping fee charged thereon has been paid shall, at any time
thereafter, on presentation of the receipt for said tapping fee to the City
Engineer, receive from said City Engineer a permit authorizing such owner
or owners, his or their assigns to connect such property with said sewer.
§ 185-1 SEWERS § 185-2
185:373

ARTICLE II
Holding Tanks
§ 185-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to establish a procedure for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage
whether from residential or commercial uses, and it is hereby declared that
the enactment of this Article is necessary for the protection, benefit and
preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City
of Coatesville.
§ 185-4. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site. "Holding tanks" include but are not limited to the
following:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the city upon which there
is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in the city.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation.
§ 185-5. Rights and privileges granted.
The Council of the City of Coatesville is hereby authorized and empowered
to undertake within the city limits the control and methods of holding tank
sewage disposal and the collection and transportation thereof.
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
A.
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to it by
a water-carrying system.
B.
VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage where
water under pressure is not available.
C.
§ 185-3 SEWERS § 185-6
185:375
§ 185-6. Rules and regulations.
The Council of the City of Coatesville is hereby authorized and empowered
to adopt such rules and regulations concerning holding tanks and sewage
disposal therefrom which it may deem necessary from time to time to effect
the purpose herein.
§ 185-7. Rules and regulations to be in conformity with applicable
law.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Council of the City of
Coatesville shall be in conformity with the provisions herein, all other
ordinances of the city and all applicable laws and applicable rules and
regulations of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 185-8. Rates and charges.
The Council of the City of Coatesville shall have the right and power to fix,
alter, charge and collect rates, assessments and other charges in the area
served by its facilities at reasonable and uniform rates as authorized by
applicable law.
§ 185-9. Areas where holding tanks are authorized.
Holding tanks shall only be authorized on properties which are located
in areas within the city, not served by existing sewer lines of the City of
Coatesville or within two hundred (200) feet of city sewer lines.
§ 185-10. Exclusive rights and privileges.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the direction
and control of the City of Coatesville, and the disposal thereof shall be
made only at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 185-11. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this Article or any
ordinance of the City of Coatesville, the provisions of any applicable law
and the rules and regulations of the City of Coatesville and any
administrative agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the city or its agent to collect, transport and dispose of the
contents therein.
§ 185-6 COATESVILLE CODE § 185-12
185:376
§ 185-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than six hundred dollars ($600.) and costs or to undergo imprisonment in
the county prison for a period not in excess of ninety (90) days, or both such
fine and imprisonment.
§ 185-13. Abatement of nuisance.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation
of § 185-11 above shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the
city by either seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief from a court of
competent jurisdiction.
§ 185-12 SEWERS § 185-13
185:377
Chapter 187
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 108.
§ 185-13 COATESVILLE CODE § 185-13
187:378
ARTICLE I
Users' Responsibilities
§ 187-1. Definitions. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SHOPPING CART — Those pushcarts of the type or types which are
commonly provided by grocery stores, markets and other types of stores for
the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores, markets and
other types of stores and incidentally from the store to a place outside the
store.
§ 187-2. Users to return carts to store premises.
Any person who makes any use of any shopping cart, belonging to or
furnished by the owner of the store, market or shopping center, for
assembling or moving of groceries, foodstuffs and allied products there
purchased shall, after such use, promptly return the shopping cart to the
property from whence taken.
§ 187-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Any other use made of said shopping carts, including the abandonment
of the same upon the streets, highways, alleys and other public ways of
the city, shall be deemed a public nuisance; and any person found guilty
of committing such a nuisance shall, upon conviction thereof in summary
proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than six hundred dollars
($600.) or to confinement to the city jail for not more than ninety (90) days,
or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 187-1 SHOPPING CARTS § 187-3
187:379

ARTICLE II
Redemption of Abandoned Carts
§ 187-4. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SHOPPING CART — Those pushcarts of the type or types which are
commonly provided by grocery stores, markets and other types of stores for
the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores, markets and
other types of stores and incidentally from the store to a place outside the
store.[Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
§ 187-5. Abandoned carts to be impounded.
Any shopping cart found abandoned upon the highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks or other public ways shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. Any
such cart shall be impounded by the city in a central pound, namely, the City
Garage.
§ 187-6. Notice to owners to redeem. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 1033-96]
The city shall notify the owners of such carts, setting forth the number of
carts so impounded and directing said owner to redeem the same within
thirty (30) days from the date of said notice.
§ 187-7. Redemption fee. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96;
9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
The owner redeeming any such cart shall pay to the city a pound fee as
provided in Chapter 108, Fees, for each cart impounded, upon the release
of said cart by the city. The fee to be paid to the city shall be as provided for
in Chapter 108, Fees.
§ 187-8. Disposal of unredeemed carts.
In the event that any such cart is not redeemed within thirty (30) days
from the date of the notice provided for in § 187-6 above and in the case
of a cart which cannot be identified because the same is not properly
tagged with the owner's name, the city may proceed to sell such cart or
carts by following the procedure set forth in the Uniform Commercial Code,
governing warehousemen, namely, Subsection 2 of an Act of Assembly dated
April 6, 1953, P.L. No. 37-210, as amended.125
125. Editor's Note: See 13 Pa. C.S.A. § 7210(b).
§ 187-4 SHOPPING CARTS § 187-9
187:381
§ 187-9. Effect on other legislation.
This Article supplements Article I, regulating the use of shopping carts, and
is not intended to repeal any of the terms thereof.
§ 187-9 COATESVILLE CODE § 187-9
187:382
Chapter 190
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 108. Hazardous material spills — See Ch. 132.
§ 187-9 SHOPPING CARTS § 187-9
187:383

Part 1
[Adopted 8-29-1R9e9c0ycBliynOgrd. No. 862-90]
ARTICLE I
Recycling
§ 190-1. Title.
The short title of this Part 1 shall be the "City of Coatesville Recycling
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
§ 190-2. Definitions. [Amended 7-26-1993 by Ord. No. 931-93]
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty beverage cans constructed solely of aluminum,
not tin, metal or steel.
BULKY WASTE — Items of solid waste which, due to their size, shape
or weight, cannot be collected as a part of the normal weekly municipal
waste collection and, therefore, require special handling. For example,
large household appliances, such as stoves and refrigerators, plumbing
fixtures, furniture, large crates, tires, tools, machinery or parts thereof, and
similar items in size shall be considered "bulky waste."
CARTWAY — That street or alley within which vehicles are permitted,
including travel lanes, but not including shoulders, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks or drainage swales.[Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
CITY — The governmental jurisdiction and legal entity of the City of
Coatesville, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in a
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited to
stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers, theaters
and multifamily rental housing properties with four or more units.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE — Lumber, roofing material,
sheathing, rubble, broken concrete, macadam, plaster and brick, conduit,
pipe, insulation and other material which results from a construction,
demolition or remodeling process.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Paper or pasteboard contracted into parallel
grooves and ridges, commonly referred to as "cardboard," which is used for
wrapping, packing, shipping and/or storage.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION — The scheduled collection and
transport of recyclable materials placed at the curbline or other similar
location by residential establishments or approved small businesses.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms in a residence or dwelling, which
room or rooms have fixed cooking facilities arranged for occupancy by one,
two or more persons living together.
§ 190-1 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-2
187:385
GLASS BOTTLE OR JAR — All clean bottles and jars made of clear, green or
brown glass, not including noncontainer glass, plate glass, blue glass and
porcelain and ceramic products, light bulbs and fluorescent tubes.
HABITABLE — Any building or structure that can be occupied or lived
in.[Added 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1155-2001]
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Printed or unprinted sheets, shavings and
cuttings of sulfite or sulfate ledger, bond, writing and other papers which
have similar fiber and filler content. This grade must be free of treated,
coated, padded or heavily printed stock. This definition includes lightweight
office papers, i.e., letterhead or mimeograph paper typically sold as white
ledger paper, bond, Xerox paper and onionskin, as well as computer paper.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and slaughterhouses.
INHABITABLE — Any building or structure that cannot be occupied or lived
in.[Added 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1155-2001]
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes,
child day-care centers, libraries, nonprofit associations, schools and
universities. This definition shall not include standard residential units.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings
and similar material but not including grass clippings.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building used or designed as a residence for
four or more families living independently of each other and doing their own
cooking therein, including apartment houses, group quarters, townhouses
and condominium complexes.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENT — Public facilities operated by the City of
Coatesville and other governmental authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities;
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
in the Solid Waste Management Act126 from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or
air-pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint" and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions and
containing advertisements as matters of public interest, but not including
glossy advertising inserts typically inserted with newspapers nor magazines
or periodicals.
126. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 190-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-2
187:386
PERSON(S) — Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture,
association, joint-stock company, trust and incorporated organization or
any government or public agency or political subdivision thereof or any
authority or agency thereof. In any provision of this Part 1 prescribing a
fine, imprisonment, penalty or remedy or any combination of the foregoing,
the term "person" shall include the officers and directors of any corporation
or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLASTICS — Empty and clean consumer product containers made of
polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polypropylene (PP), high-density
polyethylene (HDPE) and low-density polyethylene (LDPE), most commonly
but not limited to plastic bottles used as containers for soda, milk and other
consumer food products or for household cleaning products or for personal
care products.
RECYCLABLE/RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by
the City of Coatesville for separation, collection, processing, recovery or
reuse as part of a recycling program.
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which could
otherwise be disposed of or processed as solid waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of solid waste (other than through combustion)
and creation and recovery of reusable materials other than a fuel for the
generation of energy.
REGISTERED COLLECTOR OR HAULER — A person (as defined in this
Part 1) who is in possession of all pertinent permits and registrations which
may be required by the City of Coatesville for the collection, transportation,
storage or disposal of recyclables within the City.[Amended 6-23-20014
by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any occupied dwelling unit, except
multifamily rental housing properties with four or more units.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — That strip of land consisting of at least three feet from
either side of the cartway (and including the sidewalk in its entirety) for
public or private use, or other certain public or quasi-public
purpose.[Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96; amended 6-23-2014 by
Ord. No. 1433-2014]
SOLID WASTE — All materials or substances that are generally discarded
or rejected as being spent, useless, worthless or in excess to the owners at
the time of such discard or rejection, including garbage, refuse, industrial
and commercial waste, sludges from air- or water-pollution control facilities
or water supply treatment facilities, rubbish, contained gaseous materials,
incinerator residue, demolition and construction debris and offal.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
that are separated from solid waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
STEEL CANS — Empty, all-steel (ferrous material) or bimetal beverage and
food containers.
§ 190-2 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-2
187:387
UNINHABITABLE — Any building or structure that has been declared by
the Codes Department as dilapidated or under order of demolition.[Added
2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1155-2001]
§ 190-3. Program established.
The City of Coatesville hereby establishes and implements a mandatory
source-separation and collection program for recyclable materials by
persons located in the City of Coatesville in accordance with Section 1501
of the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act.127
§ 190-4. Separation requirements.
A. Residential (single-family and multifamily units up to four dwelling
units).
(1) Owners and residents of residential establishments are hereby
required to separate all recyclable materials as specified by
regulation from other municipal waste generated at their homes,
apartments and other residential establishments and to store such
material until collection.
(2) Recyclable materials from residential establishments shall be
placed at the curb or other similar area, separate from solid waste,
for collection, at such times and dates as may be established by
regulation. Such regulations shall schedule a minimum of one day
per month for pickup of recyclables from residential
establishments. Nothing in this Part 1 or regulations promulgated
hereunder shall be deemed to impair the ownership of the
separated materials by the person who generated them unless and
until such materials are placed at curbside or similar location for
collection by the municipality, its agents or authorized collector.
(3) The appropriate City authorities are hereby authorized to
designate, by regulation, the days and times for the collection of
recyclable newspaper, recyclable aluminum beverage cans and
recyclable glass.
B. Multifamily residential units with four or more dwelling units.
(1) The owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily
housing properties with four or more units may comply with the
responsibilities under this section by establishing a collection
system for recyclable materials at each property. The collection
system must include suitable containers for collecting and sorting
materials, easily accessible locations for the containers and written
instructions to the occupants concerning the use and availability of
the collection system. Owners, landlords and agents of owners or
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501.
§ 190-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-4
187:388
§ 190-5. Leaf waste.
All persons who reside in residential establishments and all persons who
are responsible for the operation of commercial, institutional, industrial
and municipal establishments where leaf waste occurs or is generated
shall source separate all leaves and place them for collection at the times
and in the manner prescribed by regulation unless those persons have
otherwise provided for the composting of leaf waste. The owner, landlord
or agent of an owner or landlord of multifamily rental housing properties
landlords who comply with this Part 1 shall not be liable for
noncompliance of occupants of their buildings.
(2) Multi-unit residential properties (buildings with four or more living
units) not included in the City's collection program shall be
required to separate for collection and recycling the following
three materials: newspaper, glass bottles and jars (clear, green and
brown) and aluminum cans.
(3) A verification form shall be sent by the City to each owner, landlord
or agent prior to the start of the implementation of this recycling
program as mandated by this Part 1.
(4) The City's Recycling Coordinator shall have the authority to verify
the appropriateness of each recycling plan for each multi-unit
residential building. The verification forms must be returned to the
City annually prior to October 1. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord.
No. 1012-96]
C. Commercial, institutional, industrial and municipal establishments.
(1) Commercial, institutional, industrial and municipal establishments
are hereby required to separate all recyclable materials as
specified by regulation and to store such material until collection.
The times, dates and places for collection shall be established by
regulations. Such regulations shall schedule a minimum of one day
per month for pickup of recyclables from commercial, institutional,
industrial and municipal establishments. All commercial,
industrial, municipal and institutional establishments shall be
required to separate for collection and recycling high-grade office
paper, corrugated paper and aluminum cans.
(2) The City's Recycling Coordinator shall have the authority to verify
the appropriateness of each recycling plan for each commercial,
institutional, industrial and municipal establishment. In addition,
anyone who has a food and beverage license must follow the same
rules as a commercial or institutional establishment and must also
recycle glass bottles and jars (clear, green and brown).
(3) Verification forms must to returned to the City's Recycling
Coordinator annually prior to October 1. [Amended 3-25-1996 by
Ord. No. 1012-96]
§ 190-4 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-5
187:389
with four or more units, commercial, institutional, industrial and municipal
establishments may comply with their responsibilities under this section by
establishing a collection system for leaf waste at each property.
§ 190-6. Unauthorized collection.
It shall be a violation of the terms of this Part 1 for any person, other
than authorized personnel of the City or the authorized collector of the
recyclables by the City, to collect, pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any such materials. Each such collection or pickup in violation hereof
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
§ 190-7. Donation to authorized organization.
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to individuals or
organizations authorized by the City in its recycling regulations. These
materials must either be delivered to the individual's or organization's site,
or they may be placed at the curb for collection by said individual or
organization on days not indicated as recyclable material collection days
by the City. Said individuals or organizations may not collect recyclable
materials on or immediately preceding (within 24 hours) a regularly
scheduled curbside collection day.
§ 190-8. Enforcement.
A. Authority. [Amended 8-22-2011 by Ord. No. 1358-2011]
(1) The City of Coatesville, its administration and/or its Recycling
Coordinator is authorized and directed to enforce this Part 1.
Enforcement authority is hereby further conferred to the SWEEP
(Solid Waste Education Enforcement Program) Officer, as
appointed by the Director of Public Works. In addition, this
authority for enforcement conferred to the SWEEP Officer extends
not only to Part 1, Article I, of Chapter 190, governing recycling,
but also to Part 2, Articles II, III, IV, V and VA,128 and Part 3, Article
VI, such that any reference to authority conferred for enforcement
under Chapter 190 and referencing the "Code Enforcement
Officer" (or other authorized enforcing party, however designated)
shall be interpreted to include as well the SWEEP Officer, who shall
have the same authority for enforcement.
(2) The same are hereby authorized and directed to establish and
promulgate reasonable regulations as to the manner, days and
times for the collection of recyclable materials in accordance with
the terms hereof and any other matters required to implement this
Part 1. The City may change, modify, repeal or amend any portion
of said rules and regulations at any time.
128. Editor's Note: Article VA was repealed 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014.
§ 190-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-8
187:390
§ 190-9. Registration of collectors. [Amended 7-26-1993 by Ord. No.
931-93; 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No.
1418-2013; 6-23-20014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
B. Persons occupying commercial (including multifamily rental housing
properties with four or more units), institutional, industrial and
municipal establishments, within the City boundaries, and otherwise
providing for the recycling of materials are required by this Part 1 to
recycle and must provide or have their authorized collector provide
written documentation semiannually to the City of the total number of
tons recycled or estimated to be recycled, as well as the name of any
authorized collector collecting their recyclables.
A. Registration requirements.
(1) Beginning September 1, 1993, no person other than a registered
hauler shall collect or transport recyclables, as defined in this Part
1, generated, whether anywhere or from any user in the City.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, collect or
remove any recyclables from any public or private property within
the City without first registering to do so in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 1.
(3) Every person desiring to engage in, to continue to engage in or
hereafter to begin to engage in the business of collecting, removing
or transporting recyclables from any property within the City shall
first register with the City. Such registration shall be for a period of
one year beginning September 1 of the year in which the
registration occurs. All persons shall register by September 30 of
each year. All registrations shall be issued for the year period
(September 1 to August 31) or such portion thereof as shall remain
after the issuance thereof. There shall be no reduction in the fee for
registration issued after the beginning of any one-year period.
(4) Standards for collection vehicle. The collection equipment and
transportation vehicles used for the collection of municipal
recyclables shall be of the closed-body type with an automatic
compactor unit. Said vehicles shall at all times be in good and
proper mechanical condition and in compliance with the minimum
safety and sanitary regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. All such vehicles shall be specifically designed to
prevent leakage of any liquid or fluids. Other type of vehicles may
be used only for the collection of recyclable materials, bulk solid
waste and collecting and transporting dumpsters, provided that
such items are separately collected in accordance with other
provisions of this Part 1 and the regulations adopted hereunder.
The municipal solid waste and recyclables so collected shall be
suitably enclosed or covered so as to prevent roadside littering,
attraction of vermin or the creation of other nuisances. All
§ 190-8 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-9
187:391
collection equipment and transportation vehicles shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition.
(5) Private haulers' insurance requirements.
(a) No person shall be entitled to register with the City as a
collector and no registration shall issue to any person desiring
to collect or transport recyclables generated in the City unless
such person or collector can show certificates of insurance as
set forth below:
[1] Workers' compensation insurance as required by statute in
such amounts as required by state law.
[2] Comprehensive general liability insurance at a minimum
limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 in the
aggregate annually for both bodily injury and property
damage coverage.
[3] Comprehensive automobile liability insurance with limits
of liability not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence. In
instances where more than one vehicle will be utilized by
the person in the City of Coatesville to collect or transport
recyclables, then the person shall satisfy the City that
comprehensive automobile liability insurance coverage is
in effect for all vehicles to be used within the City for the
collection and transportation of recyclables within the
City.
[4] Owner's and contractor's protective insurance in amounts
consistent with the minimum coverages required in
Subsection A(5)(a)[2] above.
(b) The minimum insurance coverages shall be in such amounts
that the Council may establish from time to time. Each and
every policy of insurance required in this subsection shall carry
with it an endorsement to the effect that the insurance carrier
will convey to the City, by certified mail, written notice of any
modifications, material alterations or cancellation of any such
policy or policies or the terms thereof. The above-mentioned
written notice shall be mailed at least 10 days prior to the date
of any such modification, material alteration or cancellation.
(6) Application requirements.
(a) Every person who shall apply for registration under this
section shall, in applying therefor, state the type or types of
refuse or recyclable material that will be collected, the manner
and place of disposal for all such refuse and the location of the
recycling center for all collected materials under such
registration. Said applicant shall describe the type or types of
vehicles to be used for collection, listing the make, model, year
§ 190-9 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-9
187:392
and license plate number; include a certificate of insurance as
aforementioned; and state the name of the company, address,
telephone number and the contact person responsible for
compliance with this Part 1. No such registration shall be
granted if the vehicle and/or manner and place of disposal of
such refuse and/or recycling center shall not conform in every
respect to the requirements of this Part 1.
(b) Authorized collectors shall not be required to collect refuse
from any residence where it is obvious that recyclable
materials have not been separated pursuant to the provisions
of this Part 1 and the regulations adopted hereunder.
(7) Nothing contained in this Part 1 shall prevent the City of
Coatesville from terminating or revoking any or all registrations
granted hereunder for failure of the registrant to comply with Act
101,129 the terms and conditions of this Part 1, rules and
regulations promulgated by the City Council pursuant to this Part 1
or administrative requirements established by the City
administration and staff hereunder or for failure to comply with any
other City ordinance or regulation.
(8) Registration will be done by the City for each vehicle of the person
who owns or leases the vehicle only after the person has satisfied
the conditions outlined in this Part 1. There shall be no fee for the
City's registration program for registered haulers.
(9) Registrations will be renewed annually, provided that the registrant
has maintained that registration in good standing. All registrations
will be made or renewed on a calendar-year basis. There will be no
reduction in the fee for a registration made after the beginning of
the year.
(10) Registration cannot be transferred from one vehicle to another.
(11) Registrations issued by the City must be firmly attached and
prominently displayed on each side of the vehicle so as to be clearly
visible.
(12) The registrant shall comply with the following inspection,
recordkeeping and reporting requirements:
(a) It shall be a condition of being registered with the City of
Coatesville that each registrant:
[1] Report quarterly to the City no later than December 15
and thereafter on a quarterly basis by the 15th of each
month which follows the end of a quarterly reporting
period (the first quarterly period commencing September
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 190-9 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-9
187:393
1) the gross tonnage of municipal recyclables collected in
the City and disposal sites utilized;
[2] Maintain an accurate logbook of vehicles, including the
location of container, collection routes and disposal or
processing facilities utilized, which shall be open to
inspection by the City's enforcement personnel; and
[3] Open all facilities and vehicles to inspection by the City's
enforcement personnel during reasonable hours but not
necessarily on prior notice.
B. Penalties and enforcement.
(1) Summary violations.
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this Part 1 or who
engages in unlawful conduct as defined in this Part 1 shall,
upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 to be paid to the
use of the City, with costs of prosecution, or to be imprisoned
for a period of not more than 90 days, or both. [Amended
3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
(b) Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any
provision of this Part 1 or unlawful conduct as defined in this
Part 1 shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) Any person who engages in unlawful conduct, as defined in this
Part 1, shall, in accordance with applicable provisions of the
laws of the commonwealth, be subject to the provisions of Act
101, Chapter 17,130 as such provisions with respect to
enforcement and remedies may apply to such unlawful
conduct.
(d) This Part 1 and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant
hereto shall be enforceable by an action or actions at law or
equity.
(2) Administrative penalties.
(a) If a registrant violates this Part 1, the City shall have the right
to:
[1] Suspend or revoke the registration of the violating vehicle,
suspend or revoke all registrations issued to the person
who is the registrant of the violating vehicle or impose a
civil penalty in accordance with the provisions of Act
101131 and require the registrant to pay the cost of the
proceeding.
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1701 et seq.
131. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 190-9 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-9
187:394
[2] Deny any subsequent registration application by that
person or any person who or which was or who or which is
affiliated with, related to or controlled by any person who
was, at the time of commitment of such unlawful conduct
or any time thereafter, an officer, director, shareholder,
partner or joint venturer of, under contact with, employed
by or related or affiliated in any manner with such person.
(b) In the event that any civil penalty imposed under this Part 1 is
unpaid after 10 days following the full and final disposition of
the penalty proceedings, the City shall suspend the registrant's
operating privileges within the City until the civil penalty is
paid.
(c) Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any
provision of this Part 1 or unlawful conduct as defined in this
Part 1 shall constitute a separate offense.
(3) Notice and hearing procedure.
(a) Prior to such action taken under Subsection B, the City will
give the registrant written notice of the violation setting forth
the reasons for the proposed action. The registrant will have
15 days to respond in writing to the notice. If no response is
received, the penalty, registration suspension or revocation
will take effect. If a response is received, the City will provide
the right to a hearing as described in this section. If no
response is received, an appropriate administrative
determination will be imposed.
(b) Any person who has been aggrieved by an administrative
determination of the City under this Part 1 may file a written
request for review by the City Council by certified mail within
15 days of the date of such determination. The hearing shall be
held promptly after receipt of the request but in no event later
than 30 working days of the receipt of the request, in
accordance with the procedure set forth in this section.
[1] Any person who has filed a request for review shall be
given notice, in writing, of the time and place of hearing.
Such notice shall be first-class United States mail, postage
prepaid, directed to the address set forth in the request for
review and shall be mailed not less than 10 days prior to
the date of hearing.
[2] The person requesting the hearing may appear personally
or by counsel. The person filing the request for the hearing
shall have the burden of proof to establish the basis for
review. Upon the request of the person requesting the
hearing, City Council shall issue a subpoena requiring the
testimony of witnesses and the production of books,
§ 190-9 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-9
187:395
§ 190-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-26-1993 by Ord. No.
931-93; ; 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
records or other documents relative to the material
involved in such hearing.
[3] All testimony at the hearing shall be given under oath.
[4] The hearing officer shall render a decision within 15
working days of the hearing by certified mail, return
receipt requested, forwarded to the person at the address
shown in the City's records.
C. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
section shall be deemed concurrent, and the exercise or existence of
any remedy shall not prevent the City from exercising any other remedy
hereunder, at law or in equity.
D. Reservation of rights. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
preventing the City from exercising its rights and duties as defined
pursuant to this Part 1, Act 101 and Act 97132 and further from
proceeding in courts of law and/or equity to enforce said rights as so
define, without first pursuing the action provided for in Subsection B
hereof.
E. Revisions.
(1) This section may be amended from time to time.
(2) The disposal of municipal recyclables generated within the City of
Coatesville shall be subject to such further rules, regulations,
resolutions and standards as may, from time to time, be
promulgated, adopted and enacted by the City pursuant to this Part
1 in furtherance of implementation and enforcement of the Plan,
including, but without limitation, regulations as to the form of
registration application, standards for the approval of any such
registration, the amount agreed to be charged for said registration,
the terms of the registration, registration issuance procedure and
registration revocation procedures; provided, however, that no
such rules, regulations, resolutions or standards adopted by the
City shall be contrary to or less stringent than the provisions of this
Part 1, the Plan, Act 97, Act 101 or any regulations adopted
thereunder.
F. Construction. The terms and provisions of this section are to be liberally
construed so as best to achieve and effectuate the goals and purpose
hereof.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this Part 1 or any regulation promulgated
132. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq. and 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 190-9 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-10
187:396
§ 190-11. Franchisees or registrants. [Amended 6-23-20014 by Ord.
No. 1433-2014]
The City of Coatesville may enter into an agreement(s) with public or
private agencies or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the
recyclable materials from curbside.
pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction thereof in a court of summary
jurisdiction, be punishable by fines of not more than $600 or be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
B. Alternative citation process. [Added 10-28-2013 by Ord. No.
1418-2013]
(1) Any person violating the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $25 to be paid within 10
days.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $50 to be paid after 10
days but within 20 days.
(3) Any violation of the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $75 to be paid after 20
days, but before citation.
(4) Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid shall,
after 28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the defendant.
Thereafter, the prosecution shall proceed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, and upon conviction for
the offense, the defendant shall be ordered to pay the maximum
fine prescribed by law, together with the costs of prosecution, and/
or to be incarcerated in the county prison for not more than five
days.
§ 190-10 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-11
187:397

Part 2
[Adopted C11ol-l1e3c-t1io9n9 5AnBdy DOirsdp. oNsoa.l 1002-95]
ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 190-12. Title.
This Part 2 shall be known and referred to as the "Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 190-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part 2, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ACT or ACT 97 — The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980
(P.L. 380, No. 97, July 7, 1980).
AGRICULTURAL WASTE — Poultry and livestock manure or residual
materials in liquid or solid form generated in the production and marketing
of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals and their products, provided that
such waste is not a hazardous waste. The term includes the residual
materials generated in producing, harvesting and marketing of all
agronomic, horticultural, silvicultural and agricultural crops or
commodities grown on what are usually recognized and accepted as farms,
forest or other agricultural lands.
ASHES — Residue from fires used for cooking and heating and on-site
incineration.
BULK WASTE — Large items of solid waste, including but not limited to
appliances, furniture, trees, branches or stumps, which may require special
handling due to size, shape or weight.
CITY — The City of Coatesville.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including but not limited
to stores, markets, office buildings or restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
CONSTRUCTION DEMOLITION WASTE — All municipal and residual
waste, building materials, grubbing waste and rubble resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on houses,
commercial buildings and other structures and pavements.
COUNCIL — The City Council for the City of Coatesville.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP).[Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
DISPOSAL — The incineration, disposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner
such that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the
§ 190-12 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-13
187:399
environment, is emitted into the air or discharged to the waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DOMESTIC WASTE or HOUSEHOLD WASTE — Solid waste, comprised of
garbage and rubbish, which normally originates in the residential private
household or apartment house.
DUMPSTER/CONSTRUCTION CONTAINER — A bulk storage container for
garbage and other waste materials that can be hauled directly to the
point of disposal or emptied into a large compactor-type truck or other
conveyance for disposal.
GARBAGE — Any waste parts of food, from a market or kitchen, or any
animal or vegetable matter that is discarded and/or thrown away or any
worthless or offensive matter that has been discarded.
HAULER or PRIVATE COLLECTOR — Any person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation which as been registered with the City or its
designated representative to collect, transport and dispose of refuse for a
fee herein prescribed.[Amended 6-23-20014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes, as
defined in the Act, which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics, may:
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including but not limited to factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, mines and slaughterhouses.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment engaged in
service, including but not limited to hospitals, nursing homes, orphanages,
schools and universities.
LITTER — Any discarded trash, garbage or rubbish, as defined in this
section, and all other waste materials, which, if thrown or scattered about
in a careless manner or lying about in disorder as prohibited in this Part 2,
is determined to be a nuisance to the safety, health, cleanliness and comfort
of the inhabitants of the City.
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL — Three or more dwelling units, each
accommodating one or more families living wholly or partly over another or
other units.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase morbidity in either an individual or total population; or
A.
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of
or otherwise managed.
B.
§ 190-13 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-13
187:400
under Act 97 from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply
treatment plant or air-pollution control facility. The term does not include
source-separated recyclable materials.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, state institution and agency or any other
legal entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
In any provisions of this Part 2 prescribing a fine, imprisonment or penalty
or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include but not
be limited to transfer facilities, composting facilities and resource-recovery
facilities.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building, structure or vacant
lot designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential
purposes or place of business, whether inhabited, occupied or temporarily
or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds,
walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant
to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
convert part or all such waste materials for off-site refuse. "Processing"
facilities include but are not limited to transfer facilities, composting
facilities and resource-recovery facilities.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, sidewalk, highway, alley or other public way
and any public park, square, space, ground or building.
REFUSE — All solid waste materials which are discarded as useless.
REGISTERED HAULER — A person who is in possession of all pertinent
permits and registrations which may be required by the City for the
collection, transportation, storage or disposal of solid waste, trash, garbage,
rubbish, ashes, bulk wastes and trade wastes.[Amended 6-23-20014 by
Ord. No. 1433-2014]
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded materials or
other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations;
and any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility or air-pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term "residual waste" shall
not include coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse Disposal Control
Act.133 "Residual waste" shall not include treatment sludge from coal mine
drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on pursuant to
and in compliance with a valid permit issued pursuant to the Clean Streams
Law.134
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes,
133. Editor's Note: See 52 P.S. § 30.51 et seq.
134. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 190-13 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-13
187:401
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bottles, bedding,
crockery and similar items.
SCAVENGING — The unauthorized and uncontrolled removal of materials
placed for collection or from a solid waste processing or disposal facility.
SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY WASTE — Any coarse screening, grit and
dewatered or air-dried sludge from sewage treatment plants and pumping
from septic tanks or septage which are a municipal solid waste and require
proper disposal under Act 97.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
STORAGE — The containment of any waste on a temporary basis in such
a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be presumed
that the containment of any waste in excess of one year constitutes disposal.
This presumption can be overcome by clear and convincing evidence to the
contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any solid waste at any time
after generation.
TRANSFER STATION — Any supplemental transportation facility used as an
adjunct to solid waste route collection vehicles.
TRASH — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals,
abandoned vehicles and solid and industrial waste which causes danger to
the health, safety and welfare of any resident or business owner.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a street, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
WASTE MATERIALS — Includes all categories of materials to be disposed
of, excluding garbage.
§ 190-14. Prohibitions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant of any property
to accumulate or permit to accumulate upon any public or private
property within the City garbage, rubbish, bulk waste or any other
municipal or residual solid waste, including agricultural waste,
domestic waste, animal waste and hazardous waste, except in
accordance with the provisions of this Part 2 and the rules and
regulations of the Chester County Department of Health.
B. It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant of any property
to burn any solid waste or other wastes enumerated in Subsection A
§ 190-13 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-14
187:402
§ 190-15. Standards for storage.
hereof within the City, except in accordance with the provisions of this
Part 2.
C. It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant of any property
to dispose of any solid waste or other wastes enumerated in Subsection
A hereof within the City, except in accordance with the provisions of
this Part 2.
D. It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant of any property
to haul, transport or remove any solid waste or other wastes
enumerated on Subsection A hereof from any public or private property
within the City without first registering to do so in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 2. [Amended 6-23-20014 by Ord. No.
1433-2014]
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge any materials from any
solid waste or other solid wastes enumerated in Subsection A hereof
that are stored or deposited for collection within the City.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit or cause or
permit to be thrown, placed or deposited any solid wastes enumerated
in Subsection A hereof in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, body of
water, or public or private property within the City, except as provided
in this Part 2.
A. The storage of solid waste shall be practiced so as to prevent the
attraction, harborage or breeding of insects or rodents and to eliminate
conditions harmful to public health or which create safety hazards,
odors, unsightliness or public nuisances.
B. Any property owner, occupant of any property or person producing
municipal waste shall provide a sufficient number of approved
containers to store all waste materials generated during periods
between regularly scheduled collections and shall place and store all
waste materials therein.
C. Any property owner or occupant storing municipal waste for collection
shall comply with the following preparation standards:
(1) All municipal wastes shall be drained free of liquids before placed
in storage containers.
(2) All garbage or other putrescible waste shall be securely wrapped in
paper, plastic or similar material or placed in properly tied plastic
bags.
(3) All cans, bottles or other food containers should be rinsed free of
food particles and drained before being placed in storage
containers in accordance with Part 1.
§ 190-14 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-15
187:403
(4) Subject to Part 1, grass clippings and tree trimmings shall be
placed in approved containers or shall be cut and tied securely into
bundles. Bundles shall be not more than three feet in length, not
more than two feet in diameter and not more than 40 pounds in
weight. No single piece shall be more than three inches in
diameter.
(5) Subject to Part 1, newspapers and magazines shall be placed in
approved containers or shall be tied securely into bundles of not
more than 40 pounds in weight.
(6) When specified by the City or its designated representative, special
preparation and storage procedures may be required to facilitate
the collection and resource recovery of certain waste materials.
(7) Carpet and/or carpet padding shall be placed in an approved closed
container or must be cut in lengths not to exceed eight feet and
securely tied. No single piece shall be more than 40 pounds in
weight.
D. All municipal waste shall be stored in containers approved by the City
or its designated representative. Individual containers and bulk
containers (dumpsters) utilized for storage of municipal waste shall
comply with the following standards:
(1) Reusable containers shall be constructed of durable, watertight,
rust- and corrosion-resistant material, such as plastic, metal or
fiberglass, in such a manner as to be leakproof, weatherproof,
insectproof and rodentproof.
(2) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a tightfitting
cover and suitable lifting handles to facilitate collection.
(3) Reusable containers for individual residences shall have a capacity
of not less than 10 gallons nor more than 30 gallons and a load
weight of not more than 40 pounds.
(4) All individual containers shall be ninety-six-gallon plastic
containers supplied by the contractor providing trash collection
services for the City; and any replacement containers shall be
purchased from the contractor at the cost of acquisition by the
contractor, said replacement containers to comply with the
specifications as bid out in the contract for services with the City.
[Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
E. Any person storing municipal waste for collection shall comply with the
following storage standards:
(1) Containers shall be kept tightly sealed or covered. Solid waste shall
not protrude or extend above the top of the container.
(2) Reusable containers shall be kept in a sanitary condition. The
interior of the containers shall be thoroughly cleaned, rinsed,
§ 190-15 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-15
187:404
§ 190-16. Collection.
drained and disinfected as often as necessary to prevent the
accumulation of liquid residues or solids on the bottom or sides of
the containers.
(3) Containers shall be used and maintained as to prevent public
nuisances.
(4) Containers that do not conform to the standard of this Part 2 or
which have sharp edges, ragged edges or any other defect that may
hamper or injure collection personnel shall be promptly replaced
by the owner upon notification from the City or its designated
representative and must be purchased from the company under
contract with the City for cost. [Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No.
1433-2014]
(5) Containers shall be placed by the property owner or occupant at a
collection point specified by the City or its designated
representative.
(6) With the exception of pickup days when the containers are placed
for collection, the container shall be properly stored on the owner's
premises.
(7) Bulk waste items, such as furniture, appliances and tires, shall be
stored out of sight in a manner which will prevent the accumulation
or collection of water, the harborage of rodents, safety hazards and
fire hazards. Doors must be removed from appliances. Bulk items
will only be placed for collection the day scheduled for pickup.
[Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
F. The storage of all municipal waste from residential units, multifamily
residential units, commercial establishments, institutions and industrial
lunchroom or office waste sources is subject to the regulations and
standards set forth in this Part 2. The type, size and placement
requirements for bulk containers (dumpsters) shall be determined by
the waste hauler and are subject to approval by the City.
A. The City shall provide for the collection of all garbage, rubbish and bulk
wastes from all properties in the City. Multifamily residential,
commercial, institutional and industrial properties can contract with a
private collector or collectors to provide this essential collection service
but in doing so must utilize bulk containers (dumpsters) only to be
eligible. In the cases of institutional properties and industrial
properties, such properties are required to use the services of a private
collector or collectors and the use of dumpsters. [Amended
12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1271-2005]
B. All single-family residences shall utilize the collection service provided
by the City. This service provides for collection of 1/2 yard of solid waste
and 1/2 yard of recycling for a total of one cubic yard of combined
§ 190-15 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-16
187:405
waste/recyclables. Those having extremely large families or unusually
large solid waste and recyclable needs shall be permitted to apply
to the City to obtain an additional service upon paying for same and
receiving additional containers for such use on an annual basis.
[Amended 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
C. All multifamily residential, commercial, institutional and industrial
establishments shall negotiate and individually contract collection
service with the City's collector or any other properly registered waste
hauler of their choice that is properly registered with the City.
[Amended 6-23-20014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
D. All residential garbage and rubbish shall be collected at least once a
week.
E. All multifamily residential, commercial, institutional, public and
industrial lunchroom and office waste utilizing bulk containers
(dumpsters) shall be collected at least once a week. Rubbish collection
from these sources shall be made as often as necessary to control
health hazards, odors, flies and unsightly conditions. The City reserves
the right to require more-frequent collection when deemed necessary.
F. Residential collection schedules shall be published as deemed
necessary by the City or its contracted hauler.
G. It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant of any property
to allow the placement of containers at curbside earlier than 6:00 p.m.
on the day prior to the designated collection day. All containers must be
removed from curbside to the normal storage place no later than 6:00
p.m. on the collection day. All storage areas must be located on the
property/premises and are not permitted in the right-of-way, street or
alley without specific permission from the City to address land-locked
properties or other special circumstances. [Amended 1-27-1997 by
Ord. No. 1042-97; 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
H. All waste collection activity shall be conducted from Monday through
Friday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or on Saturdays
when prior approval by the City has been granted. No collection,
hauling or transporting of solid waste shall be permitted on Sunday
unless preapproved by the City.
I. All registered haulers and haulers under contract with the City shall
comply with the following standards and regulations: [Amended
6-23-20014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
(1) All municipal waste collected within the City shall ultimately be
disposed only at landfills cited with the approval of the City
Manager.
(2) All requirements set forth under Article IV.
§ 190-16 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-16
187:406
(3) All collection vehicles conveying domestic waste and garbage shall
be watertight and suitably enclosed to prevent leakage, roadside
litter, the attraction of vectors, the creation of odors and other
nuisances.
(4) All solid waste shall be collected and transported so as to prevent
public health hazards, safety hazards and nuisances.
(5) All solid waste collection vehicles shall be operated and maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
J. A review board, consisting of three City residents appointed by the City
Council, shall review any requests from multifamily residential or
commercial properties that qualify for private trash collection but do
not meet the standard due to any parcel being lot line to lot line.
Findings and recommendations will be submitted to the City Council for
final approval.
(1) The initial terms of the members of the Solid Waste Review Board
shall be as follows: one member shall be appointed to serve until
the first day in January following the date the Solid Waste Review
Board becomes effective; one member shall be appointed to serve
until the first day of the second January thereafter; one member
shall be appointed to serve until the first day of the third January
thereafter. [Added 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 1016-96]
(2) The City Council shall appoint their successors on the expiration of
their respective terms to serve for periods of three years. An
appointment to fill a vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion
of the term. [Added 5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 1016-96]
(3) Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(a) Any member of the Solid Waste Review Board absent from
three or more consecutive regular meetings of the Solid Waste
Review Board without an approved leave of absence granted
by the City Council after public hearing and prior written
notice thereof shall be removed from the Solid Waste Review
Board by the City Council of the City of Coatesville.
(b) Any member of the Solid Waste Review Board absent from 20%
or more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Solid Waste
Review Board within any one-year period shall be notified in
writing by the City Manager acting on behalf of the City
Council of the attendance requirements of this subsection. Any
member of the Solid Waste Review Board who is absent from
20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings within a oneyear
period shall thereafter be removed for cause from such
position by the City Council with prior written notice after
public hearing unless such member resigns in writing or
waives the public hearing in writing.
§ 190-16 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-16
187:407
§ 190-17. Charges.
§ 190-18. Enforcement. [Amended 8-22-2011 by Ord. No.
1358-2011]
Primary enforcement of this Part 2, the Solid Waste Ordinance, shall rest
with the SWEEP Officer as appointed by the Director of Public Works;
however, such enforcement authority shall not be exclusive and is further
conferred upon the Code Enforcement Officer or any law enforcement
officer of the City of Coatesville. In addition to the enforcement remedies
set forth in § 190-19, the City may petition the appropriate court for an
injunction, either mandatory or prohibitive, to enforce any of the provisions
of the chapter.
§ 190-19. Violations and penalties.
(c) Any member of the Solid Waste Review Board may be removed
for cause as determined by the City Council after public
hearing and prior written notice thereof.
(d) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the
removal of any member of the Solid Waste Review Board
without cause by the City Council when authorized by state
law, City Charter or City ordinance.
A. The City Council for the City shall be authorized to make funds
available, in accordance with the laws and procedures of the City, for
the establishment, maintenance and operation of a municipal solid
waste collection and disposal system or for the contracting of such
service to a private collector.
B. Annual costs shall be made available by the City on any competitively
bid collection service contract that may be awarded by the City.
C. (Reserved)135
D. The City's contracted hauler and other registered haulers shall be
responsible for the collection of any fees for private-arrangement or
private-contract solid waste collection and disposal services provided to
any individual, residential, multifamily, commercial, institutional or
industrial source within the City. [Amended 6-23-20014 by Ord. No.
1433-2014]
A. Any person, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this Part 2 shall, upon conviction in summary proceedings, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 and,
in default of the payment of such fine, may be imprisoned for a period of
not more than 90 days. Each day of violation shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense.
135. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding City responsibility for fees, was repealed
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014.
§ 190-16 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-19
187:408
B. Alternative citation process. [Added 10-28-2013 by Ord. No.
1418-2013]
(1) Any person violating the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $25 to be paid within 10
days.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $50 to be paid after 10
days but within 20 days.
(3) Any violation of the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $75 to be paid after 20
days, but before citation.
(4) Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid shall,
after 28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the defendant.
Thereafter, the prosecution shall proceed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, and upon conviction for
the offense, the defendant shall be ordered to pay the maximum
fine prescribed by law, together with the costs of prosecution, and/
or to be incarcerated in the county prison for not more than five
days.
§ 190-19 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-19
187:409

ARTICLE III
Burning
§ 190-20. Burning except in approved incinerators prohibited.
[Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant of any property to
burn any ashes, garbage, refuse or rubbish except in approved incinerators,
within the corporate limits of the City of Coatesville. Approval of such
incinerators must meet all requirements set forth in the BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code along with all Department of Environmental Protection
regulations. A permit must be secured from the Fire Department yearly for
the use of such incinerator.
§ 190-21. Allowable burning.
Open burning shall be allowed without prior notification to the City for
recreational fires, highway safety flares, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
§ 190-22. Open flames or burning.
A person shall not cause or allow open burning unless all provisions of
the City of Coatesville Fire Prevention Code136 have been addressed and
approved by the Fire Department.
§ 190-22.1. Burning of recyclables prohibited. [Added 10-28-2013
by Ord. No. 1418-2013]
It is unlawful to burn recyclables or materials identified in the recycling
program of the City.
§ 190-23. Duties and responsibilities of owners and occupants;
maintaining property/premises; violations and penalties. [Amended
1-27-1997 by Ord. No. 1042-97]
A. Any person who is the owner or occupant of any property/premises
within the City of Coatesville shall be and is hereby required to
maintain the property/premises in accordance with the provisions of
this Solid Waste Ordinance, requiring proper storage and disposal of
solid waste, collection of solid waste, placement of bulk containers and/
or construction containers and containing prohibitions relating thereto
and providing for limitations on burning on the property/premises.
B. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended 8-22-2011 by Ord.
No. 1358-2011]
(1) Notice. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer or SWEEP Officer,
as appointed by the Director of Public Works, of the City observes a
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 115, Fire Protection and Fire Prevention, Part 2.
§ 190-20 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-23
187:411
property that is in violation of this chapter, the Officer shall give
notice to the property owner and/or occupant, and such notice shall
contain the following:
(a) The address of the property in violation and the name of the
owner.
(b) A statement that the property is in violation, specifying the
existing violation.
(c) Direction that this chapter be complied with and the offending
violation corrected.
(d) Notice that, if the violation is not corrected within three days of
service of the notice, a citation will be issued.
(e) The signature and printed name of the officer observing the
violation.
(2) Issuance of citation and penalties. If the owner or occupant of the
property fails to comply with this chapter within three days of the
above notice, the Code Enforcement Officer or SWEEP Officer, as
appointed by the Director of Public Works, shall issue a citation to
the owner or occupant of the property. Summary conviction of a
violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than $300 nor more than $1,000, and, in default of payment of such
fine, the owner or occupant may be imprisoned for a period of not
more than 90 days. Each day of violation shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense.
(3) The City may request injunctive relief from the appropriate court to
enforce any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 190-23 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-23
187:412
ARTICLE IV
Bulk Containers (Dumpsters)
§ 190-24. Purpose. [Added 10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 1436-2014137]
Whereas leaking, filthy, and poorly maintained dumpsters attract rats and
other vermin, and spilled and overflowing garbage and refuse as well as
rats and other vermin attracted thereby pose a hazard to the health, safety,
and well-being of the residents of, and visitors to, the City of Coatesville
(the "City"), the City, pursuant to authority vested under its Home Rule
Charter, the Third Class City Code codified at 53 P.S. § 37403(6) [and
neither preempted by the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and Waste
Reduction Act (Act 101) at 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., nor the Solid Waste
Management Act at 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.] the City hereby regulates
dumpsters within the City boundaries as more specifically set forth in this
Article IV.
§ 190-24.1. Placement.
The placement of bulk containers (dumpsters) and/or construction
containers upon any private property, sidewalk, street or highway within the
City of Coatesville by persons other than agents or employees of the City is
hereby prohibited unless:
A. The dumpster and/or construction container must be properly
illuminated by a least one reflector on each side, such reflector to be at
least six inches in diameter so as to be visible at night.
B. There must not be any defect or faulty design in the dumpster or
container which would create a hazard to the general public.
C. The placement of the dumpster and/or construction container shall not
block the flow of vehicular traffic or pedestrian traffic and shall not be
loaded in such a manner as to cause its contents to spill onto the street
or sidewalk areas.
D. No overflow of ashes, rubbish or other refuse from the dumpster or
container or accumulation of ashes, rubbish or other refuse next to a
dumpster or container is permitted.
E. The dumpster and/or container must be conspicuously marked with the
name and address of its owner.
F. The use of the dumpster or container must be used so as not to create
offensive odors or a health hazard.
G. A permit for the placement of a dumpster and/or container must be
secured from the City for the placement on any street, highway,
sidewalk or public open space. Prior to placement, notification must be
137. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 190-24 as
§ 190-24.1.
§ 190-24 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-24.1
187:413
§ 190-25. Permit fee.
§ 190-26. Revocation of permit.
Any permit granted pursuant to this Part 2 may be revoked by the Codes
Department if:
§ 190-27. Placement near a fire hydrant or building. [Amended
2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1155-2001]
No person shall cause or permit the placing of any materials, structures,
shrubs, fences or bulk containers (dumpsters) within 15 feet of a fire
hydrant. No person shall cause or permit the placement of any dumpster
within 15 feet of any building or structure.
made to all departments of emergency services in the City of
Coatesville.
H. The dumpster placed on private property must be a minimum of 15 feet
from any structure where distance allows such placement. All locations
that do not have the available distance shall be determined by the
Codes Department. [Added 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 1133-2000;
amended 7-10-2000 by Ord. No. 1134-2000]
A. The fee payable for a permit pursuant to this Part 2 shall be for each
bulk container (dumpster) or construction container as per fee so
designated under Chapter 108 of the City Code.
B. No permit shall be granted for a term longer than seven days. A permit
may be renewed for every additional seven-day period.
C. Upon the expiration of the permit, the permit holder shall remove or
cause to be removed the dumpster and/or construction container from
the street, highway, sidewalk or public right-of-way.
D. The City Code Official or SWEEP Officer shall patrol the City routinely
and shall inspect all dumpsters to confirm compliance with the
standards set forth in § 190-24.1A through H as part of his official
duties. [Added 10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 1436-2014]
E. In the opinion of the Code Official or SWEEP Officer, when a dumpster
is overflowing, causing an unsanitary condition, or has violated any
provision under § 190-24.1, it may be ordered removed by the Code
Official or SWEEP Officer, with any and all costs associated with such
action levied on the property owner. [Added 2-12-2001 by Ord. No.
1155-2001; amended 8-22-2011 by Ord. No. 1358-2011;
10-27-2014 by Ord. No. 1436-2014]
A. The permit holder has made a false statement in his application.
B. The permit holder fails to conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 190-24.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-28
187:414
§ 190-28. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this
Part 2 shall, upon conviction in summary proceedings, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 and, in default of
the payment of such fine, may be imprisoned for a period of not more
than 90 days. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate and
distinct offense.
B. Alternative citation process. [Added 10-28-2013 by Ord. No.
1418-2013]
(1) Any person violating the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $25 to be paid within 10
days.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $50 to be paid after 10
days but within 20 days.
(3) Any violation of the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $75 to be paid after 20
days, but before citation.
(4) Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid shall,
after 28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the defendant.
Thereafter, the prosecution shall proceed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, and upon conviction for
the offense, the defendant shall be ordered to pay the maximum
fine prescribed by law, together with the costs of prosecution, and/
or to be incarcerated in the county prison for not more than five
days.
§ 190-28 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-28
187:415

ARTICLE V
Collection
§ 190-29. Fee collection schedule.
A. An additional charge as so designated under Chapter 108 of the City
Code per 1/2 cubic yard or part thereof will be made for collection,
transport and disposal of solid waste in excess of 1/2 cubic yard per
week. The owner of each property in the City of Coatesville shall be
charged the sum as per the fee defined in Chapter 108 of the City Code
per unit for the collection, transport and disposal of up to 1/2 cubic yard
of solid waste per week and for the collection, transport and disposal of
recyclables consistent with the provisions of the City of Coatesville
Recycling Ordinance, Chapter 190, Part 1, Article I, of the Code of the
City of Coatesville. The City will also pick up 1/2 cubic yard of recycling.
[Amended 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1155-2001; 6-23-2014 by Ord.
No. 1433-2014]
B. Billing. [Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1094-98; 2-24-2003 by
Ord. No. 1210-2003; 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1271-2005;
4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 1333-2010; 6-23-2014 by Ord. No.
1433-2014; 11-27-2047 by Ord. No. 1497-2017]
(1) Bills for solid waste collection shall be included in the real estate
bill issued by the City and will be sent out for the annual minimum
charge established in Chapter 108 and sent to the owners at the
beginning of any year (after January 15) to be paid in full by
December 31 of the year of billing. The amount will be based upon
whether the trash collection has been characterized under § 190-16
of this chapter as subject to standard collection service or qualified
for private trash collection.
(2) The solid waste fees will be subject to a discount of 2% if paid in full
by March 31. The solid waste fees can be paid in three equal
installments of the face amount with payments due March 31, April
30 and May 31. Each installment payment must be made within the
time specified, or the entire bill (the remaining unpaid portion of
the bill) will be treated as delinquent, subject to procedures
identified below.
(3) The bills mentioned in Subsection B(1) above, if not timely paid,
will be subject to a late fee of 10%. Further, if this amount and the
late fee are not paid within 30 days of demand for same, an
additional increase of 30% over the amount then due shall be added
to the bill as a delinquency charge, and the City shall be authorized
to move forward with a collection action. In addition, the City shall
be entitled to the recovery of any fees incurred by the City in its
collection action, including legal fees, filing fees and costs (such as
the fees for the filing of a municipal lien); and the City shall be
entitled to interest at the maximum rate permitted for the
municipal lien law and state law generally.
§ 190-29 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-29
187:417
(4) Any multifamily, commercial, institutional or industrial unit owner
who wishes to apply for a private hauler registration must complete
an application, which will be automatically sent and billed based
upon prior year applications, and obtain approval of same by the
Codes Office of the City of Coatesville. The fees for such private
hauler shall have an amount established by ordinance or resolution
and found in Chapter 108 of the Code. [Amended 6-23-20014 by
Ord. No. 1433-2014]
C. The owner of the premises served shall be billed and responsible for the
payment thereof. For nonpayment, the City shall have the remedy of
suing, liening the property and any other remedy allowed by law,
including but not limited to the delinquent procedures set forth by this
Part 2. [Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1094-98]
D. All charges and penalties for collection, transport and disposal of solid
wastes not paid by the last day of the current year may be liened as
provided by the Pennsylvania Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act, 53
P.S. § 7107. [Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1094-98; 2-12-2001
by Ord. No. 1155-2001]
E. The owner of each unit(s) for which there is a delinquent bill shall also
be liable for any and all fees, charges, legal fees and costs, court fees
and costs and all costs associated with collection efforts to collect
delinquent accounts. [Amended 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1094-98]
F. Where one use or business exists on multiple real estate parcels,
provided that the owner is applying to the county to consolidate the
multiple parcels into one parcel or if the owner makes application to
consolidate the parcels within such reasonable time period as
determined by the City, then the owner will be responsible for one unit
charge.
G. 138All trash fees (including any delinquent fees) must be paid in full
before a rental property receiving collection will be issued a rental
license under the provisions of Chapter 136 of the City Code. [Added
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
H. Property owners must make application for private hauler before April
15 of the current billing year. No applications will be accepted after the
April 15 deadline. [Added 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 1147-2000;
amended 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1155-2001; 12-22-2005 by Ord.
No. 1271-2005]
I. All charges and penalties for collection, transport and disposal of solid
wastes not paid by the last day of the current year may be liened as
provided by the Pennsylvania Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act, 53
P.S. § 7107. [Added 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1155-2001]
138. Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, regarding private collection, transport and disposal of
solid waste was repealed 1-22-2001 by Ord. No. 1155-2001.
§ 190-29 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-29
187:418
§ 190-30. Collection and transportation; registration of private
haulers. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96; 2-12-2001 by
Ord. No. 1155-2001; 6-23-20014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
J. Exemptions. The following classes of properties shall not be subject to
the minimum fee or registration fee herein provided:
(1) Unimproved vacant lot.
(2) Properties on which the only improvement is private garages, not
exceeding four individual units, which are used as an accessory use
to a residential use.
(3) Authorities and governmental agencies of the City of Coatesville
and vacant property titles in the Chester County Redevelopment
Authority.
(4) Properties that are classified and declared by the Codes
Department as uninhabitable and cannot receive a use and
occupancy permit.139
K. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith
are hereby repealed. [Added 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 1210-2003]
L. Severability. [Added 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 1210-2003]
(1) The provisions of this article are severable and, if any portion is
held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of
federal or state constitutional statute or statutory law, that portion
is hereby repealed, and the decision of the court will not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions of this article. It is hereby
declared to be the City Council’s intention that this article would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional or ultra vires
provision not been included.
(2) If any portion of the article shall be determined to be
unconstitutional, illegal or unenforceable, then the portion and
only that portion of this article which is deemed to be
unconstitutional, illegal or unenforceable shall be severed from the
remainder of this article, and all other terms thereof shall remain in
full force and effect. This article shall be effective 30 days after
publication following final adoption in accordance with the City
Charter and the Third-Class City Code.
A. No person other than a registered hauler shall collect or transport solid
waste as defined in this Part 2 generated whether anywhere or from any
user in the City.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, collect or remove
any solid waste from any public or private property within the City
139. Editor's Note: Former Subsection J(5), regarding conditions for hardship, was repealed
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014.
§ 190-29 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-30
187:419
without first registering to do so in accordance with the provisions of
this Part 2.
C. Every person desiring to engage in, to continue to engage in or
hereafter begin to engage in the business of collecting, removing or
transporting solid waste from any property within the City shall first
register with the City. Such registration shall be for a period of one year
beginning September 1 of the year in which the registration occurs. All
persons shall register by September 30 of each year. All registrations
shall be for the year period (September 1 to August 31) or such portion
thereof as shall remain after the issuance thereof. There shall be no
reduction in the fee for registration after the beginning of any one-year
period.
D. The annual registration fee shall be as provided in Chapter 108, Fees.
The City Council of Coatesville shall be authorized to promulgate rules
and regulations governing the application and administration of the
registration procedure, including amending the annual registration fee.
At the time of registration, the collector or private hauler shall pay the
City the annual registration fee then in effect as established by the City
Council.
E. Standards for collection vehicles. The collection equipment and
transportation vehicles used for the collection of municipal solid waste
shall be of the closed metal-body type with an automatic compactor
unit. Said vehicles shall at all times be in good and proper mechanical
condition and in compliance with the minimum safety and sanitary
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. All such vehicles
shall be specifically designed to prevent leakage of any liquid or fluids.
Other types of vehicles may be used only for the collection of recyclable
materials, bulk solid waste and collecting and transporting dumpsters,
provided that such items are separately collected in accordance with
other provisions of this Part 2 and the regulations adopted hereunder.
The municipal solid waste and recyclables so collected shall be suitably
enclosed or covered so as to prevent roadside littering, attraction of
vermin or the creation of other nuisances. All collection equipment and
transportation vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
F. Private haulers' insurance requirements. No person shall be entitled to
register with the City as a collector and no registration shall be issued
to any person desiring to collect or transport solid waste generated in
the City unless such person or collector can show certificates of
insurance as set forth below:
(1) Workers' compensation insurance as required by statute in such
amounts as required by state law.
(2) Comprehensive general liability insurance at a minimum limit of
$1,000,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000 in the aggregate
annually for both bodily injury and property damage coverage.
§ 190-30 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-30
187:420
(3) Comprehensive automobile liability insurance with limits of liability
not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence. In instances where more
than one vehicle will be utilized by the person in the City of
Coatesville to collect or transport solid waste, then the person shall
satisfy the City that comprehensive automobile liability insurance
coverage is in effect for all vehicles to be used within the City for
the collection and transportation of solid waste within the City.
(4) Owner's and contractor's protective insurance in amounts
consistent with the minimum coverage required in Subsection F(2)
above. The minimum insurance coverage shall be in such amounts
that the Council may establish from time to time. Each and every
policy of insurance required in this section shall carry with it an
endorsement to the effect that the insurance carrier will convey to
the City, by certified mail, written notice of any modifications,
material alterations or cancellation of any such policy or policies or
the terms thereof. The above-mentioned written notice shall be
mailed at least 10 days prior to the date of any such modification,
material alteration or cancellation.
G. Application requirements.
(1) Every person who shall apply for registration under this section
shall, in applying therefor, state the type or types of refuse or
recyclable material that will be collected, the manner and place of
disposal for all such refuse and the location of the recycling center
for all collected materials under such registration. Said applicant
shall describe the type or types of vehicles to be used for collection,
listing the make, model, year and license plate number; include a
certificate of insurance as aforementioned; and state the name of
the company, address, telephone number and the contact person
responsible for compliance with this Part 2. No such registration
shall be granted if the vehicle and/or manner and place of disposal
of such refuse and/or recycling center shall not conform in every
respect to the requirements of this Part 2.
(2) Authorized collectors shall not be required to collect refuse from
any residence where it is obvious that recyclable materials have not
been separated pursuant to the provisions of the City Code dealing
with the collection of recyclables.140
H. Nothing contained in this Part 2 shall prevent the City of Coatesville
from terminating or revoking any or all registrations granted hereunder
for failure of the registrant to comply with Act 101,141 the terms and
conditions of this Part 2, rules and regulations promulgated by the City
Council pursuant to this Part 2 or administrative requirements
established by the City administration and staff hereunder or for failure
to comply with any other City ordinance or regulation.
140. Editor's Note: See Part 1 of this chapter.
141. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 190-30 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-30
187:421
§ 190-31. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
I. Registration will be done by the City for each vehicle of the person who
owns or leases the vehicle only after the person has satisfied the
conditions outlined in this Part 2.
J. Registrations will be renewed annually, provided that the registrant has
maintained that registration in good standing. All registrations will be
made or renewed on a calendar-year basis. There will be no reduction
in the fee for registration made after the beginning of the year.
K. Registration cannot be transferred from one vehicle to another.
L. Registrations issued by the City must be firmly attached and
prominently displayed on each side of the vehicle so as to be clearly
visible.
M. The registrant shall comply with the following inspection,
recordkeeping and reporting requirements:
(1) It shall be a condition being registered with the City of Coatesville
that each registrant:
(a) Report quarterly to the City no later than December 15 and
thereafter on a quarterly basis by the 15th of each month,
which follows the end of a quarterly reporting period (the first
quarterly period commencing September 1), the gross tonnage
of municipal waste collected in the City and the disposal sites
utilized;
(b) Maintain an accurate logbook of vehicles, including location of
container, collection routes and disposal or processing
facilities utilized, which shall be open to inspection by the
City's enforcement personnel; and
(c) Open all facilities and vehicles to inspection by the City's
enforcement personnel during reasonable hours but not
necessarily on prior notice.
A. Summary violations.
(1) Any person who violates any provision of this Part 2 or who engages
in unlawful conduct as defined in this Part 2 shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 and not less than $100 to be paid to the use of
the City, with costs of prosecution, or to be imprisoned for a period
of not more than 30 days, or both.
(2) Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any
provision of this Part 2 or unlawful conduct as defined in this Part 2
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 190-30 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-31
187:422
(3) Any person who engages in unlawful conduct as defined in this Part
2 shall, in accordance with applicable provisions of the laws of the
commonwealth, be subject to the provisions of Act 101, Chapter 17,
142as such provisions with respect to enforcement and remedies
may apply to such unlawful conduct.
(4) This Part 2 and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto
shall be enforceable by an action or actions at law or equity.
B. Alternative citation process. [Added 10-28-2013 by Ord. No.
1418-2013143]
(1) Any person violating the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $25 to be paid within 10
days.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $50 to be paid after 10
days but within 20 days.
(3) Any violation of the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $75 to be paid after 20
days, but before citation.
(4) Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid shall,
after 28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the defendant.
Thereafter, the prosecution shall proceed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, and upon conviction for
the offense, the defendant shall be ordered to pay the maximum
fine prescribed by law, together with the costs of prosecution, and/
or to be incarcerated in the county prison for not more than five
days.
C. Administrative penalties.
(1) If registrant violates this Part 2, the City shall have the right to:
[Amended 6-23-20014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
(a) Suspend or revoke the registration of the violating vehicle,
suspend or revoke all registrations issued to the person who is
the registrant of the violating vehicle or impose a civil penalty
in accordance with the provisions of Act 101 and require the
registrant to pay the cost of the proceeding.
(b) Deny any subsequent registration application by that person or
any person who or which was or who or which is affiliated with,
related to or controlled by any person who was, at the time of
commitment of such unlawful conduct or any time thereafter,
an officer, director, shareholder, partner or joint venturer of,
142. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1701 et seq.
143. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
and C as Subsections C and D, respectively.
§ 190-31 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-31
187:423
under contact with, employed by or related to or affiliated in
any manner with such person.
(2) In the event that any civil penalty imposed under this Part 2 is
unpaid after 10 days following the full and final disposition of the
penalty proceedings, the City shall suspend the registrant's
operating privileges within the City until the civil penalty is paid.
[Amended 6-23-20014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
(3) Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any
provision of this Part 2 or unlawful conduct as defined in this Part 2
shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Notice and hearing procedure.
(1) Prior to such action taken under Subsection C, the City will give the
registrant written notice of the violation, setting forth the reasons
for the proposed action. The registrant will have 15 days to respond
in writing to the notice. If no response is received, the penalty,
registration suspension or revocation will take effect. If a response
is received, the City will provide the right to a hearing as described
in this section. If no response is received, an appropriate
administrative determination will be imposed. [Amended
6-23-20014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014]
(2) Any person who has been aggrieved by an administrative
determination of the City under this Part 2 may file a written
request for review by the City Council by certified mail within 15
days of the date of such determination. The hearing shall be held
promptly after receipt of the request, but in no event later than 30
working days of the receipt of the request, in accordance with the
procedure set forth in this section.
(a) Any person who has filed a request for review shall be given
notice in writing of the time and place of hearing. Such notice
shall be by first-class, United States mail, postage prepaid,
directed to the address set forth in the request for review, and
shall be mailed not less than 10 days prior to the date of
hearing.
(b) The person requesting the hearing may appear personally or
by counsel. The person filing the request for the hearing shall
have the burden of proof to establish the basis for review. Upon
the request of the person requesting the hearing, the City
Council shall issue a subpoena requiring the testimony of
witnesses and the production of books, records or other
documents relative to the material involved in such hearing.
(c) All testimony at the hearing shall be given under oath.
(d) The hearing officer shall render a decision within 15 working
days of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested,
§ 190-31 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-31
187:424
§ 190-32. Concurrent remedies.
The penalties and remedies prescribed by this Part 2 shall be deemed
concurrent, and the exercise or existence of any remedy shall not prevent
the City from exercising any other remedy hereunder at law or in equity.
§ 190-33. Reservation of rights.
Nothing in this Part 2 shall be construed as preventing the City from
exercising its rights and duties as defined pursuant to this Part 2, Act 101
and Act 97144 and further from proceeding in courts of law and/or equity to
enforce said rights as so defined, with out first pursuing the action provided
for in § 190-31 hereof.
§ 190-34. Revisions.
§ 190-35. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this Part 2 are to be liberally construed so as
best to achieve and effectuate the goals and purpose hereof.
§ 190-36. (Reserved)145
forwarded to the person at the address shown in the City's
records.
A. This section may be amended from time to time.
B. The disposal of municipal waste generated within the City of Coatesville
shall be subject to such further rules, regulations, resolutions and
standards as may, from time to time, be promulgated, adopted and
enacted by the City pursuant to this Part 2 in furtherance of
implementation and enforcement of the plan, including, but without
limitation, regulations as to the form of registration application,
standards for the approval of any such registration, the amount agreed
to be charged for said registration, the terms of the registration,
registration issuance procedures and registration revocation
procedures; provided, however, that no such rules, regulations,
resolutions or standards adopted by the City shall be contrary to or less
stringent than the provisions of this Part 2, the plan, Act 97, Act 101 or
any regulations adopted thereunder. [Amended 6-23-20014 by Ord.
No. 1433-2014]
144. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq. and 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., respectively.
145. Editor's Note: Former § 190-36, Charges, as amended, was repealed 2-12-2001 by Ord. No.
1155-2001, with the exceptions of Subsections E, F and G which have been redesignated
as § 190-29H, I and J, respectively.
§ 190-31 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-36
187:425

ARTICLE VA
(Reserved)146
146. Editor's Note: Former Art. VA, Hardship Approvals and Payments, added 1-22-2001, as
amended, was repealed 6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 1433-2014.
SHOPPING CARTS § 190-36
187:427

Part 3
[Adopted 6-26-1L9i9tt5erBiyngOrd. No. 992-95]
ARTICLE VI
Littering
§ 190-37. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Part 3, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CITY — The City of Coatesville, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
GARBAGE — Any waste parts of food, from a market or kitchen, or any
animal or vegetable matter that is discarded and or thrown away, or any
worthless or offensive matter that has been discarded.
LITTER — Any discarded trash, garbage or rubbish, as defined in this
section, and all other waste material which, if thrown or scattered about in
a careless manner or lying about in disorder as prohibited in this Part 3, is
determined to be a nuisance to the safety, health, cleanliness and comfort
of the inhabitants of the City.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building, structure or vacant
lot, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes
or place of business, whether inhabited, occupied or temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds,
walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant
to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, sidewalk, highway, alley or other public way
and any public park, square, space, ground or building.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bottles, bedding,
crockery and similar items.
TRASH — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals,
abandoned vehicles and solid and industrial waste which causes danger to
the health, safety and welfare of any resident or business owner.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a street, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 190-38. Word usage.
For the purposes of this Part 3, the word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
§ 190-37 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-39
187:429
§ 190-39. Littering in public places.
No person shall throw, deposit or allow to occur litter or rubbish in or upon
any street, sidewalk or other public place within the City, except that litter
may be thrown or deposited in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles for collection.
§ 190-40. Placing litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in private receptacles shall do
so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other place or upon private property.
§ 190-41. Sweeping litter into public places.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or public place
within the City the accumulation of litter from any building or lot from
any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
§ 190-42. Business premises; sidewalks to be free of litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the City the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the City shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises
free of litter.
§ 190-43. Litter from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the City or upon private
property.
§ 190-44. Vehicles to be constructed and loaded to prevent littering.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the City
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place.
§ 190-45. Vehicle tires depositing mud on public places.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the City so
that the wheels or tires of such vehicle carry onto or deposit on any street,
alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign
matter of any kind.
§ 190-39 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-46
187:430
§ 190-46. Parks.
No person shall throw, deposit or allow to occur litter in any park within the
City except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as
provided by this chapter.
§ 190-47. Bodies of water.
No person shall throw, deposit or allow to occur litter in any stream, creek,
run or any other body of water within the City.
§ 190-48. Occupied private property.
No person shall throw, deposit or allow to occur litter on any occupied
private property within the City, whether owned by such person or not,
except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain
authorized private receptacles for the collection of litter in such a manner
that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements
upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private
property.
§ 190-49. Duties of property owners.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not be so construed as to prohibit the storage of litter in authorized
private receptacles for collection.
§ 190-50. Vacant private property.
No person shall throw, deposit or allow to occur litter on any open or vacant
property within the City, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 190-51. Enforcement; violations and penalties; abatement by City.
A. Initial notice. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer or SWEEP
Officer, as appointed by the Director of Public Works, of the City of
Coatesville observes a property that is in violation of this Part 3, the
Officer shall give notice to the property owner. Such notice shall contain
the following: [Amended 8-22-2011 by Ord. No. 1358-2011]
(1) The address of the property in violation and the name of the owner.
(2) A statement that the property is in violation, specifying, if
applicable, the specific area in violation.
(3) Directions that the ordinance be complied with and the offending
litter be removed.
§ 190-46 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-51
187:431
(4) Notice that if the violation is not corrected within five days of
receipt of the notice that a citation will be issued.
(5) Notice that the Code Administrator will discuss the violation with
the property owner if this is requested.
(6) A statement that the notice is not a citation and that it will not be
kept on file after the violation is abated.
(7) The signature and printed name of the officer observing the
violation.
B. Alternative citation process. [Added 10-28-2013 by Ord. No.
1418-2013147]
(1) Any person violating the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $25 to be paid within 10
days.
(2) Any person violating the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $50 to be paid after 10
days but within 20 days.
(3) Any violation of the provisions of Chapter 190 shall, at the
discretion of the City, be subject to a fine of $75 to be paid after 20
days, but before citation.
(4) Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid shall,
after 28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the defendant.
Thereafter, the prosecution shall proceed in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, and upon conviction for
the offense, the defendant shall be ordered to pay the maximum
fine prescribed by law, together with the costs of prosecution, and/
or to be incarcerated in the county prison for not more than five
days.
C. Issuance of citation and penalties. If the owner or occupant of the
property in violation fails to comply with this Part 3 within five days of
the above notice, the Code Enforcement Officer or SWEEP Officer, as
appointed by the Director of Public Works, shall issue a citation to the
owner or occupant of the property. Summary conviction of a violation of
this Part 3 shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300 and costs
of such proceedings and, upon default of payment of such fine and
costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of not more than 30
days. A continuance of a violation shall constitute a violation for each
day of such violation, and the person or persons allowing or permitting
the continuance of the violation may be punished as provided above for
each separate offense. [Amended 8-22-2011 by Ord. No.
1358-2011]
147. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections B
through D as Subsections C through E, respectively.
§ 190-51 COATESVILLE CODE § 190-51
187:432
D. Abatement of violation by City. If the owner or occupant of a property
fails to abate the violation after summary conviction, then the City of
Coatesville may remove such litter. Nothing in this Part 3 shall
authorize the City to enter private property for these purposes while
any conviction under this Part 3 is being appealed.
E. Collection of costs. The cost of abating such violation, together with any
additional penalty authorized by law, may be collected by the City from
such owner or occupant in the manner provided by law. The cost of such
action by the City shall include the total cost to the City of
compensating the laborers and foremen for the abatement, including
but not limited to the hourly cost of their work and the expense of
benefits for said workers, and also the administrative costs of the
abatement, or the cost of hiring a contract service. Upon completion of
the work, the City shall bill the responsible owner or occupant for the
amount specified above, and if not paid within 10 days thereafter, the
City may institute suit for the recovery of such costs and penalties, or at
its discretion, enter a lien against the premises on which the work has
been done, in accordance with the Municipal Lien Act of Pennsylvania.
§ 190-51 SHOPPING CARTS § 190-51
187:433
Chapter 192
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 92.
Firearms, weapons and fireworks — See Ch.
112.
Noise — See Ch. 161.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 172.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 193.
§ 192-1. Legislative intent.
City Council finds that streets, public places and private facilities within the
City are from time to time temporarily closed and used as sites for ethnic
festivals, shows, neighborhood celebrations and other public events which
are privately sponsored but open to the public. Events of this kind serve to
improve the quality of life of the residents of the City and often result in
large numbers of people congregating within the confines of the temporarily
closed street, public places and private facilities, and the resulting crowd
conditions create concerns for police and fire access and other control
concerns related to health, safety and welfare of the public and of persons
and property in the designated area. It is therefore essential that a policy
be established for governing these events which shall facilitate control over
them by the sponsor and by the City officials from departments involved
with the event to safeguard persons and property.
§ 192-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have meanings indicated:
ADMISSION FEE — The charge for persons who attend an event.
CITY EVENT — An event sponsored by the City of Coatesville as recognized
by City Council.
COMMERCIAL EVENT — An event sponsored privately which is opened to
the public, whether or not controlled by the sale of tickets.
SPECIAL EVENT — A preplanned single event or series of events that,
because of its nature, interest, location, promotion or any combination of
similar influences, is expected, or later found, to draw a large number of
people, sponsored by an individual or entity other than the City, proposed to
be held on public or private property or requiring the use of public support
services, for the purpose(s) of entertainment, celebration, amusement,
cultural recognition, arts and craft displays and/or sales, special sport
competition, block parties or similar activities generally considered
recreational in nature.
SPONSOR — The individual, group, corporation or other entity responsible
for organizing the event.
§ 190-51 COATESVILLE CODE § 192-2
187:434
SUPPORT SERVICES — Those which can or must be provided by the City
to ensure that a special event is conducted in such a manner as to protect
the rights, safety, health, property and general welfare of its citizens. This
includes but is not limited to fire protection, crowd management and
control, traffic management and control and solid waste management and
control.
§ 192-3. Special Event Action Team.
§ 192-4. City responsibility.
The City is responsible for determining whether to issue permits and
licenses for special events and establishing guidelines for the safe and
proper conduct of such special events. To fulfill these responsibilities, the
City must determine if a special event should be conducted and the terms
and conditions under which an approved event may be conducted.
§ 192-5. Sponsor responsibility.
It is the sponsor's responsibility to make application to conduct any special
event or commercial event which is planned with an estimated attendance
of 350 or more participants, and also to furnish any additional information
that may be requested by the Special Event Action Team. It is the sponsor's
responsibility to abide by all of the terms and conditions established as part
of the approval process. It shall be the sponsor's responsibility to provide for
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Special Event Action Team is to provide a
mechanism which will allow the City to plan, evaluate, and coordinate
any City event, any commercial event, and any special event, which will
allow the establishment of terms and conditions within which the event
may be conducted and will allow the sponsor to plan and manage the
event within the context of the established terms and conditions.
B. Special Event Action Team (SEAT). The composition of the special event
action committee shall consist of the following:
(1) Fire Chief.
(2) Police Chief.
(3) Public Works Director.
C. Special Event Coordinator. The Special Event Coordinator shall be
appointed by the City Manager and shall act as the coordinator
between the City and the event sponsor.
D. Responsibilities of the Special Event Action Team. The Special Event
Action Team is charged with the responsibility of reviewing, evaluating
and recommending to the City Manager, the approval/disapproval of
any request for a special event and shall attach with such
recommendation, the cost of such services as needed.
§ 192-2 SHOPPING CARTS § 192-5
187:435
the protection of the safety, health, property and general welfare of those
attending and participating in the special event.
§ 192-6. Application; fee; applications for baseball league use.
[Amended 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 1248-2005]
§ 192-7. Approval process.
A. The sponsor must submit an application to the City at least 45 days
prior to the event. The application must be submitted in writing and
must include the sponsor’s name, lead contact person, telephone
number, site location, dates, times, estimated participants, and any
other information that would assist in the approval process. If the
special event involves a fee paid for participation or admission to the
special event, then an application fee is required to reflect the costs of,
police presence for one officer in the amount of $155.48 for a minimum
of four hours, presence for any event with up to 100 attendees. This
amount will increase for every multiple of 75 attendees (or portion
thereof) and will also be increased after the minimum four hours of
police presence at the applicable rate of $38.87 per man-hour for every
multiple of 100 attendees (or portion thereof). This application fee shall
hereinafter be amended by resolution passed by City Council reflecting
the purpose and amount of any amendment to the application fee and
the fee schedule associated therewith.
B. Applications for baseball league use shall be submitted prior to the
season for which use is sought and shall identify the intended park for
which use is sought by the baseball league, the time periods at issue,
the days of use and the beginning and end of the proposed league use.
All such applications shall pay an application fee sufficient to cover the
costs incurred by the City for maintenance of the fields (including
dragging and liming), as identified in § 108-1U of the City Code, subject
to amendment by resolution of City Council. The City shall seek to
coordinate efforts to use the existing fields for baseball use with a
priority given to those leagues that have historically used the fields in
question. Every effort will be made to accommodate league schedules
and to provide flexibility to allow other uses of the fields. [Added
3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 1348-2011]
A. The Special Event Action Team will review and recommend to the City
Manager the approval/disapproval of each proposed special event on its
own merits. In reviewing a proposed special event, the SEAT will also
review, evaluate and determine the costs of City support services
required for the special event that will be charged to the sponsors. The
SEAT may also recommend to the City Manager that costs, or any
portion of the costs, be waived if such a waiver is in the best interest of
the City. The SEAT will consider in the approval process various criteria
and factors including but not limited to:
(1) Is the proposed special event considered desirable for the City.
§ 192-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 192-7
187:436
§ 192-8. Notification. [Amended 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 1339-2010]
The City will notify the sponsor within five days of the final decision made by
the City Manager or City Council. This notification will include the approval/
disapproval of the proposed event along with any costs and/or conditions
attached.
§ 192-9. Requirements.
(2) Does the City have the ability to provide, if needed, the required
support services regardless of who bears the cost.
(3) Does the proposed special event conflict with any other proposed
special event or activity.
B. The SEAT shall recommend either to approve/disapprove a proposed
special event, submit the conditions required, submit the costs of City
services and any other related issues to the City Manager in a timely
manner so as not to delay the planning process for the event sponsor.
C. The final approval/denial for the special event proposed, along with all
costs and conditions attached, will be made by the City Manager upon
advice from the SEAT, except that, if any of the following requests are
made, the City Manager shall refer the special events request to the
City Council for its consideration and approval/denial: [Amended
9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 1339-2010; 10-10-2011 by Ord. No.
1362-2011]
(1) The anticipated attendance to the special event exceeds 200
participants;
(2) A request for the closing of a street for more than two hours is
made;
(3) The City Manager's denial of a special event application may be
appealed to the City Council for final disposition.
A. Approval to conduct a special event by this process does not relieve the
sponsor or any participant, including but not limited to peddlers,
vendors, or exhibitors, from the responsibilities of applying for any
other permits or licenses or meeting any other requirements which may
be applicable.
(1) Fireworks.
(2) Street closings.
(3) Peddlers/solicitation.
(4) Handbills/posters.
(5) Vendors.
(6) Health Department.
§ 192-7 SHOPPING CARTS § 192-9
187:437
§ 192-10. Guidelines.
§ 192-11. Violations and penalties.
(7) Banners.
B. All events must obtain a liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000
with the City being named as an additional insured, or a larger amount
in the discretion of the City. This insurance shall satisfy all insurance
requirements for the City for holding the special event. The insurance
policy shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Solicitor.
C. All required permits, licenses, security deposits, fees and insurance
policies must be obtained no later than 10 days prior to the special
event. Except for events sponsored by the City of Coatesville, no
permits, licenses, security deposits, insurances or other special event
fees will be waived. [Amended 9-27-2010 by Ord. No. 1339-2010]
A. Times of the event must follow all City curfew requirements. No special
event will be permitted to operate prior to 9:00 a.m. and must conclude
no later than 12:00 midnight. Actual times for the event must be
approved as part of the approval process.
B. Inspections by the City's Fire and Codes Departments must be
completed. This will include a preevent inspection and any other
inspection(s) deemed necessary by the City.
C. Site maintenance is the responsibility of the sponsor and the site must
be left in a clean condition. This may be required on a daily basis.
D. Services may be provided and/or required from the City. The cost for
these services will be determined by the SEAT and could include any of
the following:
(1) Temporary parking signs.
(2) Barricades.
(3) Additional police protection.
(4) Security.
(5) Emergency medical services.
(6) Utilities.
(7) Restroom facilities.
A. Special events shall not be held without the authorization and/or
notification of the City nor held in contravention of the terms and
conditions set forth by the SEAT. Violations of this chapter may subject
the event sponsor to a fine of $1,000 in addition to any other penalty
provided in the ordinances for the City.
§ 192-9 COATESVILLE CODE § 192-11
187:438
Chapter 193
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
B. The City Manager or his designee may direct the Police Chief or his
designee to close any special event conducted without approval of the
City or any special event that has created serious concerns for the
safety, health and welfare of the public or the citizens of Coatesville.
Failure of the sponsor and/or its participants to comply with such order
may be subject to arrest.
§ 192-11 SHOPPING CARTS § 192-11
187:439

ARTICLE I
Openings and Excavations
§ 193-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — Any governmental corporation created
pursuant to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Authorities Act of 1945
(See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.), as amended.[Added 8-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 1389-2012]
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has agreed
to fulfill all the provisions of this article.[Added 8-13-2012 by Ord. No.
1389-2012]
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any utility company, excluding municipal authorities,
licensed by the Public Utility Commission of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.[Added 8-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1389-2012]
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway or other
public place located in the City of Coatesville and established for the use of
vehicles.
§ 193-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of any
kind in any street in the City of Coatesville without first securing a permit
therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 193-3. Application; bond.
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any of the
streets in the City of Coatesville shall make application to the City Engineer
and/or Codes Department in writing for the purpose. Such application
shall be made upon blanks to be furnished by the City and shall set forth
the name of the applicant, the exact location of the proposed opening
or excavation and the approximate size or depth thereon and such other
information as may be required upon said application, and it shall contain
an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be done in full
compliance with the ordinances of the City of Coatesville and the laws of
the commonwealth in relation thereto and that the applicant shall well and
truly save, defend and keep harmless the City from and indemnify it against
any and all actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges for or by
reason of the proposed opening or excavation and all damages to persons
or property.
§ 193-1 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-4
187:441
§ 193-4. Rules and regulations.
The City Engineer and/or Codes Department shall promulgate rules and
regulations governing the opening, excavation, refilling, resurfacing and
repaving of streets in the City of Coatesville, and after the same have been
approved by the Council of the City of Coatesville and entered upon the
minutes of Council, such rules and regulations shall be the sole criteria for
any work to be done or performed by any applicant or permittee governed
by the terms of this article. Copies of said rules and regulations shall be
furnished to any person making application hereunder.
§ 193-4.1. Traffic plan required. [Added 11-24-1997 by Ord. No.
1058-97]
The applicant for any street opening within the City of Coatesville shall
submit at the time of application a detailed traffic plan, to be approved
by the Police Department. The traffic plan will consist of a diagram of the
traffic flow pattern, along with the means to be used for closing the street
to normal traffic, length of time for closure and the type of equipment to be
used as traffic flow indicators. The Chief of Police and/or his designee shall
have full authority to close, change or redirect any and all such activity that
would hamper the safety and well being of the general public.
§ 193-5. Fees. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96; 8-13-2012
by Ord. No. 1389-2012]
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any street, the
applicant shall pay the fee as provided in Chapter 108, Fees, § 108-1M, as
identified in a fee schedule adopted by resolution of City Council.
§ 193-6. Unsatisfactory completion of work.
In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in the
opinion of the City Engineer and/or Codes Department, be unsatisfactory
and the same shall not be corrected in accordance with his or her
instructions within the time fixed by him or her or in the event that the
work for which the permit was granted is not completed within the time
fixed therein, the City may proceed to correct such unsatisfactory work or
complete any such work not completed and charge the costs thereof plus
25% to the applicant.
§ 193-7. Leaks, explosions or other accidents.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface
pipe, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus to commence
an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later
than the next business day thereafter and that all other provisions of
this article are fully complied with. If any such emergency condition shall
not be immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for
§ 193-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 193-7
187:442
such pipe, line, construction or apparatus, the City Engineer and/or Codes
Department, after such notice as he or she shall deem necessary under the
circumstances of the particular case, shall proceed to do the work necessary
and required by such emergency and charge the same, on the basis of cost
plus 25%, to such owner or person.
§ 193-8. Notice of new paving given to abutting property owners
and utility companies.
The City Engineer and/or Codes Department shall give timely notice to
all persons owning property abutting on any street within the City about
to be paved or improved and to all public utility companies operating in
the City, and all such persons and utility companies shall make all water,
gas or sewer connections, as well as any repairs thereto, which would
necessitate excavation of said street within 30 days from the giving of such
notice, unless such time is extended in writing for cause shown by the
City Engineer and/or Codes Department. New paving shall not be opened
for a period of five years after the completion thereof, except in case of
emergency, the existence of which emergency and the necessity for the
opening of such paving to be determined by the City Engineer and/or Codes
Department. If it is sought to excavate upon or open a street within five
years after the completion of the paving thereof for any other reason than
an emergency as above stated, the applicant shall make written application
to the City Council, and a permit for such opening shall only be issued after
express approval of the Council.
§ 193-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Any person, whether principal, agent or employee, violating or assisting in
the violation of any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
in summary proceedings, pay a fine of not more than $600 or shall be
imprisoned for not more than 90 day, or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 193-10. Road specifications, street excavations and utility
installations in highways. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96;
8-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1389-2012]
A. Road specifications.
(1) Approval of plans required. No person shall construct, open or
dedicate street or drainage facilities in connection therewith, for
public use or travel in the City, except in strict accordance with
plans which have been submitted to and approved by the City
Council.
(2) Contents of plans. Such plans shall show:
(a) Profiles of proposed roads, showing grades, cuts and fills.
§ 193-7 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-10
187:443
(b) Course, structure and capacity of all drainage facilities,
indicating the method of drainage of the adjacent or
contiguous territory.
(c) Cross sections of paving, indicating depth and type of each
course.
(d) )Names of all roads.
(e) Road widths.
(f) Locations of all existing or proposed gas, water, electric and
other mains, pipes and conduits.
(g) The size of lots, which shall conform to requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance of this City.148
(h) All other improvements and utilities to be installed or erected
thereon.
(i) Any other details that may be required by any rules and
regulations adopted by the City Council.
(3) Improvement standards and specifications. All roads and streets
shall be improved in accordance with the standards and
specifications of the Subdivision of Land Ordinance of the City of
Coatesville.149
(4) Application for approval of plans. All plans, together with an
application for the approval thereof, shall be filed in duplicate with
the City Secretary at least 30 days prior to the regular meeting of
the City Council at which it is desired that such plans be
considered.
(5) Action on plans. The City Council reserves the right to specify such
alterations, changes or modifications of plans as it deems
necessary and may make approval of such plans subject to such
alterations, changes or modifications. Prior to taking action on any
plans, the City Council may hold a public hearing thereon after
giving such notice as it deems advisable in each case. No approval
of plans by the City Council shall obligate or require the City to
construct, reconstruct, maintain, repair or grade roads indicated
thereon.
(6) Filing of approved plans. All plans and specifications when
approved shall be signed on behalf of the City by the City Council
and an approved copy shall be filed with the City Secretary, who
shall make such copy available for public inspection.
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 224, Zoning.
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 193-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 193-10
187:444
(7) Appeals. Where the City Council shall refuse to approve any plans
submitted to it in accordance with this article, any person
aggrieved by the action of the City Council may, within 30 days
after such action, appeal therefrom by petition to the Court of
Common Pleas of Chester County. Such appeal shall be heard de
novo, and, after hearing, the Court may enter a decree affirming,
reversing or modifying the action of the City Council. The Court
shall designate the manner in which notices of the hearing of any
such appeal shall be given to all parties interested. The decision of
the Court shall be final.
(8) Recording of approved plans. All plans approved by the City
Council or by the Court on appeal shall be recorded by the person
applying for such approval in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Chester County.
(9) Performance contract. Before the applicant shall undertake the
construction of any improvements subject to the provisions of this
article, he shall enter into a contract, in writing, with the City, in
which he shall agree to perform the work described in the plans in
strict accordance with the plans as finally approved by the City
Council. In addition, the applicant shall furnish a bond, in such
amount and with such surety as shall be approved by the City
Council, to guarantee the performance of the contract. In lieu of a
bond, the applicant may deposit cash to guarantee performance of
said contract, upon an escrow agreement and with an escrow agent
approved by the City Council.
(10)Waiver of City responsibility. If any road or any drainage facilities in
connection therewith shall be opened, constructed or dedicated for
public use or travel except in strict accordance with plans approved
and recorded in accordance with the provisions of this article,
neither the City Council nor any public authorities shall place,
construct or operate any sewer, drain, water pipe or other facilities
or do any work of any kind in or upon such road, and neither the
City Council nor any other public authorities shall have any
responsibility of any kind with respect to any such road or drainage
facilities, notwithstanding any use of the same by the public;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the
laying of trunk sewers, drains or water or gas mains if required by
engineering necessity for the accommodation of other territory.
(11) Fees. Fees to defray the costs of inspection shall be paid by the
applicant at the time application for approval of plans is made. The
amount of such fee shall be determined according to a general fee
schedule adopted by resolution of the City Council, and all such
fees shall be paid into the City Finance Department with a copy
provided to the City Codes Department.
(12) State and county roads. Nothing contained in this article shall be
held to restrict or limit the State Department of Highways or the
§ 193-10 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-10
187:445
County of Chester in the exercise of its duties, powers and
functions.
B. Street excavations.
(1) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to
make any excavation of any kind in any of the streets in the City of
Coatesville without first securing a permit therefor as hereinafter
provided.
(2) Application for permit.
(a) Any person, public utility or municipal authority who shall
desire to make any opening or excavation in any of the streets
in the City shall file an application with the City's Engineer.
Such application shall be made upon forms to be furnished by
the City which shall include the name of the applicant, the
exact location of the proposed opening or excavation, and the
approximate size or depth thereof. The forms shall also contain
the applicant's agreement that the work shall be done in full
compliance with the ordinances of the City and the laws of the
commonwealth in relation thereto and that the applicant shall
defend and indemnify the City from and against any and all
actions, suits, demands, payments, costs and charges for or by
reason of the proposed opening or excavation and all damages
to persons or property resulting in any manner therefrom or
occurring in the prosecution of the work connected therewith,
or from any other matter, cause or thing related thereto.
(b) The City's Streets Department and the City of Coatesville
municipal authority shall not be required to obtain a permit
under this article for routine repair and/or replacement work
associated with the existing infrastructure unless required by
the City Council. Further, any person or contractor performing
work under contact with the City and/or the City of Coatesville
municipal authority shall obtain a permit if required by the City
Council.
(c) The City reserves the right to revoke any permit issued
hereunder for any violations of the provisions of this article.
(d) The permit application shall be accompanied by the required
Pennsylvania One Call System notification serial number for
the desired work. Failure to provide said serial number will
result in permit denial.
(e) The permit application shall be accompanied by a traffic
control plan applicable to the work zone necessary for the
excavation. The traffic control plan shall indicate the necessary
signage required for the excavation and shall be developed in
accordance with the current version of the Manual on Uniform
§ 193-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 193-10
187:446
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), PennDOT Publication 213,
PennDOT Publication 408, and other applicable laws.
(3) Permit fees. Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate
any street in the City, the applicant shall pay a permit fee to the
City, which fee shall be as established or amended from time to
time by resolution of the City Council.
(4) Refilling; reimbursement for repairs to defective work. Any person
who shall open or excavate any street in the City shall thoroughly
and completely refill the opening or excavation and attain proper
compaction so as to prevent any settling thereafter, in the manner
provided in § 193-10B(6) of this article. If, within 18 months after
the restoration of the surface as herein provided, defects shall
appear therein resulting from defective backfilling, concrete and
blacktop placement by the applicant, the applicant shall reimburse
the City for the costs of all necessary repairs to the permanent
paving.
(5) Fiscal responsibility; supervision and approval. All work in
connection with openings in any street, including excavation,
protection, refilling and temporary paving, shall be done by the
applicant at his expense and all such work shall be subject to the
provisions of this article and to the supervision and approval of the
City's Engineer or his designee.
(6) Conduct of work.
(a) The City Engineer, or his designee, shall inspect all excavations
conducted on any street within the City. When the reasonable
safety and convenience of the public is in jeopardy, the City
Engineer shall have the authority to change the requirements
of this section at will.
(b) The applicant shall provide notice to the City Engineer at least
24 hours prior to starting any work under a right-of-way
permit. In the event timely notice is not given to the City
Engineer, the person performing the work shall re-excavate the
repair at his own cost for the necessary inspections.
(c) No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the
curbline into the highway a distance greater than one foot
beyond the center line of the street before being refilled and
the surface of the highway restored to a condition safe and
convenient for traveling. No more than 200 feet longitudinally
shall be opened in any street at any one time, and, during
excavation, at least one lane of the road must be open to
vehicle traffic at all times unless the City Engineer officially
closes said roadway to through traffic. Access to private
properties adjacent to the excavation shall be maintained for
emergency vehicle traffic at all times.
§ 193-10 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-10
187:447
(d) All openings and excavations shall be properly backfilled at the
end of each workday. In the event conditions warrant the use of
steel plates as a temporary measure, the City Engineer may
permit the use of steel plates for a limited time period.
(e) The work of excavation shall be conducted so as not to
interfere with the water mains, sewers or their connections
until permission of the proper authorities in connection with
such subsurface lines or constructions shall have been
obtained. The applicant shall be responsible for any and all
damages which may be incurred by the failure to protect any
and all underground facilities.
(f) No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of
the City Engineer, whose permission must be endorsed upon a
right-of-way permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall
be made only in the presence of the City Engineer, or his
designee, and shall be done only in a manner approved by him.
Prior to excavation, proper warnings signs must be installed in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publication 408 and Publication 213.
(g) All road openings or excavations shall be backfilled using 2A
modified stone compacted in six-inch lifts for the entire trench
up to a distance of six inches from finished grade. The
remaining six inches shall consist of 4 1/2 inches of superpave
HMA base course, PG 64-22, less than 0.3 million ESALS, 25
mm mix and 1 1/2 inches of superpave HMA wearing course,
PG 64-22, less than 0.3 million ESALS, 9.5 mm mix, unless
otherwise directed by the City Engineer. All joints must be
sealed in accordance with the latest version of Publication 408.
(h) During the making of any excavation in any street, every
necessary and reasonable precaution shall be taken by the
permittee and the parties making the same to keep the street
in a safe and passable condition both day and night by guards,
barriers, lanterns and other devices. All excavating permits are
granted under and subject to the express condition that the
person to whom the same is issued shall indemnify, save and
keep harmless the City from any loss in damages or otherwise
whatsoever which may or shall be occasioned at any time by
said excavation or by any leak, explosion or other injury from
any pipe apparatus, conduit or any other matter in or placed in
said excavation.
(i) The permittee and/or his contractor shall remove all excavated
materials from the site and dispose of such materials at the
permittee's sole expense. At no time shall the permittee and/or
his contractor deposit excavated material within the City
rights-of-way.
§ 193-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 193-10
187:448
(j) In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder
shall, in the opinion of the City Engineer, or his designee, be
unsatisfactory and the same shall not be corrected in
accordance with his instructions within the time fixed by him,
or in the event that the work for which the permit was granted
is not completed within the time fixed, the City may proceed to
correct such unsatisfactory work or complete any such work
not completed and charge the cost thereof plus 20% to the
applicant.
(k) In the event the applicant's work may interrupt and/or hinder
the Fire Department's ability to provide adequate fire
protection in the vicinity of the excavation, the applicant must
notify the County of Chester's Fire Board at least 24 hours
prior to an opening of a street that will cause said interruption.
(l) No permit to open or break the surface of any street, alley or
highway shall be issued between December 1 and March 1
except in cases of emergency. The final determination of an
emergency situation shall be made by the City.
(m) For openings on state highways, the applicant shall coordinate
all work with the City of Coatesville and PennDOT prior to
proceeding with said work.
(n) The use of dynamite or other explosives is prohibited.
(o) No attachments or openings shall be made on any bridge or
culvert
(p) Mats or protective pads must be used to protect the pavement
from steel traveling pads of equipment and any other piece of
the equipment (i.e., bucket, outrigger, etc.). Damages to
pavement or curbs will be the responsibility of the applicant,
and repair of said damage shall be assessed and assigned by
the City Engineer to the permittee.
(q) The trench perimeter must be shouldered a minimum of 12
inches to offer proper support for newly installed fill. All
irregular road openings must be properly squared.
(r) Prior to making the final restoration, the permittee shall saw
cut one foot from each edge of the trench, in a neat, straight
line, to the bottom elevation of the existing base course, and
the detached material shall be removed and properly disposed.
(s) When traffic lanes of a street are overlayed, the edge of the
overlayed traffic lane shall be milled to a depth of 1 1/2 inches
for the entire length of the overlayed area in order to ensure a
smooth joint with proper elevation and cross section. Traffic
lane or pavement markings that are covered, removed, or
§ 193-10 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-10
187:449
destroyed by any opening or overlay shall be restored by the
permittee.
(t) All areas of the street which are excavated shall be restored
according to the following requirements:
[1] Perpendicular excavation: a perpendicular street
excavation for installation of a utility service line to a new
or existing residence or business from a new or existing
main utility line.
[a] Restoration requirements: The excavation area shall
be milled and overlay applied to a width of three feet
beyond the trench edge. If the excavation is within
three feet of the center line of the road, the entire lane
shall be paved.
[2] Longitudinal excavation: a longitudinal street excavation
for installation of a water main, sewer main or other
longitudinally located utilities.
[a] Restoration requirements: The excavation area shall
be milled and overlay applied to a full lane width. If
excavation is within three feet of the center line of the
road, full roadway width paving is required.
[3] Miscellaneous surface penetrations: any single core
borings, bore holes, or other small excavations.
[a] Restoration requirements: Full depth paving
restoration is required for a minimum of two feet
beyond the boring or excavation. If the boring or
excavation penetrates below the existing pavement,
the area below the paving shall be filled with Type A or
Type B flowable backfill or an alternative fill material
approved by the City Engineer. Excavation shall be
milled and overlay applied to three feet beyond
excavation. If excavation is within three feet of the
center line of the road, full width paving is required.
[4] Miscellaneous surface penetrations: two or more core
borings, bore holes or other small excavations within a
one-hundred-foot road segment:
[a] Restoration requirements: full lane width restoration.
If excavation is within three feet of the center line of
the road, full roadway width paving is required.
(7) Emergency conditions; remedies; costs. In the case of any leak,
explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe, line,
construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus to
§ 193-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 193-10
187:450
commence an excavation to remedy such condition before securing
a permit, provided that application for a permit shall be made
immediately and not later than the next business day thereafter
and that all other provisions of this article are fully complied with.
If any such emergency condition shall not be immediately attended
to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe, line,
construction or apparatus, the City Engineer, or his designee, after
such notice as he shall deem necessary under the circumstances
of the particular case, shall direct City personnel and/or a thirdparty
contractor to do the work necessary and required by such
emergency and charge the same on the basis of cost plus 20% to
such owner, person and/or permittee.
(8) Notice of proposed work; opening new paving restricted. The City
Secretary shall give timely notice to all public utility companies
operating in the City, and all such persons and utility companies
shall make all water, gas and/or sewer connections as well as any
repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of said street
within 30 days from the giving of such notice unless such time is
extended, in writing, for cause shown by the City Engineer. The
method of said notification is to be determined by the City.
(9) Approval of utility mains. No new utility line, including but not
limited to water, sewer and gas mains, shall hereafter be laid or
constructed, and no existing water, sewer or gas main shall be
extended in any of the streets of the City until the exact location
thereof and the plan therefor shall have been first approved by the
City Engineer. In the event a permittee desires to relocate and/or
replace an existing utility, the existing utility shall be removed from
the right-of-way unless otherwise directed by the City Engineer.
(10) Collection of charges due City. Payments for all work done by the
City under the provisions hereof shall be made by the person liable
therefor under the provisions hereof within 30 days after a bill
therefor is sent to such person by the City. Upon failure to pay such
charges within such time, the same shall be collectible by the City
in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal
claims or liens.
(11) Exceptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the
laying of sidewalk or curbs nor to the planting of poles.
C. Utility installations in highways.
(1) Permit required. In accordance with the provisions of Article XXXIX
of the Third Class City Code, as amended (See 53 P.S. §§ 27915 to
370990.), no railroad or street railway shall hereafter be
constructed upon any City road, nor shall any railroad or street
railway crossings nor any gas pipe, water pipe, electric conduits or
other piping be laid upon or in any portion of a City road, nor shall
any telephone, telegraph or electric light or power poles or any coal
§ 193-10 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-10
187:451
tipples or any other obstructions be erected upon or in any portion
of a City road, except under such conditions, restrictions and
regulations relating to the installation and maintenance thereof as
may be prescribed in permits granted by the City for such purpose.
The erection or removal of any utility is specifically made subject to
the provision of this article as amended and set forth hereinabove.
(2) Application for permit; fee. The application for a permit shall be on
a form prescribed by the City and submitted to the City in
triplicate. An application for the erection or removal of any utility
pole shall be accompanied by a fee of $10, or such fee as shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The
fee which shall accompany any other application in accordance
with this article shall be in accordance with the schedule of fees set
forth by the Department of Transportation for highway occupancy
permits and restoration charges. In addition, the applicant shall
submit three copies of a sketch showing such dimensions as the
location of the intended facility, width of the traveled roadway,
right-of-way lines and a dimension to the nearest intersecting
street.
(3) Issuance of permit. A permit shall be issued to the applicant after
all the aforementioned requirements have been filed.
(4) Notice of completion of work. Upon completion of the work, the
applicant shall give written notice thereof to the City.
(5) Inspection of work; defective work. Upon completion of the work
authorized by the permit, the City shall inspect the work and, when
necessary, enforce compliance with the conditions, restrictions and
regulations prescribed by the permit. Where any settlement or
defect in the work occurs, if the applicant shall fail to rectify any
such settlement or other defect within 60 days after written notice
from the City to do so, the City may do the work and shall impose
upon the applicant the cost thereof, together with an additional
20% of such cost.
§ 193-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 193-10
187:452
ARTICLE II
Sidewalk and Curb Construction
[Amended 3-8-1993 by Ord. No. 920-93]
§ 193-11. Construction and repair required.
The City of Coatesville may require owners of property abutting on any
street, including state highways, to construct, pave, repave and repair the
sidewalk, curb and gutter along such property, at such grades and under
such regulations as may be prescribed by the City Engineer, the Codes
Department or the City Council (which may adopt the same by resolution).
§ 193-12. Construct requirements for sidewalks.
From and after the enactment of this article, all sidewalks hereafter
constructed in the City of Coatesville shall be constructed according to the
following specifications:
§ 193-13. Construction requirements for curbing.
From and after the enactment of this article, all curbing hereafter shall be
constructed as follows:
§ 193-14. Plans submitted for approval.
A plan of the proposed construction of sidewalks and curbs, showing width,
length and thickness, shall be submitted to the City Engineer or Codes
Department office for approval. The fees for permits shall be at the same
rate as the fee charged for building construction. When applying for a
building permit, a permit for sidewalk or curbing shall be applied for.
A. The sidewalks shall be composed of a concrete base of not less than
four inches of concrete, using a one-to-two-to-three mix.
B. The concrete shall be placed on a six-inch thoroughly compacted base
of earth or slag.
A. The concrete curb shall be five inches wide at the top and seven inches
wide at the bottom, and the street side battered to make the seven
inches. The distance from the top of the curb shall not be less than 18
inches to the bottom, measured vertically, or so modified to meet field
conditions as approved by the City Engineer or Codes Department.
Extra depth may be required. The concrete mix shall be the same as for
sidewalk construction.
B. Expansion-joint material of a mastic composition will be required on
long-running pours of concrete sidewalks and curbs.
C. All sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be constructed, paved, repaved or
repaired upon the line and grade obtained by the property owner from
the City Engineer or Codes Department office.
§ 193-11 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-15
187:453
§ 193-15. Failure to comply.
§ 193-16. Standards for paving, repaving, repair and maintenance.
§ 193-17. Performance of work by City; costs.
A. Any sidewalk or curb laid by any person, firm or corporation contrary to
the provisions of this article shall be removed and the proper sidewalk
or curb substituted therefor by the property owner within 10 days after
receipt of notice from the City Engineer or Codes Department office,
setting forth that the sidewalk or curbing does not comply with these
specifications; and if said sidewalk or curb is not constructed within
said 10 days, then and in such case said sidewalk and curb shall be
constructed by the City; and the cost thereof plus 10% of such costs and
all charges and expenses shall be billed to the defaulting property
owner; and if not paid within 10 days thereafter, the City shall cause a
lien to be entered against said premises and thereafter collected
according to law, which lien shall accrue from the time of the
completion of the work, which date shall be fixed by the City Engineer
or Codes Department office, filed as required by law, and may be
collected by action in assumpsit, or such lien may be filed and
proceeded in as provided by law in the case of municipal liens.
B. The notice required herein shall be served upon the owner if that can be
done within the county. When it cannot be done so, then the notice may
be served upon the owner's agent or the party in possession; and if this
cannot be done, then the notice may be served by posting conspicuously
upon the premises.
A. It shall be the duty of owners of property abutting on any street,
including state highways, to maintain sidewalks, curbs and gutters free
from defective conditions and in accordance with standards
promulgated by City Council and administered by the City Codes
Department office. Further, it shall be the duty of owners of such
sidewalks, curbs and gutters to construct, pave, repave and repair any
defective condition in a sidewalk, curb or gutter after receiving a notice
from the Codes Department office of the defective condition within 30
days after the service of such notice upon them. The service of notice
shall be the same as the notice provision of § 193-15 of this chapter.
B. The standards for sidewalk, curb and gutter condition, reconstruction,
maintenance, paving, repaving and repair shall be the same as for
sidewalk construction as established by the City Council by resolution.
These standards shall be administered by the City Codes Department
office and copies of the standards shall be available at the Codes
Department office.
C. At any time during the performance of the required work, the City
Engineer or the City codes officials may inspect the work to determine
whether construction specifications and standards are being observed.
§ 193-15 COATESVILLE CODE § 193-17
187:454
§ 193-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, upon conviction
thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.150
A. Upon the failure of any property owner to construct, reconstruct, pave,
repave or maintain any sidewalk, curb or gutter in compliance with
notice to do so within 30 days of said notice, the City may do the work
required or cause the same to be done and the cost thereof levied and
collected from such owner, together with a penalty of 10% of such costs
and all charges and expenses, which amount shall be a lien upon such
premises from the time of the completion of the work, which date shall
be fixed by a certificate from the City Engineer filed with the Secretary,
and may be collected by action in assumpsit, or such lien may be filed
and proceeded in as provided by law in the case of municipal liens.
B. Emergency repairs. Where, in the opinion of the City Codes Department
office, a dangerous condition exists that can be repaired by expenditure
of $50, the City shall send such property owner notice by registered or
certified mail stating emergency repairs are required. Upon failure of
such owner to comply with the notice within 48 hours after receiving it,
the City may make emergency repairs and levy the cost of its work on
such owner as a property lien to be collected in the manner provided by
law.
C. Construction and repair done on owner's initiative without notice. Any
property owner not required by notice to construct, pave, repave or
keep in repair sidewalks, curbs or gutters may construct, pave, repave
or repair the sidewalk, curb and gutter abutting his/her property,
provided that such owner shall make application to the City Codes
Department office before commencing work, shall conform to the
provisions of this article and other regulations as to specifications for
construction and repair work and shall notify the City Codes
Department office within two days after completion of his/her work.
150. Editor's Note: Original Art. V, entitled "Obstruction of Streets," which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96.
§ 193-17 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-18
187:455

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)151
§ 193-19. through § 193-22. (Reserved)
151. Editor’s Note: Former Art. III, Snow and Ice Removal, was repealed 6-12-2017 by Ord. No.
1494-2017. See now Ch. 180, Property Maintenance, § 180-2M(5).
§ 193-19 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-19
187:457

ARTICLE IV
Obstruction of Sidewalks
§ 193-23. Obstruction of sidewalks unlawful.
§ 193-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Any person, firm or corporation, or any employee or agent thereof, violating
the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction in summary
proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of $600 or imprisonment for not
more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment.152
A. From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation or any officer or employee thereof to block
or cause to be blocked any sidewalk of the City of Coatesville by the
storing or placing of goods, wares or merchandise within or on any
traveled section of paved sidewalk, except undedicated or unordained
portions thereof, or by the obstruction thereof by trucks or other
vehicles being backed or driven on or across such sidewalks for the
purpose of loading or unloading goods, wares or merchandise of any
kind or description whatsoever, except as otherwise herein provided.
B. Individual owners may be granted a special permit on application to the
Codes Enforcement Officer for temporary use of abutting sidewalks on
the following conditions:
(1) A clear space of not less than 48 inches from the curbline shall be
maintained at all times so as not to interfere with the safe, free and
unhampered passage of pedestrians.
(2) Special permits shall not be issued to any owner more often than
six times during a calendar year.
(3) Special permits shall not be issued for more than four days.
(4) Any obstruction of the sidewalk pursuant to a special permit shall
be removed at dusk or shall be lighted from dusk to dawn.
(5) The applicant for a special permit shall agree to indemnify and hold
harmless the City of Coatesville against any and all loss, damage,
cost and expense and all liability, claims and demands whatsoever
arising from the issuance of such permit and the use thereof.
152. Editor's Note: Original Art. VII, entitled "Littering on Streets and Sidewalks," which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96.
§ 193-23 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-24
187:459

ARTICLE IVA
Obstruction of Streets
[Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
§ 193-24.1. Obstruction of streets unlawful.
A. From and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation, or any officer or employee thereof, to block
or cause to be blocked over any street, avenue or alley of the City of
Coatesville, by the storing or placing of goods, wares or merchandise
within or on any traveled section of paved street, avenue or alley, or by
the obstruction thereof by placing any motor-propelled or other type of
vehicle on any such highway for any purpose whatever particularly so
placed for the purpose of making major repair or repairs to such
vehicle. Major repairs are prohibited by this section. This section does
not prohibit minor repairs.
B. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MAJOR REPAIRS — The replacement of major parts on a vehicle that
would require the use of a hoist or heavy floor jack. "Major repairs"
include but are not limited to work on brakes, engines, transmissions,
radiator, auto body repair, seats, cushions, interior dashboard, steering
column or any other item not included in the term "minor repairs."
MINOR REPAIRS — The replacement of existing parts on a vehicle,
which parts can be purchased in automotive stores over the counter.
"Minor repairs" include but are not limited to replacement of such items
as spark plugs, motor oil, transmission oil, window wash and vehicle
tires. "Minor repairs" do not include the performance of any of the
foregoing as a commercial venture.
§ 193-24.1 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-24.1
187:461

ARTICLE V
Trash Dumpsters
[Added 6-14-1993 by Ord. No. 928-93]
§ 193-25. Permit required for dumpster on streets, roadways or
sidewalks. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
No person shall place or cause to be placed any trash dumpster or similar
container for trash or construction materials on any City street, roadway or
sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the City Codes Department.
Every person applying for a permit shall provide such information as
required by the Codes Department, and the fee for said permit shall be as
provided in Chapter 108, Fees. Said fee may be changed by the Council by
amendment of Chapter 108, Fees, from time to time. A permit shall not be
necessary for the placement of a dumpster or similar container on private
property.
§ 193-26. Procedure and standards for permit.
The procedure for obtaining a permit for a dumpster or similar container is
as follows:
§ 193-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction in summary proceedings, be subject to a fine
of not more than $600 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, for each day on which said violation may have
been committed.
A. Contact the Codes Department.
B. The Codes Department shall submit the request to the Police and Fire
Departments for the approval of those Departments. No permits shall
be issued without the approval of said Departments.
C. No dumpster may be placed on a sidewalk or street in such a fashion as
to completely block or obstruct passageway on said street or sidewalk.
No permit will issue if such condition is likely to exist. [Amended
5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
D. Upon a showing that all of the above conditions and standards have
been met, the Codes Department will approve and issue the permit
upon payment of the applicable fee.
E. If the placement of a dumpster or similar container would be located in
an area where parking meters exist, meter rental applications must also
be acquired for the number of meters obstructed by the placement of
the dumpster for the period of time that the dumpster will be placed in
said location.
§ 193-25 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-27
187:463

ARTICLE VI
Littering
[Added 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
§ 193-28. Littering on streets and sidewalks.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall deposit or cause to be
deposited any wastepaper, rubbish, beverage cans or bottles or other
material on any street in the City of Coatesville, nor shall they deposit or
cause to be deposited the same on any lot or other place in said City without
protecting it in such manner that it cannot be carried on or to any street by
wind or storm.
§ 193-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction in summary proceedings, be subject to a fine
of not more than $600 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
§ 193-28 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-29
187:465

ARTICLE VII
Billboards
[Added 3-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1161-2001]
§ 193-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BILLBOARD — A sign and/or structure for the public display of
advertisements which directs attention to a person, business, profession,
product or activity not conducted on the same premises. The sign must be a
minimum of 100 square feet to be eligible for permit.
§ 193-31. Maintenance of billboards; inspections; permit.
§ 193-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating the provision of this
article shall upon conviction in summary proceeding, be subject to a fine of
not more than $600 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both
fine and imprisonment.
A. The billboard structure shall be free of peeling, flaking and chipping of
paint.
B. Every five years, the owner of the billboard shall have a structural
inspection made of the billboard by a qualified engineer and shall
provide to the City a certification certifying that the billboard is
structurally sound.
C. An annual inspection of the billboard shall be conducted by the City's
Codes Department to determine compliance with this article, and any
billboard found to be in violation of this section shall be brought into
compliance within 30 days of the notice or ordered removed upon
proper notification by the City.
D. Billboards using removable paper or other materials shall be
maintained in such a condition as to eliminate loose or frayed materials
protruding or hanging from the structure. Upon notice by the City
referencing this section, the owner of the billboard must correct such
violation within 48 hours.
E. Any billboard in the City must be registered with the City by permit on a
yearly basis. The fee for such permit is listed in Chapter 108 of the City
Code and is due in January of the current year. Owner of the billboard
along with an authorization letter from the property owner is required
as part of the permit application process.
§ 193-30 SHOPPING CARTS § 193-32
187:467
Chapter 194
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION AND
SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain District requirements — See Ch.
82, Art. I.
Sewers — See Ch. 185.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
197.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 193-32 COATESVILLE CODE § 193-32
187:468
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 194-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "City of Coatesville Stormwater
Management and Erosion Control Ordinance."
§ 194-102. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from land disturbance and development throughout a watershed
increases flooding, flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, overtaxes the capacity of streams and storm sewers,
greatly increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage
stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood reduction
efforts in upstream and downstream communities, reduces infiltration
and groundwater recharge, increases nonpoint source pollution to
waterways, and threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land disturbance and development throughout a watershed can
harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of stream beds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted
through loss of recharge.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
minimization of impacts of new development, redevelopment, and other
earth disturbance activities causing accelerated runoff and erosion and
loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the people of the municipality and all of the
people of the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource that provides infiltration
and groundwater recharge for water supplies and baseflow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by reducing the
volume of stormwater generated and by using project designs that
maintain the natural hydrologic regime and sustain high water quality,
infiltration, stream baseflow, and aquatic ecosystems. Cost-effective
and environmentally sensitive stormwater management can be
achieved through the use of nonstructural site design techniques that
minimize impervious surfaces, reduce disturbance of land and natural
resources, avoid sensitive areas (i.e., riparian buffers, floodplains, steep
§ 194-101 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-102
187:469
§ 194-103. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health, safety and general
welfare, property and water quality by implementing drainage and
stormwater management practices, criteria, and provisions included herein
for land development, construction and earth disturbance activities, to
achieve the following throughout the municipality:
slopes, wetlands, etc.), and consider topography and soils to maintain
the natural hydrologic regime.
F. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
G. Federal and state regulations require the municipality to implement a
program of stormwater controls. The municipality is required to obtain
a permit and comply with its provisions for stormwater discharges from
its separate storm sewer system under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
H. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal or other storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of the waters of the commonwealth.
A. Reduce the frequency and magnitude of flooding and stormwater
impacts affecting people, property, infrastructure and public services.
B. Sustain or improve the natural hydrologic characteristics and water
quality of groundwater and surface waters.
C. Protect natural resources, including riparian and aquatic living
resources and habitats.
D. Maintain the natural hydrologic regime of land development sites and
their receiving watersheds.
E. Minimize land disturbance and protect and incorporate natural
hydrologic features, drainage patterns, infiltration, and flow conditions
within land development site designs.
F. Reduce and minimize the volume of stormwater generated, and manage
and release stormwater as close to the source of runoff as possible.
G. Provide infiltration and maintain natural groundwater recharge to
protect groundwater supplies and stream baseflows, prevent
degradation of surface water and groundwater quality, and to otherwise
protect water resources.
H. Reduce stormwater pollutant loads to protect and improve the
chemical, physical, and biological quality of ground and surface waters.
I. Reduce scour, erosion and sedimentation of stream channels.
J. Reduce flooding impacts and preserve and restore the natural floodcarrying
capacity of streams and their floodplains.
§ 194-102 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-103
187:470
K. Protect adjacent and downgradient lands from adverse impacts of
direct stormwater discharges.
L. Minimize impervious surfaces and connected impervious surfaces to
promote infiltration and reduce the volume and impacts of stormwater
runoff.
M. Provide proper long-term operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities, BMPs and conveyances that are
implemented within the municipality.
N. Reduce the impacts of runoff from existing developed land undergoing
redevelopment while encouraging new development and
redevelopment in urban areas and areas designated for growth.
O. Implement an illicit discharge detection and elimination program that
addresses nonstormwater discharges.
P. Provide performance standards and design criteria based on
watershed-based stormwater management planning.
Q. Provide standards to meet certain NPDES stormwater permit
requirements.
R. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93, to protect, maintain, reclaim and
restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of the
commonwealth.
S. Implement the requirements of total maximum daily load (TMDLs)
where applicable to waters within or impacted by the municipality.
T. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
U. Fulfill the purpose and requirements of PA Act 167 (PA Act 167, Section
3):
"(1) Encourage planning and management of stormwater runoff in
each watershed which is consistent with sound water and land
use practices.
(2) Authorize a comprehensive program of stormwater management
designated to preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity
of commonwealth streams; to preserve to the maximum extent
practicable natural stormwater runoff regimes and natural
course, current and cross section of water of the commonwealth;
and to protect and conserve groundwaters and groundwater
recharge areas.
§ 194-103 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-103
187:471
§ 194-104. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered or required to regulate land use activities
that affect runoff and surface- and groundwater quality and quantity by the
authority of:
§ 194-105. Applicability.
(3) Encourage local administration and management of stormwater
consistent with the commonwealth's duty as trustee of natural
resources and the people's constitutional right to the preservation
of natural, economic, scenic, aesthetic, recreational and historic
values of the environment."
A. Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167) 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as
amended, the "Stormwater Management Act" (hereinafter referred to
as "the Act");
B. Third Class City Code, 53 P.S. § 35101 et seq.; and
C. Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as
amended, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247
(hereinafter referred to as the "MPC").
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the
provisions of Article VIII, titled "Prohibitions," shall apply to every
person in the City regardless if they are engaged in a regulated activity.
B. The following activities are regulated by this chapter:
(1) All regulated activities as defined in this chapter including, but not
limited to, new development, redevelopment, and earth
disturbance activities that are located within the municipality shall
be subject to regulation by this chapter.
(2) When a building and/or grading permit is required for any
regulated activity on an existing parcel or approved lot created by a
subdivision and/or improved as a land development project,
issuance of the permit shall be conditioned upon adherence to the
terms of this chapter.
(3) This chapter contains the stormwater management performance
standards and design criteria that are necessary from a watershedbased
perspective. The municipality's stormwater management
conveyance and system design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet
type, collection system design and details, outlet structure design,
etc.) shall continue to be regulated by the applicable municipal
ordinance(s) and applicable state regulations, or as included in
§ 194-311 of this chapter.
C. Duty of persons engaged in a regulated activity. Notwithstanding any
provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any landowner or any
§ 194-103 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-105
187:472
§ 194-106. Exemptions and modified requirements.
person engaged in a regulated activity, including but not limited to the
alteration or development of land, which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics, shall implement such measures as are reasonably
necessary to prevent injury to health, safety, or other property. Such
measures also shall include actions as are required to manage the
rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater runoff in
a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property, and
water quality of waters of the commonwealth.
D. Phased and incremental project requirements.
(1) Any regulated activity (including but not limited to new
development, redevelopment, or earth disturbance) that is to take
place incrementally or in phases, or occurs in sequential projects
on the same parcel or property, shall be subject to regulation by
this chapter if the cumulative proposed impervious surface or earth
disturbance exceeds the corresponding threshold for exemption (as
presented in Table 106.1 "Thresholds for Regulated Activities
Exempt from Chapter Provisions ").
(2) The date of adoption of this chapter shall be the starting point from
which to consider tracts as parent tracts relative to future
subdivisions, and from which impervious surface and earth
disturbance computations shall be cumulatively considered.
(3) For example: If, after adoption of this chapter, an applicant
proposes construction of a six-hundred-square-foot garage, that
project would be exempted from the requirements of this chapter
as noted in Table 106.1. If, at a later date, an applicant proposes to
construct a nine-hundred-square-foot room addition on the same
property, the applicant would then be required to implement the
stormwater management and plan submission requirements of this
chapter for the cumulative total of 1,500 square feet of additional
impervious surface added to the property since adoption of this
chapter.
A. Requirements for exempt activities:
(1) An exemption from any requirement of this chapter shall not
relieve the applicant from implementing all other applicable
requirements of this chapter or from implementing such measures
as are necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare,
property and water quality.
(2) An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from complying with
the requirements for state-designated special protection waters
designated by PADEP as high-quality (HQ) or exceptional-value
(EV) waters, or any other current or future state or municipal water
quality protection requirements.
§ 194-105 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-106
187:473
(3) An exemption under this chapter shall not relieve the applicant
from complying with all other applicable municipal ordinances or
regulations.
B. General exemptions. Regulated activities that:
(1) Involve less than 1,000 square feet of proposed impervious
surfaces and less than 5,000 square feet of earth disturbance; or
(2) Are listed in § 194-106C, are exempt from those (and only those)
requirements of this chapter that are included in the sections and
articles listed in Table 106.1. Exemptions are for the items noted in
Table 106.1 only, and shall not relieve the landowner from other
applicable requirements of this chapter. Exemption shall not
relieve the applicant from implementing such measures as are
necessary to protect health, safety, and welfare, property, and
water quality.
Table 106.1
Thresholds for Regulated Activities Exempt From Chapter
Provisions
Ordinance
Article/Section
Activities
Listed in
§ 194-106C
Less Than
1,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Impervious
Surfaces and
Less Than
5,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Earth
Disturbance
Equal or
Greater Than
1,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Impervious
Surfaces or
Equal or
Greater Than
5,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Earth
Disturbance
Article I, General
Provisions
Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Article II,
Definitions
Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Article III,
Stormwater
Management
Standards,
§§ 194-302,
194-303 and
194-311
Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
§ 194-106 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-106
187:474
Table 106.1
Thresholds for Regulated Activities Exempt From Chapter
Provisions
Ordinance
Article/Section
Activities
Listed in
§ 194-106C
Less Than
1,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Impervious
Surfaces and
Less Than
5,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Earth
Disturbance
Equal or
Greater Than
1,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Impervious
Surfaces or
Equal or
Greater Than
5,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Earth
Disturbance
Article III,
Stormwater
Management
Standards,
§§ 194-301,
194-304, 194-305,
194-306, 194-307,
194-308, 194-309
and 194-310
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article IV,
Stormwater
Management
(SWM) Site Plan
Requirements
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article V,
Performance and
Inspection of
Regulated
Activities; Final
As-Built Plans
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article VI, Fees
and Expenses
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
Article VII,
Operation and
Maintenance
(O&M)
Responsibilities
and Easements
Exempt Exempt Not exempt
§ 194-106 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-106
187:475
Table 106.1
Thresholds for Regulated Activities Exempt From Chapter
Provisions
Ordinance
Article/Section
Activities
Listed in
§ 194-106C
Less Than
1,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Impervious
Surfaces and
Less Than
5,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Earth
Disturbance
Equal or
Greater Than
1,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Impervious
Surfaces or
Equal or
Greater Than
5,000 Square
Feet of
Proposed
Earth
Disturbance
Article VIII,
Prohibitions
Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Article IX,
Enforcement;
Violations and
Penalties
Not exempt Not exempt Not exempt
Other erosion,
sediment and
pollution control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter 102 of the
Pa. Code and other applicable state and
municipal codes, including the Clean Streams
Law153
NOTES:
Specific activities listed in § 194-106C are exempt from the
indicated requirements, regardless of size.
A proposed regulated activity must be less than both the proposed
impervious surfaces and proposed earth disturbance thresholds
to be eligible for exemption from the requirements listed in this
table.
"Proposed impervious surface": as defined in this chapter.
"Exempt": Regulated activities are exempt from the requirements
of listed section(s) only; all other provisions of this chapter apply.
C. Exemptions for specific activities. The following specific regulated
activities are exempt from the requirements of §§ 194-301, 194-304,
194-305, 194-306, 194-307, 194-308, 194-309 and 194-310, and
Articles IV, V, VI and VII of this chapter (as shown in Table 106.1),
unless otherwise noted below. All other conveyance and system design
153. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 194-106 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-106
187:476
standards established by the municipality in other codes or ordinances
shall be required, and all other provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(1) Emergency exemption: emergency maintenance work performed
for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. This
exemption is limited to repair of the existing facility; upgrades,
additions or other improvements are not exempt. A written
description of the scope and extent of any emergency work
performed shall be submitted to the municipality within two
calendar days of the commencement of the activity. A detailed plan
shall be submitted no later than 30 days following commencement
of the activity. If the municipality finds that the work is not an
emergency, then the work shall cease immediately and the
requirements of this chapter shall be addressed as applicable.
(2) Maintenance: any maintenance to an existing stormwater
management system, facility, BMP or conveyance made in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
Municipal Engineer or municipality.
(3) Existing landscaping: use of land for maintenance, replacement or
enhancement of existing landscaping.
(4) Gardening: use of land for gardening for home consumption.
(5) Agricultural-related activities:
(a) Agricultural activities (as defined in Article II), when
performed in accordance with the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 102.
(b) Conservation practices (as defined in Article II) that do not
involve construction of any new or expanded impervious
surfaces.
(6) Forest management: forest management operations, which are
consistent with a sound forest management plan as filed with the
municipality and which comply with the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection's management practices contained in
its publication "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines
for Forestry" (as amended or replaced by subsequent guidance).
Such operations are required to have an erosion and sedimentation
control plan, which meets the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter
102 and meets the erosion and sediment control standards of
§ 194-303 of this chapter.
(7) Maintenance of existing paved surfaces: Replacement of existing
paved surfaces shall meet the erosion and sediment control
requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 and § 194-303 of this
chapter, and is exempt from all other requirements of this chapter
listed in Subsection C above. Resurfacing of existing paved
surfaces is exempt from the requirements of this chapter listed
§ 194-106 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-106
187:477
above. Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces shall
comply with all requirements of this chapter as indicated in Table
106.1.
(8) Municipal roadway shoulder improvements: shoulder
improvements conducted within the existing roadway cross section
of municipal-owned roadways, unless an NPDES permit is required,
in which case the proposed work must comply with all
requirements of this chapter.
(9) In-place replacement of residential dwelling unit: the replacement
in the exact footprint of an existing one- or two-family dwelling
unit.
(10) In-place replacement, repair, or maintenance of residential
impervious surfaces: the replacement of existing residential patios,
decks, driveways, pools, garages, and/or sidewalks that are
accessory to an existing one- or two-family dwelling unit in the
exact footprint of the existing impervious surface.
D. Modified requirements for small projects. Regulated activities that
involve less than 2,000 square feet of proposed impervious surfaces and
less than 10,000 square feet of proposed earth disturbance may apply
the modified requirements presented in the "Simplified Approach to
Stormwater Management for Small Projects" (Simplified Approach)
(Appendix A154) to comply with the requirements of §§ 194-304,
194-305, 194-306, 194-307, 194-308, 194-309 and 194-310, and
Articles IV, V, VI and VII of this chapter (as shown in Table 106.2). The
applicant shall first contact the Municipal Engineer to confirm that the
proposed project is eligible for use of the Simplified Approach and is not
otherwise exempt from these chapter provisions; to determine what
components of the proposed project are to be considered as impervious
surfaces; and to determine if other known site or local conditions exist
that may preclude the use of any techniques included in the Simplified
Approach. Appendix A includes instructions and procedures for
preparation, submittal, review and approval of documents required
when using the Simplified Approach and shall be adhered to by the
applicant. All other provisions of this chapter shall apply.
Table 106.2
Thresholds for Regulated Activities Eligible for "Modified"
Requirements
Ordinance Article/Section Activities Listed in § 194-106D
Article I, General Provisions All provisions apply
Article II, Definitions All provisions apply
154. Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the City offices.
§ 194-106 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-106
187:478
Table 106.2
Thresholds for Regulated Activities Eligible for "Modified"
Requirements
Ordinance Article/Section Activities Listed in § 194-106D
Article III, Stormwater
Management Standards,
§§ 194-302, 194-303 and
194-311
All provisions apply
Article III, Stormwater
Management Standard,
§§ 194-301, 194-304, 194-305,
194-306, 194-307, 194-308,
194-309 and 194-310
Exempt if modified requirements of
§ 194-106D are applied
Article IV, Stormwater
Management (SWM) Site Plan
Requirements
Exempt if modified requirements of
§ 194-106D are applied
Article V, Performance and
Inspection of Regulated
Activities; Final As-Built Plans
Exempt if modified requirements of
§ 194-106D are applied
Article VI, Fees and Expenses Exempt if modified requirements of
§ 194-106D are applied
Article VII, Operation and
Maintenance (O&M)
Responsibilities and Easement
Exempt if modified requirements of
§ 194-106D are applied
Article VIII, Prohibitions All provisions apply
Article IX, Enforcement;
Violations and Penalties
All provisions apply
Other erosion, sediment and
pollution control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter
102 of the Pa. Code and other
applicable state and municipal codes,
including the Clean Streams Law155
NOTES:
"Modified Requirements" – Regulated activities listed within the
subsections of this chapter noted in Table 106.2 are eligible for
exemption only from the indicated sections and subsections of this
chapter and only if the modified requirements of Subsection D are
met to the satisfaction of the municipality; all other provisions of this
chapter apply.
155. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 194-106 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-107
187:479
§ 194-107. Repealer.
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the municipality inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
§ 194-108. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared the intent of the governing body of the municipality that this
chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid provision, sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included
herein.
§ 194-109. Compatibility with other ordinances or legal
requirements.
§ 194-110. Financial security.
For all activities requiring submittal of a stormwater management (SWM)
site plan that involve subdivision or land development, the applicant shall
post financial security to the municipality for the timely installation and
proper construction of all stormwater management facilities as required by
the approved SWM site plan and this chapter, and such financial security
shall:
A. Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure and comply with
other required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act, law, regulation, or ordinance.
B. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent
requirements for stormwater management than any other code, rule,
act, law, regulation or ordinance, the specific requirements contained in
this chapter shall take precedence.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters that do not
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). The
requirements of this chapter shall supersede any conflicting
requirements in other municipal ordinances or regulations.
A. Be equal to or greater than the full construction cost of the required
facilities except to the extent that financial security for the cost of any
of such improvements is required to be and is posted with the
§ 194-107 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-110
187:480
§ 194-111. Waivers.
§ 194-112. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful.
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in connection with a
highway occupancy permit application; and
B. Be determined, collected, applied and enforced in accordance with
§§ 509 through 511 of the MPC156 and the provisions of the
municipality's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(SALDO).157
A. General. The requirements of this chapter are essential and shall be
strictly adhered to. For any regulated activity where, after a close
evaluation of alternative site designs, it proves to be impracticable to
meet any one or more of the mandatory minimum standards of this
chapter on the site, the municipality may approve measures other than
those in this chapter, subject to Subsections B and C.
B. The governing body shall have the authority to waive or modify the
requirements of one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal
enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification will
not be contrary to the public interest and that the purpose and intent of
the chapter is observed. Cost or financial burden shall not be
considered a hardship. Modification may also be considered if an
alternative standard or approach can be demonstrated to provide equal
or better achievement of the results intended by the chapter. A request
for modification shall be in writing and accompany the SWM site plan
submission. The request shall state in full the grounds and facts on
which the request is based, the provision or provisions of the chapter
involved and the minimum modification necessary.
C. PADEP approval required. For any proposed regulated activity involving
earth disturbance equal to or greater than one acre, the municipality
may approve measures for minimum volume and infiltration control
other than those required in this chapter only after consultation with
and evaluation by PADEP that the alternate site design meets state
water quality requirements and does not conflict with state law,
including, but not limited to, the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, 35
P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
156. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509 through 10511.
157. Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 194-110 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-112
187:481

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 194-201. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 194-202. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture such
as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use
areas. This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, plowing,
disking, harrowing, planting or harvesting crops; or pasturing and raising
of livestock; and installation of conservation measures. Construction of new
buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity as defined in this chapter.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, partnership, public or private
association or corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality,
governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
Whenever used in any section prescribing or imposing a penalty, the
term "person" shall include the members of a partnership, the officers,
members, servants and agents of an association, officers, agents and
servants of a corporation, and the officers of a municipality.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied, or maintained."
F. The definitions in this chapter are for the purposes of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter and have no bearing on other municipal
regulations or ordinances.
§ 194-201 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-202
187:483
AS-BUILT PLANS (DRAWINGS) — Engineering or site plans or drawings
that document the actual locations, dimensions and elevations of the
improvements, and building components, and changes made to the original
design plans. The final version of these documents, or a copy of same, are
signed and sealed by a qualified licensed professional and submitted to the
municipality at the completion of the project, as per the requirements of
§ 194-502 of this chapter as "final as-built plans."
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASEFLOW — Portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater; the
sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from water
diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human activities.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to provide water quality treatment, infiltration, volume
reduction, and/or peak rate control, to promote groundwater recharge,
and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs
are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures:
"structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, nonstructural BMPs or
measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that
attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the site.
BUFFER — See "riparian buffer."
CARBONATE GEOLOGY or CARBONATE ROCK FORMATIONS — See
"karst."
CFS — Cubic feet per second.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial open drainage feature that conveys,
continuously or periodically, flowing water and through which stormwater
flows. Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly
full.
CN — Curve number.
COMMONWEALTH — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Chester County Conservation District.
§ 194-202 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-202
187:484
CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan written by a planner certified by NRCS
that identifies conservation practices and includes site-specific BMPs for
agricultural plowing or tilling activities and animal heavy use areas.
CONSERVATION PRACTICES — Practices installed on agricultural lands to
improve farmland, soil and/or water quality which have been identified in a
current conservation plan.
CONVEYANCE — A natural or man-made, existing or proposed facility,
feature or channel used for the transportation or transmission of
stormwater from one place to another. For the purposes of this chapter,
conveyance shall include pipes, drainage ditches, channels and swales
(vegetated and other), gutters, stream channels, and like facilities or
features.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely
shortly after any given rainfall event.
DETENTION or TO DETAIN — Capture and temporary storage of runoff in
a stormwater management facility for release at a controlled rate.
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person who seeks to undertake any regulated activities at
a site in the municipality.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The outside bark diameter of a
tree at breast height which is defined as 4.5 feet (1.37 m) above the forest
floor on the uphill side of the tree.
DISTURBED AREA — Land area disturbed by or where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DRAINAGE AREA — That land area contributing runoff to a single point
(including but not limited to the point/line of interest used for hydrologic
and hydraulic calculations) and that is enclosed by a natural or man-made
ridgeline.
EARTH DISTURBANCE or EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A
construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land,
including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations;
embankments; road maintenance; land development; building construction;
and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth
materials.
EASEMENT — A right of use granted by a landowner to allow a grantee the
use of the designated portion of land for a specified purpose, such as for
stormwater management or other drainage purposes.
§ 194-202 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-202
187:485
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including water/
stream channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan required by the
Conservation District or the municipality to minimize accelerated erosion
and sedimentation, and that must be prepared and approved per the
applicable requirements.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this
commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being
a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided
by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence
to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the center line of the stream
and to 50 feet beyond the top of the bank of the stream on both sides.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forest lands. These include timber
inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment,
cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber harvesting,
site preparation, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the design high-water elevation
and the elevation of the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion
berm. The space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GEOTEXTILE — A fabric manufactured from synthetic fiber that is used
to achieve specific objectives, including infiltration, separation between
different types of media (i.e., between soil and stone), or filtration.
GOVERNING BODY — City Council of City of Coatesville.
GRADE/GRADING — 1. (noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel, or natural
ground, specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein. 2.
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or the
bottom of an excavation.
GROUNDWATER — Water that occurs in the subsurface and fills or
saturates the porous openings, fractures and fissures of underground soils
and rock units.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
groundwater supplies from infiltration of rain or overland flow.
§ 194-202 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-202
187:486
HEC-1 — The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering Center
(HEC) hydrologic runoff model.
HEC-HMS — The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering
Center (HEC)-Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS).
HOTSPOT — Areas where prior or existing land use or activities can
potentially generate highly contaminated runoff with concentrations of
pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic system, cycle or balance that
sustains the quality and quantity of stormwater, stream baseflow, storage,
and groundwater supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) into four runoff potential groups.
The groups range from A soils, which are very permeable and produce little
runoff, to D soils, which are not very permeable and produce much more
runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it prevents or is resistant to infiltration
of water, including but not limited to structures such as roofs, buildings,
storage sheds; other solid, paved or concrete areas such as streets,
driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, patios, decks, swimming pools, tennis
or other paved courts; or athletic playfields comprised of synthetic turf
materials. For the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter,
compacted soils or stone surfaces used for vehicle parking and movement
shall be considered impervious. Surfaces that were designed to allow
infiltration (i.e., areas of porous pavement) will be considered on a case-bycase
basis by the Municipal Engineer, based on appropriate documentation
and condition of the material, etc.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION FACILITY — A stormwater BMP designed to collect and
discharge runoff into the subsurface in a manner that allows infiltration
into underlying soils and groundwater (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, or
seepage trenches, etc.).
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A defined channel in which surface water is
absent during a portion of the year, in response to seasonal variations in
precipitation or groundwater discharge.
INVERT — The lowest surface, the floor or bottom of a culvert, pipe, drain,
sewer, channel, basin, BMP or orifice.
KARST — A type of topography that is formed over limestone or other
carbonate rock formations by dissolving or solution of the rock by water,
and that is characterized by closed depressions, sinkholes, caves, a
subsurface network of solution conduits and fissures through which
groundwater moves, and no perennial surface drainage features.
§ 194-202 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-202
187:487
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if they are authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in the land.
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL — A Pennsylvania registered professional
engineer, registered landscape architect, registered professional land
surveyor, or registered professional geologist, or any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State and qualified by law to perform the work
required by the chapter within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata that includes one of the following:
MAINTENANCE — The action taken to restore or preserve the as-built
functional design of any facility or system.
MFEMP — Mushroom farm environmental management plan.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features;
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (as amended).158
C.
A seasonal high-water table, whether perched or regional, determined
by direct observation of the water table or indicated by other
subsurface or soil conditions.
A.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill
the voids between the fragments.
B.
A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition that is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
C.
158. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 194-202 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-202
187:488
MPC — Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as
amended, the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247.
MS4 — Municipal separate storm sewer system.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency, or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY — City of Coatesville, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Any regulated activity involving placement or
construction of new impervious surface or grading over existing pervious
land areas not classified as redevelopment as defined in this chapter.
NOAA — National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMPs) — See "best
management practice (BMP)."
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,159
which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously Soil
Conservation Service, SCS), an agency of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture.
PADEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption of
this chapter.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PennDOT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
PENNSYLVANIA STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
MANUAL (PADEP BMP MANUAL) — Document Number 363-0300-002
(December 2006, and as subsequently amended).
PERVIOUS SURFACE or PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as
impervious surface.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the City of
Coatesville.
159. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 194-202 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-202
187:489
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.160
POSTCONSTRUCTION — Period after construction during which disturbed
areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and functioning, and
all proposed improvements approved by the municipality are completed.
PREDEVELOPMENT — Land cover conditions assumed to exist within the
proposed disturbed area prior to commencement of the regulated activity
for the purpose of calculating the predevelopment water quality volume,
infiltration volume, and peak flow rates as required in this chapter.
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide
storage or filtering, or other methods to trap or remove coarse materials
and other pollutants before they enter the stormwater system, but may
not necessarily be designed to meet the entire water quality volume
requirements of this chapter.
PROPOSED IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — All new, additional and replacement
impervious surfaces.
RAINFALL INTENSITY — The depth of accumulated rainfall per unit of
time.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any regulated activity that involves demolition,
removal, reconstruction, or replacement of existing impervious surface(s).
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Any earth disturbance activity(ies) or any activity
that involves the alteration or development of land in a manner that may
affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Any activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,161
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.162
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment that is designed to temporarily
detain a certain amount of stormwater from a catchment area and which
may be designed to permanently retain stormwater runoff from the
catchment area; retention basins always contain water.
RETENTION or TO RETAIN — The prevention of direct discharge of
stormwater runoff into surface waters or water bodies during or after a
storm event by permanent containment in a pond or depression; examples
160. Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of the Pa. Code was reserved 10-8-2010. Defined terms can now
be found at 25 Pa. Code § 92a.2.
161. Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
162. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 194-202 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-202
187:490
include systems which discharge by percolation to groundwater,
exfiltration, and/or evaporation processes and which generally have
residence times of less than three days.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of the
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year-return-period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent
chance).
RIPARIAN — Pertaining to anything connected with or immediately adjacent
to the banks of a stream or other body of water.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — An area of land adjacent to a body of water and
managed to maintain vegetation to protect the integrity of stream channels
and shorelines, to reduce the impact of upland sources of pollution by
trapping, filtering, and converting sediments, nutrients, and other
chemicals, and to supply food, cover and thermal protection to fish and
other aquatic species and wildlife.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO — See Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.163
SCS — Soil Conservation Service, now known as the Natural Resources
Conservation Service.
SEDIMENT — Soil or other materials transported by, suspended in or
deposited by surface water as a product of erosion.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
SITE — Total area of land in the municipality where any proposed regulated
activity, as defined in this chapter, is planned, conducted, or maintained or
that is otherwise impacted by the regulated activity.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to
a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
163. Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 194-202 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-202
187:491
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.164
STORM FREQUENCY — See "return period."
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any feature, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate, or quantity. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention
and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN — The plan prepared
by the applicant or its representative, in accordance with the requirements
of Article IV of this chapter, indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at a particular site in accordance with this chapter, and including
all necessary design drawings, calculations, supporting text, and
documentation to demonstrate that chapter requirements have been met,
herein referred to as "SWM site plan." All references in this chapter to
"final" or "approved" SWM site plans shall incorporate the approved SWM
site plan and all subsequent approved revisions thereto.
STREAM — A natural watercourse.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — See "BMP
(best management practices)".
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
as defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247 (as amended).165
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE — Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance of City of Coatesville, Chester County, PA,
as amended.166
SWALE — An artificial or natural waterway or low-lying stretch of land that
gathers and conveys stormwater or runoff, and is generally vegetated for
soil stabilization, stormwater pollutant removal, and infiltration.
SWM SITE PLAN — See "stormwater management site plan."
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TOP-OF-BANK — Highest point of elevation of the bank of a stream or
channel cross section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of
the channel and into the floodplain.
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
164. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
165. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
166. Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 194-202 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-202
187:492
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
WATER TABLE — The uppermost level of saturation of pore space or
fractures by groundwater. "Seasonal high-water table" refers to a water
table that rises and falls with the seasons due either to natural or man-made
causes.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
WOODS — Any land area of at least 0.25 acre with a natural or naturalized
ground cover (excluding manicured turf grass) and that has an average
density of two or more viable trees per 1,500 square feet with a DBH
of six inches or greater and where such trees existed at any time within
three years of the time of land development application submission of the
proposed project. The land area to be considered woods shall be measured
from the outer driplines of the outer trees.
§ 194-202 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-202
187:493

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 194-301. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in the municipality which are
not exempt under § 194-106 shall submit a stormwater management
site plan (SWM site plan) to the municipality for review and approval in
accordance with Articles III and IV. SWM site plans approved by the
municipality shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
B. The stormwater management and runoff control criteria and standards
in this chapter shall apply to the total proposed regulated activity, even
if it is to take place in stages. The measurement of impervious surfaces
shall include all of the impervious surfaces in the total proposed
regulated activity even if the development is to take place in stages.
C. No regulated activity within the municipality shall commence until:
(1) The municipality issues approval of a SWM site plan, which
demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this chapter;
and
(2) The applicant has received a letter of adequacy or approval for the
erosion and sediment control plan review by the municipality and
the Conservation District (if required), and has received all other
local, state and federal permit approvals required for the project
involving the regulated activity.
D. Neither submission of an SWM site plan under the provisions herein
nor compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any
person from responsibility for damage to any person or property
otherwise imposed by law.
E. The applicant shall design the site to minimize disturbances to land, site
hydrology, and natural resources, and to maintain the natural
hydrologic regime, drainage patterns and flow conditions. The
applicant shall apply the procedures set forth in § 194-304 for the
overall site design and for selection, location and design of features and
BMPs to be used to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
F. To the maximum extent practicable, postconstruction stormwater shall
be discharged within the drainage area of the same stream or water
body receiving the runoff prior to construction of the proposed
regulated activity.
G. For regulated activities with one acre or more of proposed earth
disturbance, existing drainage peak rate discharges up to and including
the one-hundred-year storm onto or through adjacent property(ies) or
downgradient property(ies), including diffuse drainage discharge, shall
not be altered in any manner without written permission from, and,
§ 194-301 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-301
187:495
where applicable as determined by the municipality an easement and
agreement with, the affected landowner(s) for conveyance of
discharges onto or through their property(ies). Such discharge shall be
subject to any applicable discharge criteria specified in this chapter.
H. Areas located outside of the site (i.e., areas outside of the regulated
activity) that drain through a proposed site are not subject to water
quality and volume control, infiltration, stream channel protection, or
peak flow rate control requirements (as presented in §§ 194-305,
194-306, 194-307 and 194-308). Drainage facilities located on the site
shall be designed to safely convey flows from outside of the site through
the site.
I. If site conditions preclude capture of runoff from limited portions of the
disturbed area for achieving water quality volume control standards,
stream channel protection standards, and the two-year, five-year and
ten-year storm event peak runoff rate reduction standards for new
development required by this chapter, the applicant shall propose
alternate methods to mitigate the bypass of the BMPs, subject to the
approval of the Municipal Engineer. In no case shall resulting peak rate
be greater than the predevelopment peak rate for the equivalent design
storm.
J. For all regulated activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated
activities (i.e., during construction) as required to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter, to meet the erosion and sediment
control requirements of the municipality, if applicable, and to meet all
requirements under Title 25 of the Pa. Code and the Clean Streams
Law.167
K. For all regulated activities, permanent BMPs and conveyances shall be
designed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the
Stormwater Management Act.168
L. The design of all BMPs and conveyances shall incorporate sound
engineering principles and practices in a manner that does not
aggravate existing stormwater problems as identified by the
municipality. The municipality reserves the right to disapprove any
design that would result in construction in an area affected by existing
stormwater problem(s) or continuation of an existing stormwater
problem(s).
M. Existing wetlands, either on the site or on an adjacent property, shall
not be used to meet the minimum design requirements for stormwater
management or stormwater runoff quality treatment. Stormwater
167. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
168. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq. and 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., respectively.
§ 194-301 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-301
187:496
discharges to existing wetlands shall not degrade the quality or
hydrologic integrity of the wetland.
N. Hotspot runoff controls. Specific structural or pollution prevention
practices may be required, as determined to be necessary by the
Municipal Engineer, to pretreat runoff from hotspots prior to
infiltration. Following is a list of examples of hotspots:
(1) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities;
(2) Vehicle fueling stations;
(3) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities;
(4) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities;
(5) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.);
(6) Industrial sites based on Standard Industrial Classification Codes;
(7) Marinas (service and maintenance areas);
(8) Outdoor liquid container storage;
(9) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities;
(10) Public works storage areas;
(11) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials;
(12) Commercial container nursery;
(13) Contaminated sites/brownfields;
(14) Other land uses and activities as designated by the municipality.
O. Contaminated and brownfield sites. Where BMPs may contribute to the
migration of contaminants in groundwater, the water quality and runoff
volume, stream channel protection, and peak rate control standards
shall be met; however, at the Municipal Engineer's discretion, the
minimum infiltration requirement may be reduced or eliminated
commensurate with the contaminated area and the required water
quality and runoff control measures may be increased to mitigate the
reduced infiltration requirement for the contaminated area.
P. Additional water quality requirements. The municipality may require
additional stormwater control measures for stormwater discharges to
special management areas including, but not limited to:
(1) Water bodies listed as "impaired" by PADEP.
(2) Any water body or watershed with an approved total maximum
daily load (TMDL).
(3) Areas of known existing flooding problems.
§ 194-301 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-301
187:497
§ 194-302. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
The following permit or other regulatory requirements may apply to certain
regulated activities and shall be met prior to (or as a condition of) final
approval by the municipality of the SWM site plan and prior to
commencement of any regulated activities, as applicable:
(4) Critical areas with sensitive resources (e.g., state-designated
special protection waters, cold-water fisheries, carbonate geology
or other groundwater recharge areas that may be highly vulnerable
to contamination, drainage areas to water supply reservoirs, etc.).
Q. Applicants shall utilize the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual (PA BMP Manual), as amended, or other sources
acceptable to the Municipal Engineer, for testing and design standards
for BMPs, and where there is a conflict with the provisions of this
chapter, the most restrictive applies.
R. For areas underlain by karst or carbonate geology that may be
susceptible to the formation of sinkholes and other karst features, the
location, type, and design of infiltration BMPs shall be based on a site
evaluation conducted by a qualified licensed professional and based on
the PA BMP Manual or other design guidance acceptable to the
Municipal Engineer.
S. All regulated activities located within a special flood hazard area
designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
shall comply with Article XI of the City of Coatesville Zoning Ordinance,
as amended from time to time and shall be designed to maintain the
flood-carrying capacity of the floodway such that the base flood
elevations are not increased, either upstream or downstream. The
natural conveyance characteristics of the site and the receiving
floodplain shall be incorporated into the stormwater management
practices proposed for the site.
T. Disturbance of existing ground cover during construction of the
proposed regulated activity is prohibited within 50 feet of top-of-bank of
all perennial and intermittent waterways, water bodies (lakes, ponds,
etc.) and wetlands, except for activities otherwise approved by state or
local agencies (e.g., stream restoration projects, road crossings,
subsurface utility projects, etc.). At the Municipal Engineer's discretion,
and with Conservation District and PADEP approval where necessary,
the nondisturbance buffer may be reduced because of setback or other
site constraints, but never be less than 10 feet.
A. All regulated activities subject to permit or regulatory requirements by
PADEP under regulations at Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 102, or
erosion and sediment control requirements of the municipality.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by PADEP under
Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 105.
§ 194-301 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-302
187:498
§ 194-303. Erosion and sediment control.
§ 194-304. Site design process.
For regulated activities with 10,000 or more square feet of proposed earth
disturbance or 2,000 or more square feet of proposed impervious surfaces,
the applicant shall design the site to minimize the disturbances to land, site
hydrology, and natural resources, and to maintain the natural hydrologic
regime, drainage patterns and flow conditions. The applicant shall
C. Any BMP or conveyance that would be located in or adjacent to surface
waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands, subject to permit by
PADEP under Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 105.
D. Any BMP or conveyance that would be located on or discharge to a state
highway right-of-way, or require access to or from a state highway and
be subject to approval by PennDOT.
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers, or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by PADEP under Title 25
Pennsylvania Code Chapter 105.
A. No regulated activity within the municipality shall commence until:
(1) The municipality receives documentation that the applicant has
received:
(a) A "letter of adequacy" from the Conservation District or other
approval from PADEP in compliance with Title 25, Chapter
102, of the Pennsylvania Code of an erosion and sediment
control plan for construction activities, if applicable;
(b) A PADEP NPDES Construction Activities Permit as required
under Title 25 Pennsylvania Code Chapter 92, if applicable;169
(c) Evidence of any other permit(s) or approvals required for the
regulated activities; and
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan has been approved by the
municipality, if required.
B. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit(s), as required by PADEP regulations, shall be available on the
site at all times.
C. Additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be applied
where infiltration BMPs are proposed, at a minimum including those
required in § 194-306M.
169. Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. It was replaced by Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
§ 194-302 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-304
187:499
demonstrate in its SWM site plan (as required in § 194-402C) that the
design sequence, objectives and techniques described below were applied
to the maximum extent practicable in the site design of the regulated
activity while complying with all other requirements of this chapter. The site
design shall:
A. First, identify and delineate all existing natural resources and natural
and man-made hydrologic features listed in § 194-402B(8) that are
located within the site, or receive discharge from, or may be impacted
by the proposed regulated activity.
B. Second, provide a prioritized listing of these resources and features to
identify:
(1) Those to be incorporated into the site design in a manner that
provides protection from any disturbance or impact from the
proposed regulated activity;
(2) Those to be protected from further disturbance or impact but for
which the proposed regulated activity will provide improvement to
existing conditions;
(3) Those that can be incorporated into and utilized as components of
the overall site design in a manner that protects or improves their
existing conditions while utilizing their hydrologic function within
the limits of their available capacity (e.g., for infiltration,
evapotranspiration, or reducing pollutant loads, runoff volume or
peak discharge rates, etc.) to reduce the need for or size of
constructed BMPs; and
(4) Those that may be considered for alteration, disturbance or
removal.
C. Third, develop the site design to achieve the following:
(1) Recognize and incorporate the priorities identified in Subsection B
as the basis for the proposed site layout, grading, construction, and
permanent ground cover design;
(2) Minimize earth disturbance (both surface and subsurface);
(3) Maximize protection of or improvement to natural resources and
special management areas;
(4) Minimize the disturbance of natural site hydrology, in particular
natural drainage features and patterns, discharge points and flow
characteristics, natural infiltration patterns and characteristics,
and natural channel and floodplain conveyance capacity;
(5) Incorporate natural hydrologic features and functions identified in
Subsection B into the site design to protect and utilize those
features and their hydrologic functions to reduce the need for or
size of constructed BMPs;
§ 194-304 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-304
187:500
(6) Maximize infiltration and the use of natural site infiltration
features, patterns and conditions, and evapotranspiration features;
(7) Apply selective grading design methods to provide final grading
patterns or preserve existing topography in order to evenly
distribute runoff and minimize concentrated flows;
(8) Minimize the cumulative area to be covered by impervious
surfaces; and:
(a) Minimize the size of individual impervious surfaces;
(b) Separate large impervious surfaces into smaller components;
(c) Disconnect runoff from one impervious surface to another; and
(d) Utilize porous materials in place of impervious wherever
practicable;
(9) Minimize the volume and peak discharge rates of stormwater
generated;
(10) Avoid or minimize stormwater runoff pollutant loads and receiving
stream channel erosion;
(11) Locate infiltration and other BMPs:
(a) At or as near to the source of generation as possible; and
(b) At depths that are as shallow as possible;
(12) Prioritize the selection and design of BMPs as follows:
(a) Nonstructural and vegetation BMPs; then
(b) Structural (surface and subsurface) BMPs;
(13) For flow volumes requiring conveyance from the source of
generation to a BMP for management, give preference to openchannel
conveyance techniques that provide infiltration and water
quality benefits, and landscaped-based management in common
open space areas, where practicable; and
(14) Consider additional guidance for incorporating natural hydrology
into the site and BMP designs, methods and techniques that
support the objectives of Subsections B and C. Appendix B presents
additional discussion of natural hydrology site design and sources
of information for conservation design, low-impact design, and
sustainable design.170
D. The procedures set forth above shall be utilized to the maximum extent
practicable for the overall site design and selection, location and design
170. Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the City offices.
§ 194-304 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-304
187:501
§ 194-305. Water quality and runoff volume requirements.
To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated activities
and meet state water quality requirements, BMPs shall be provided in
the site design that replicate predevelopment stormwater infiltration and
runoff conditions, such that postconstruction stormwater discharges do not
degrade the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of the receiving
waters. The applicant shall comply with the following water quality and
runoff volume requirements for all regulated activities, including all new
development and redevelopment activities:
of features and BMPs to be used to comply with the requirements of
§§ 194-305, 194-306, 194-307 and 194-308.
A. The postconstruction total runoff volume shall not exceed the
predevelopment total runoff volume for all storms equal to or less than
the two-year, twenty-four-hour duration precipitation (design storm).
The water quality and runoff volume to be managed shall consist of any
runoff volume generated by the proposed regulated activity over and
above the predevelopment total runoff volume and shall be captured
and permanently retained or infiltrated on the site. Permanent
retention options may include, but are not limited to, reuse,
evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.
B. For modeling purposes, the predevelopment ground cover conditions
shall be determined using the corresponding ground cover assumptions
presented in § 194-309D of this chapter.
C. The design of the facility outlet shall provide for protection from
clogging and unwanted sedimentation.
D. BMPs that moderate the temperature of stormwater shall be used to
protect the temperature of receiving waters.
E. Water quality improvement shall be achieved in conjunction with
achieving the infiltration requirements of § 194-306. The infiltration
volume required under § 194-306 may be included as a component of
the water quality volume. If the calculated water quality and runoff
volume is greater than the volume infiltrated, then the difference
between the two volumes shall be managed for water quality and runoff
volume control through other techniques or practices but shall not be
discharged from the site.
F. Runoff from the disturbed area shall be treated for water quality prior
to entering existing waterways or water bodies. If a stormwater
management practice does not provide water quality treatment, then
water quality BMPs shall be utilized to provide pretreatment prior to
the runoff entering the stormwater management practice.
G. The municipality may require additional water quality and runoff
control measures for stormwater discharging to special management
areas such as those listed in § 194-301P.
§ 194-304 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-305
187:502
§ 194-306. Infiltration requirements.
Providing for infiltration consistent with the natural hydrologic regime
is required to compensate for the reduction in the recharge that occurs
when the ground surface is disturbed or impervious surface is created
or expanded. The applicant shall achieve the following infiltration
requirements:
H. When the regulated activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage
areas, the water quality and runoff volume shall be separately
addressed for each drainage area.
I. Weighted averaging of runoff coefficients shall not be used for manual
computations or input data for water quality and runoff volume
calculations.
J. Areas located outside of the site (i.e., areas outside of the regulated
activity) may be excluded from the calculation of the water quality and
runoff volume requirements.
K. Water quality and volume control practices shall be selected and
designed to meet the criteria of § 194-304C that apply to water quality
and volume control.
A. Wherever possible, infiltration should be designed to accommodate the
entire water quality and runoff volume required in § 194-305.
B. For regulated activities involving new development, the volume of a
minimum of one inch of runoff from all proposed impervious surfaces
shall be infiltrated.
C. For regulated activities involving redevelopment, whichever is less of
the following volume options shall be infiltrated:
(1) The volume of a minimum of one inch of runoff from all proposed
impervious surfaces; or
(2) The total water quality and runoff volume required in § 194-305 of
this chapter.
D. If the requirements of Subsection B or C cannot be physically
accomplished, then the applicant shall be responsible for
demonstrating with data or calculations to the satisfaction of the
Municipal Engineer why this infiltration volume cannot be physically
accomplished on the site (e.g., shallow depth to bedrock or limiting
zone, open voids, steep slopes, etc.) and what alternative volume can be
infiltrated; however in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of runoff
volume shall be infiltrated.
E. Only if a minimum of at least 0.5 inch infiltration requirement cannot be
physically accomplished on the site shall a waiver from § 194-306 be
considered by the municipality.
§ 194-305 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-306
187:503
F. If site conditions preclude capture of runoff from portions of the
impervious surfaces, the infiltration volume for the remaining area shall
be increased an equivalent amount to offset the loss.
G. When a project contains or is divided by multiple watersheds, the
infiltration volume shall be separately addressed for each watershed.
H. Existing impervious surfaces located in areas outside of the site (i.e.,
outside of the regulated activity) may be excluded from the calculation
of the required infiltration volume.
I. A detailed soils evaluation of the site shall be conducted by a qualified
professional and at a minimum shall address soil permeability, depth to
bedrock, and subgrade stability. The general process for designing the
infiltration BMP shall be conducted by a qualified licensed professional
and shall be consistent with the PA BMP Manual (as amended) (or other
guidance acceptable to the Municipal Engineer) and in general shall:
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is
under consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of
subgrade stability; infiltration may not be ruled out without
conducting these tests.
(2) Provide field tests such as double-ring infiltrometer or other
hydraulic conductivity tests (at the elevation of the proposed
infiltration surface) to determine the appropriate hydraulic
conductivity rate. Standard septic/sewage percolation tests are not
acceptable for design purposes.
(3) Design the infiltration facility for the required retention
(infiltration) volume based on field-determined infiltration capacity
(and apply safety factor as per applicable design guidelines) at the
elevation of the proposed infiltration surface.
(4) On-lot infiltration features are encouraged; however, it shall be
demonstrated to the Municipal Engineer that the soils are
conducive to infiltration on the identified lots.
J. Infiltration BMPs shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site
conditions and shall be constructed on soils that have the following
characteristics:
(1) A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the BMP and
the top of the limiting zone. Additional depth may be required in
areas underlain by karst or carbonate geology.
(2) An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional stormwater
volume and drain completely as determined by field tests
conducted by the applicant.
§ 194-306 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-306
187:504
(3) The infiltration facility shall completely drain the retention
(infiltration) volume within two days (48 hours) from the end of the
design storm.
K. All infiltration practices shall:
(1) Be selected and designed to meet the criteria of § 194-304C that
are applicable to infiltration;
(2) Be set back at least 15 feet from all buildings and features with
subgrade elements (e.g., basements, foundation walls, etc.), unless
otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer;
(3) For any infiltration practice that collects runoff from shared or
multiple features and that is located within 50 feet of a building or
feature with subgrade elements (e.g., basements, foundation walls,
etc.), the bottom elevation shall be set below the elevation of the
subgrade element.
L. Infiltration facilities shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be
located to avoid introducing contaminants to groundwater:
(1) When a hotspot is located in the area draining to a proposed
infiltration facility, an evaluation of the potential of groundwater
contamination from the proposed infiltration facility shall be
performed, including a hydrogeologic investigation (if necessary)
by a qualified licensed professional to determine what, if any,
pretreatment or additional design considerations are needed to
protect groundwater quality.
(2) When located within a "wellhead protection area" of a public water
supply well, infiltration practices shall be in conformance with the
applicable approved source water protection assessment or source
water protection plan.
(3) The applicant shall provide appropriate safeguards against
groundwater contamination for land uses that may cause
groundwater contamination should there be a mishap or spill.
M. During site construction, all infiltration practice components shall be
protected from compaction due to heavy equipment operation or
storage of fill or construction material. Infiltration areas shall also be
protected from sedimentation. Areas that are accidentally compacted
or graded shall be remediated to restore soil composition and porosity.
Adequate documentation to this effect shall be submitted to the
Municipal Engineer for review. All areas designated for infiltration shall
not receive runoff until the contributory drainage area has achieved
final stabilization.
N. Where sediment transport in the stormwater runoff is anticipated to
reach the infiltration system, appropriate permanent measures to
§ 194-306 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-306
187:505
§ 194-307. Stream channel protection requirements.
For regulated activities involving new development with one or more acres
of earth disturbance, the applicant shall comply with the following stream
channel protection requirements to minimize stream channel erosion and
associated water quality impacts to the receiving waters:
prevent or collect sediment shall be installed prior to discharge to the
infiltration system.
O. Where roof drains are designed to discharge to infiltration practices,
they shall have appropriate measures to prevent clogging by unwanted
debris (for example, silt, leaves and vegetation). Such measures shall
include but are not limited to leaf traps, gutter guards and cleanouts.
P. All infiltration practices shall have appropriate positive overflow
controls.
Q. No sand, salt or other particulate matter may be applied to a porous
surface material for winter ice conditions.
R. The following procedures and materials shall be required during the
construction of all subsurface facilities:
(1) Excavation for the infiltration facility shall be performed with
equipment that will not compact the bottom of the seepage bed/
trench or like facility.
(2) The bottom of the bed and/or trench shall be scarified prior to the
placement of aggregate.
(3) Only clean aggregate with documented porosity, free of fines, shall
be allowed.
(4) The tops, bottoms and sides of all seepage beds, trenches, or like
facilities shall be covered with drainage fabric. Fabric shall be
nonwoven fabric acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
(5) Stormwater shall be distributed throughout the entire seepage
bed/trench or like facility and provisions for the collection of debris
shall be provided in all facilities.
A. The peak flow rate of the postconstruction two-year, twenty-four-hour
design storm shall be reduced to the predevelopment peak flow rate of
the one year, twenty-four-hour duration precipitation, using the SCS
Type II distribution.
B. To the maximum extent practicable, and unless otherwise approved by
the Municipal Engineer, the postconstruction one-year, twenty-fourhour
storm flow shall be detained for a minimum of 24 hours and a
maximum not to exceed 72 hours from a point in time when the
maximum volume of water from the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm is
stored in a proposed BMP (i.e., when the maximum water surface
§ 194-306 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-307
187:506
§ 194-308. Stormwater peak rate control requirements.
The applicant shall comply with the following peak flow rate control
requirements for all regulated activities including those that involve new
development and redevelopment.
elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water can begin at the
start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the orifice is at the invert of the
proposed BMP).
C. For modeling purposes, the predevelopment ground cover conditions
shall be determined using the corresponding ground cover assumptions
presented in § 194-309D of this chapter.
D. The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be
three inches in diameter unless otherwise approved by the Municipal
Engineer, and a trash rack shall be installed to prevent clogging. For
sites with small drainage areas contributing to the BMP that do not
provide enough runoff volume to allow a twenty-four-hour attenuation
with the three-inch orifice, the calculations shall be submitted showing
this condition.
E. When the calculated orifice size is below three inches, gravel filters (or
other methods) are recommended to discharge low-flow rates subject to
the Municipal Engineer's satisfaction. When filters are utilized,
maintenance provisions shall be provided to ensure filters meet the
design function.
F. All proposed stormwater facilities shall make use of measures to extend
the flow path and increase the travel time of flows in the facility.
G. When a regulated activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage
areas, the peak flow rate control shall be separately addressed for each
drainage area.
A. Postconstruction peak flow rates from any regulated activity shall not
exceed the predevelopment peak flow rates as shown for each of the
design storms specified in Table 308.1.
§ 194-307 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-308
187:507
Table 308.1
Peak Rate Control Standards
(Peak Flow Rate of the Postconstruction Design Storm Shall be
Reduced to the Peak Flow Rate of the Corresponding
Predevelopment Design Storm Shown in the Table)
Predevelopment Design Storm
Postconstruction
Design Storm
Frequency
(24-Hour Duration)
New Development
Regulated Activities
Redevelopment
Regulated Activities
2-Year 1-Year 2-Year
5-Year 2-Year 5-Year
10-Year 2-Year 10-Year
25-Year 25-Year 25-Year
50-Year 50-Year 50-Year
100-Year 100-Year 100-Year
B. For modeling purposes, the predevelopment ground cover conditions
shall be determined using the corresponding ground cover assumptions
presented in § 194-309D of this chapter.
C. For regulated activities involving only redevelopment, no peak flow rate
controls are required when and only if the total proposed impervious
surface area is at least 20% less than the total existing impervious
surface area to be disturbed by the regulated activity. In all cases where
this requirement is not met, the redevelopment regulated activity shall
achieve the peak flow rate controls presented in Table 308.1, using the
redevelopment ground cover assumptions presented in § 194-309D.
D. Only the area of the proposed regulated activity shall be subject to the
peak flow rate control standards of this chapter. Undisturbed areas for
which the discharge point has not changed are not subject to the peak
flow rate control standards.
E. Areas located outside of the site (i.e., areas outside of the regulated
activity) that drain through a proposed site are not subject to peak flow
rate control requirements. Drainage facilities located on the site shall
be designed to safely convey flows from outside of the site through the
site.
F. When a regulated activity contains or is divided by multiple drainage
areas, the peak flow rate controls shall be separately addressed for
each drainage area.
G. The effect of structural and nonstructural stormwater management
practices implemented as part of the overall site design may be taken
§ 194-308 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-308
187:508
§ 194-309. Calculation methodology.
into consideration when calculating total storage volume and peak flow
rates.
A. Stormwater runoff from all regulated activity sites with a drainage area
of greater than five acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted
calculation technique(s) that is based on the NRCS Soil Cover Complex
Method. Table 309.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods. The
method selected for use shall be based on the individual limitations and
suitability of each method for a particular site. The use of the Rational
Method to estimate peak discharges for drainage areas greater than
five acres shall be permitted only upon approval by the Municipal
Engineer.
Table 309.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for SWM Site Plan
Method Developed By Applicability
TR-20
(or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55
(or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans where
limitations described in
TR-55 are met
HEC-1/HEC-HMS US Army Corps
of Engineers
Applicable where use of a full
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary
Rational Method
(or commercial
computer package
based on Rational
Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites up to five acres, or
as approved by the
municipality
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by
the municipality
B. All calculations using the Soil Cover Complex Method shall use the
appropriate design rainfall depths for the various return period storms
consistent with this chapter. Rainfall depths used shall be obtained
from NOAA Atlas 14 values consistent with a partial duration series.
When stormwater calculations are performed for routing procedures or
infiltration, water quality and runoff volume functions, the duration of
rainfall shall be 24 hours.
§ 194-308 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-309
187:509
C. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times of concentration (duration) and storm
events with rainfall intensities obtained from NOAA Atlas 14 partial
duration series estimates, or the latest version of the PennDOT
Drainage Manual (PDM Publication 584). Times of concentration shall
be calculated based on the methodology recommended in the
respective model used. Times of concentration for channel and pipe
flow shall be computed using Manning's equation.
D. The applicant shall utilize the following ground cover assumptions for
all predevelopment water quality and runoff volume, infiltration volume
and peak flow rate calculations:
(1) For regulated activities involving new development, the following
ground cover assumptions shall be used:
(a) For areas that are woods (as defined in Article II of this
chapter), predevelopment calculations shall assume ground
cover of "woods in good condition."
(b) For all other areas (including all impervious surfaces),
predevelopment calculations shall assume ground cover of
"meadow."
(2) For regulated activities involving redevelopment, the following
ground cover assumptions shall be used:
(a) For areas that are woods (as defined in Article II of this
chapter), predevelopment calculations shall assume ground
cover of "woods in good condition."
(b) For areas that are not woods or not impervious surfaces,
predevelopment calculations shall assume ground cover of
"meadow."
(c) For areas that are impervious surfaces, predevelopment
calculations shall assume at least 20% of the existing
impervious surface area to be disturbed as "meadow" ground
cover.
(3) The applicant shall determine which stormwater standards apply to
the proposed regulated activity as follows:
(a) Stormwater standards for new development shall apply to all
proposed regulated activities that involve only new
development activities as defined in this chapter.
(b) Stormwater standards for redevelopment shall apply to all
proposed regulated activities that involve only redevelopment
activities as defined in this chapter.
(c) At the discretion of the Municipal Engineer, regulated
activities that involve a combination of both new development
§ 194-309 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-309
187:510
§ 194-310. Other requirements.
and redevelopment activities, as defined in this chapter, may
either:
[1] Apply the stormwater standards (redevelopment or new
development) that are associated with the activity that
involves the greatest amount of land area; or
[2] Apply the redevelopment and new development
stormwater standards to the corresponding
redevelopment and new development portions of the
proposed regulated activity.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both predevelopment and proposed
(postconstruction) conditions to be used in the Soil Cover Complex
Method shall be obtained from Table C-1 in Appendix C of this
chapter.171
F. Runoff coefficients (C) for both predevelopment and proposed
(postconstruction) conditions for use in the Rational Method shall be
obtained from Table C-2 in Appendix C of this chapter.172
G. Weighted averaging of runoff coefficients shall not be used for manual
computations or input data for water quality and runoff volume
calculations.
H. Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of pipes, culverts,
and storm sewers shall be consistent with methods and computations
contained in the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Design
Series Number 5 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-01-020 HDS No. 5, as
amended). Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of open
channels shall be consistent with methods and computations contained
in the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Engineering Circular
Number 15 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-05-114 HEC 15, as amended).
Values for Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with
Table C-3 in Appendix C of the Ordinance.173
I. Runoff calculations shall include the following assumptions:
(1) Average antecedent moisture conditions (for the Soil Cover
Complex Method only for example, TR-55, TR-20).
(2) A Type II distribution storm (for the Soil Cover Complex Method
only for example, TR-55, TR-20).
A. Any BMP intended to hold standing water for four days or longer shall
be designed to incorporate biologic controls consistent with the West
171. Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the City offices.
172. Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the City offices.
173. Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the City offices.
§ 194-309 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-310
187:511
§ 194-311. Other conveyance and system design standards.
Nile Guidance found in Appendix D,174 PADEP Document 363-0300-001
"Design Criteria — Wetlands Replacement/Monitoring" (as amended),
or contact the Pennsylvania State Cooperative Wetland Center or the
Penn State Cooperative Extension Office for design information.
B. Any stormwater basin required or regulated by this chapter designed to
store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment shall be
designed to provide an emergency spillway to safely convey flow up to
and including the one-hundred-year proposed conditions. The height of
embankment shall provide a minimum 1.0 of freeboard above the
maximum pool elevation computed when the facility functions for the
one-hundred-year proposed conditions inflow. Should any BMP require
a dam safety permit under PA Chapter 105 regulations,175 the facility
shall be designed in accordance with and meet the regulations of PA
Chapter 105 concerning dam safety. PA Chapter 105 may require the
safe conveyance of storms larger than one-hundred-year event.
C. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel not governed by PA
Chapter 105 regulations shall be designed to convey, without damage to
the drainage facility or roadway, runoff from the fifty-year storm event.
Larger storm events (fifty-year and one-hundred-year storms) shall also
be safely conveyed in the direction of natural flow without creating
additional damage to any drainage facilities, nearby structures, or
roadways.
D. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater management
facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be designed to convey the design
flow to or from the facility.
E. Roadway crossings or structures located within designated floodplain
areas shall be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design
storm consistent with Federal Emergency Management Agency
National Flood Insurance Program — Floodplain Management
Requirements.
F. Any facility located within a PennDOT right-of-way shall comply with
PennDOT minimum design standards and permit submission and
approval requirements.
G. Adequate erosion protection and energy dissipation shall be provided
along all open channels and at all points of discharge. Design methods
shall be consistent with the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic
Engineering Circular Number 11 (Publication No. FHWA-IP-89-016, as
amended) and the PADEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (Publication No. 363-2134-008, as amended), or other
design guidance acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
174. Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the City offices.
175. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
§ 194-310 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-311
187:512
A. In any application that is subject to the regulations of subdivision and
land development application under the City regulations, stormwater
management design shall incorporate and provide for stormwater
management controls that consider the maximum impervious coverage
allowed for on the entire project site by the municipality's Zoning
Ordinance.176
B. Stormwater infiltration practices.
(1) All infiltration systems shall have appropriate positive overflow
controls to prevent storage within one foot of the finished surface
or grade.
(2) Perforated distribution pipes connected to centralized catch basins
and/or manholes with provision for the collection of debris shall be
provided in all facilities. The perforated pipes shall distribute
stormwater throughout the entire seepage bed/trench, or like
facility.
(3) All infiltration facilities, which service more than one lot and are
considered a common facility, shall have an easement provided to
the City for future access if necessary.
C. Open vegetated channels.
(1) The channel shall be designed to safely convey the fifty-yearfrequency
storm event with a freeboard of at least six inches.
Freeboard is the difference between the elevation of the design
flow in the channel and the top elevation of the channel.
(2) The peak velocity of the runoff from the fifty-year storm shall be
nonerosive for the soil and ground cover provided in the channel.
(3) The longitudinal slope shall be no greater than 4%.
(4) Channels shall be trapezoidal in cross section. The minimum
bottom width shall be two feet. The maximum bottom width shall be
eight feet.
(5) Channels shall be designed with moderate side slopes of four
horizontal to one vertical. Flatter side slopes may be necessary
under certain circumstances.
(6) The maximum allowable ponding time in the channel shall be less
than 48 hours.
(7) Channels (for example, dry swales) may require an underdrain in
order to function and dewater.
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. 224, Zoning.
§ 194-311 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-311
187:513
(8) Channels shall be designed to temporarily store the water quality
volume within the system for a maximum period of 48 hours and a
minimum period of one hour.
(9) Landscape specifications shall address the grass species, wetland
plantings (if applicable), soil amendment and hydric conditions
present along the channel.
(10) Accumulated sediment within the channel bottom shall be removed
when 25% of the original water quality volume has been exceeded.
(11) Check dams along the channel length may be warranted.
(12) The bottom of dry swales shall be situated at least two feet above
the seasonal high-water table.
D. Retention basins.
(1) Retention basins shall be designed to create a healthy ecological
community with sufficient circulation of water to prevent the
growth of unwanted vegetation and mosquitoes. Care should be
taken to landscape retention basins in accordance with Subsection
G.
(2) All outlet structures shall be designed to allow complete drainage
of the pond for maintenance.
(3) The design of a retention basin shall include the determination of
the proposed site's ability to support a viable permanent pool. The
design shall take into account such factors as the available and
required rate and quality of dry weather inflow, the stormwater
inflow, seasonal and longer-term variations in groundwater table,
and impacts of potential pollutant loadings.
(4) Sediment storage volume equal to at least 20% of the volume of the
permanent pool shall be provided.
(5) A sediment forebay with a hardened bottom shall be provided at
each inlet into the retention basin. The forebay storage capacity
shall at minimum be 10% of the permanent pool storage. The
forebay shall be designed to allow for access by maintenance
equipment for periodic cleaning.
(6) Emergency spillways shall be sized and located to permit the safe
passage of stormwater flows from a one-hundred-year storm. The
maximum velocities in vegetated spillways excavated in otherwise
undisturbed soil shall be analyzed based upon the velocity of peak
flow in the emergency spillway during an assumed clogged primary
outlet condition. Where maximum velocities exceed design
standards contained in the Engineering Field Manual for
Conservation Practices (USDA, SCS, July 1984), suitable lining
shall be provided. All emergency spillways placed on fill materials
shall be lined. Lining for emergency spillways shall incorporate
§ 194-311 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-311
187:514
native colors and materials where possible including mono slab
revetments, grass pavers and native stone.
(7) Existing ponds or permanent pool basins can be used for
stormwater management provided that it can be demonstrated that
the ponds are structurally sound and meet the design requirements
herein.
(8) Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the
greatest extent possible in order to maximize the flow path through
the retention basin.
(9) Retention basins shall be designed to provide a length-to-width
ratio of at least 3L:1W as measured in plan view (for example, a
ratio of 4L:1W is too narrow).
(10) The retention basin depth shall average three feet to six feet with
no area shallower than three feet. In residential areas, ponds shall
be equipped with management practices that reduce the potential
for unauthorized entry and use of the pond by the general public.
Preference shall be given to split rail fences equipped with mesh
wire or other such practices that are both functional and attractive.
A securable gate shall be provided to allow for periodic
maintenance equipment/vehicle access. Any fence or barrier
around a retention basin shall be no less than 42 inches in height or
as otherwise required by local building codes or ordinances.
(11) An aquatic bench/shelf at least 10 feet wide and with a gentle slope
not exceeding 10H:1V shall be provided along the entire perimeter
of the retention basin.
(12) Any side slopes below the permanent water surface level shall not
exceed 5H:1V. Side slopes above the permanent water surface level
shall not exceed 3H:1V.
(13) Stabilization. Proper stabilization structures, including stilling
basins, energy dissipaters, and channel lining, shall be constructed
at the outlets of all retention basins and emergency spillways. The
stabilization structures shall control water to avoid erosion; reduce
velocities of released water; and direct water so that it does not
interfere with downstream activities.
(14) Energy dissipaters and level spreaders. Energy dissipaters and/or
level spreaders shall be installed to prevent erosion and/or initiate
sheet flow at points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or
from basins. Energy dissipaters shall comply with criteria in
Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 15 - Design for Stable Channels
with Flexible Linings (USDOT, FEW A, 1986) or as amended or the
Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices (USDA, SCS,
July 1984) or as amended. Such facilities shall be both functional
and harmonious with the surrounding environment; for example,
§ 194-311 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-311
187:515
native rock shall be used in constructing dissipaters where
practical.
(15) Discharge points. The minimum distance between a proposed basin
discharge point (including the energy dissipater, etc.) and a
downstream property boundary shall in no case be less than 15
feet. Where there is discharge onto or through adjacent properties
prior to release to a stream, designers shall demonstrate how
downstream properties are to be protected. The City Engineer may
require that the setback distance be increased based upon factors
such as topography, soil conditions, the size of structures, the
location of structures, and discharge rates. A drainage easement
may also be required.
(16) Outlet structures. Outlet structures shall meet the following
specifications:
(a) To minimize clogging and to facilitate cleaning and inspecting,
outlet pipes shall have an internal diameter of at least 18
inches and a minimum grade of 1%.
(b) Antiseep collars shall be provided on all outlet pipes within a
constructed berm.
(c) All principal outlet structures shall be built using reinforced
concrete with watertight construction joints.
(d) The use of architecturally treated concrete, stucco, painted
surface or stone facade treatment shall be considered for
enhancing the outlet structure. Such facilities shall be both
functional and harmonious in design with the surrounding
environment.
(e) Outlet pipes shall be constructed of reinforced concrete with
rubber gaskets in conformance with AASHTO M170, MI98 and
M207.
(f) Basin outlet structures shall have childproof nonclogging trash
racks over all design openings exceeding 12 inches in diameter
except those openings designed to carry perennial stream
flows. Periodic cleaning of debris from trash racks shall be
included in the operation and maintenance plan.
(g) Antivortex devices, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to
the basin berm, shall be provided at the top of all circular
risers or stand pipes.
E. Detention basins.
(1) Detention basins are generally discouraged as a stormwater
management practice and should only be used as a last resort
where no other management facility is practical. Detention basins
typically collect and quickly release runoff from a site in a manner
§ 194-311 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-311
187:516
that is contrary to the principles, goals and standards presented
within this chapter. The landscape standards of Subsection G shall
apply.
(2) The maximum inside side slopes shall not exceed three horizontal
to one vertical (3H:1V). The minimum required slope for the basin
bottom is 2%. A level bottom is acceptable, provided the designer
demonstrates to the City's satisfaction that the basin bottom will be
landscaped with appropriate wetland vegetation pursuant to
Subsection F. In addition, detention basins of sufficient size and
slope may serve other functions as well, including recreational uses
which do not hinder or conflict with the function of the detention
basin.
(3) Inlet structures. The inlet pipe invert into a basin shall be six inches
above the basin floor or lining so that the pipe can adequately drain
after rainstorms. Inlets shall discharge into areas of the basin that
slope toward the outlet structure.
(4) Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the
greatest extent possible in order to maximize the flow path through
the retention basin.
(5) Low-flow channels. Low-flow channels constructed of concrete or
asphalt are not permitted. Where low-flow channels are necessary,
they shall be composed of a natural or bioengineered material.
Low-flow channels shall be designed to promote water quality and
slow the rate of flow through the basin. Low-flow channels may also
be designed to infiltrate where practical.
(6) Outlet structures. Outlet structures shall meet the following
specifications:
(a) To minimize clogging and to facilitate cleaning and inspection,
outlet pipes shall have an internal diameter of at least 18
inches and a minimum grade of 1%.
(b) Antiseep collars shall be provided on all outlet pipes within a
constructed berm.
(c) All principal outlet structures shall be built using reinforced
concrete with watertight construction joints.
(d) The use of architecturally treated concrete, stucco, painted
surface or stone facade treatment shall be considered for
enhancing the outlet structure. Such facilities shall be both
functional and harmonious in design with the surrounding
environment.
(e) Outlet pipes shall be constructed of reinforced concrete with
rubber gaskets in conformance with AASHTO M170, M198 and
M207.
§ 194-311 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-311
187:517
(f) Energy dissipation practices that convert concentrated flow to
uniform shallow sheet flow shall be used where appropriate.
(g) Basin outlet structures shall have childproof nonclogging trash
racks over all design openings exceeding 12 inches in diameter
except those openings designed to carry perennial stream
flows.
(h) Antivortex devices, consisting of a thin vertical plate normal to
the basin berm, shall be provided at the top of all circular
risers or stand pipes.
(7) Emergency spillways shall be sized and located to permit the safe
passage of stormwater flows from a one-hundred-year storm. The
maximum velocities in vegetated spillways excavated in otherwise
undisturbed soil shall be analyzed based upon the velocity of peak
flow in the emergency spillway during an assumed clogged primary
outlet condition. Where maximum velocities exceed design
standards contained in the Engineering Field Manual for
Conservation Practices (USDA, SCS, July 1984) or as amended,
suitable lining shall be provided. In general, emergency spillways
should not be located in fill areas; all such practices placed on fill
materials shall be lined. Lining for emergency spillways shall
incorporate native colors and materials where possible, including
mono slab revetments, grass pavers and native stone.
(8) Freeboard. Freeboard is the difference between the elevation of
the design flow in the emergency spillway (usually the onehundred-
year peak elevation) and the top elevation of the settled
basin embankment (that is, top of berm). The minimum freeboard
shall be one foot.
(9) Energy dissipaters and level spreaders. Energy dissipaters and/or
level spreaders shall be installed to prevent erosion and/or initiate
sheet flow at points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or
from basins. Energy dissipaters shall comply with criteria in
Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 15 - Design for Stable Channels
with Flexible Linings (USDOT, FHWA, 1986) as amended or the
Engineering Field Manual for Conservation Practices (USDA, SCS,
July 1984). Such facilities shall be both functional and attractive;
for example, native rock shall be used in constructing dissipaters
where practical.
(10) Stabilization. Proper stabilization structures, including stilling
basins, energy dissipaters, and channel lining, shall be constructed
at the outlets of all basins and emergency spillways. The
stabilization structures shall control water to avoid erosion, reduce
velocities of released water and direct water so that it does not
interfere with downstream activities.
(11) Discharge points. The minimum distance between a proposed basin
discharge point (including the energy dissipater, etc.) and a
§ 194-311 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-311
187:518
downstream property boundary shall in no case be less than 15
feet. Where there is discharge onto or through adjacent properties
prior to release to a stream, designers shall demonstrate how
downstream properties are to be protected. The City Engineer may
require that the setback distance be increased based upon factors
such as topography, soil conditions, the size of structures, the
location of structures, and discharge rates. A drainage easement
may also be required.
(12) A sediment forebay with a hardened bottom shall be provided at
each inlet into the detention basin. The forebay storage capacity
shall at minimum be 10% of the permanent pool storage. The
forebay shall be designed to allow for access by maintenance
equipment for periodic cleaning.
F. Conveyance systems (open channels, drainageways, and storm sewers).
(1) Applicants are encouraged to design conveyance systems that
encourage infiltration and improve water quality wherever
practicable.
(2) Wherever conveyance channels are necessary, drainage shall be
maintained by an open channel with landscaped banks designed to
carry the fifty-year, twenty-four-hour stormwater runoff from
upstream contributory areas. The City Engineer may increase the
design storm, as conditions require. All open channels shall be
designed with one foot of freeboard above the design water surface
elevation of the design runoff condition.
(3) Flood relief channels shall be provided and designed to convey the
runoff from the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm, such
that a positive discharge of this runoff to an adequate receiving
stream or conveyance system occurs without allowing this runoff to
encroach upon other properties.
(4) Open channels along existing roadways may be required to be
enclosed by the City of Coatesville if PennDOT standards for safety
and maintenance cannot be satisfied. All drainage structures shall
conform to the latest edition of Form 408, PennDOT specifications.
(5) Manholes and/or inlets shall not be spaced more than 300 feet
apart for pipe sizes up to 24 inches in diameter and not more than
450 feet apart for larger pipe sizes.
(6) Where drainage swales are used in lieu of or in addition to storm
sewers, they shall be designed to carry the required runoff without
erosion and in a manner not detrimental to the properties they
cross. Drainage swales shall provide a minimum grade of 2% but
shall not exceed a grade of 9%. Drainage swales used strictly for
conveyance are not the same as open vegetated channels. Design
standards for open vegetated channels are provided under
Subsection C of this chapter.
§ 194-311 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-311
187:519
(7) Street curbing for the purpose of stormwater conveyance is
discouraged. On streets that must contain curbing, storm sewers
shall be placed in front of the curbing. To the greatest extent
possible, storm sewers shall not be placed directly under curbing.
At curbed street intersections, storm inlets shall be placed in the
tangent section of the road.
(8) Use of grassed swales or open vegetated swales in lieu of curbing
to convey, infiltrate and/or treat stormwater runoff from roadways
is encouraged. Inlets shall be placed at the center of the shoulder
swale draining the street and shall be located no closer than four
feet from the edge of the cartway.
(9) No property owner shall obstruct or alter the flow, location or
carrying capacity of a stream, channel or drainage swale to the
detriment of any other property owner, whether upstream or
downstream. All subdivision and/or land development plans
containing streams, channels, drainage swales, storm sewers or
other conveyance systems that cross property boundaries, existing
or proposed, or whose discharge crosses such boundaries shall
contain a note stating the above.
(10)Water quality inlets. Storm drainage systems that collect runoff
from parking areas and/or loading areas exceeding 10,000 square
feet of impervious coverage and discharge to stormwater
management systems, including surface or subsurface infiltration
systems, shall have a minimum of one water quality inlet per each
acre of drainage area. The purpose of water quality inlets is to
remove oil, grease, and heavy particulates or total suspended
solids, hydrocarbons and other floating substances from
stormwater runoff. Methods other than water quality inlets may be
permitted if the applicant demonstrates to the City's satisfaction
that any such alternative will be as effective and as easily
maintained. Periodic cleaning of these systems shall be addressed
in the operation and maintenance plan submitted to the City.
G. Landscaping of stormwater management practices. Stormwater
management practices shall be landscaped in accordance with the
following standards. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a
professional landscape architect licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(1) Landscaping shall be required in and around all constructed
stormwater management practices with a minimum surface area of
1,000 square feet for the purposes of:
(a) Assisting in the management of stormwater;
(b) Stabilizing the soil within such facilities to minimize and
control erosion;
(c) Enhancing the visual appearance of such facilities; and
§ 194-311 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-311
187:520
(d) Mitigating maintenance problems commonly associated with
the creation of such facilities.
(2) A planting plan and planting schedule shall be submitted in
accordance with the following:
(a) Wet meadows including floors of stormwater management
practices.
[1] Wet meadows and floors of stormwater management
practices shall be planted with wildflowers and
nonaggressive grasses, the intent being to create a mixed
meadow of such plantings, where appropriate. Selection of
plantings shall be based on whether the area in question is
usually well drained or permanently wet and whether the
area will be used for recreation purposes. No woody plants
shall be planted within the saturated zone (phreatic line)
of a stormwater management practice or on a berm
constructed for impounded water.
[2] Seeding by drills, corrugated rollers, cyclone or drop
seeders or hand seeding of such areas is preferred;
however, hydroseeding followed by hydromulching can be
used on wet ground and steep slopes.
[3] Fertilizers, as a nutrient supplement, shall not be used
unless it is documented that soil conditions warrant such
use and nutrient applied does not exceed plant uptake.
Soil for planting of wildflowers shall contain not less than
3% or more than 10% organic matter, as determined by an
agricultural chemist, with certification of the test before
planting.
[4] Seeding shall take place either between April 1 and May
15 or between September 1 and October 15. Planting
areas shall be soaked to maintain a consistent level of
moisture for at least four to six weeks after planting.
[5] Once established, a single annual mowing when plants are
dormant should be sufficient to maintain a wet meadow
and/or floor of a stormwater management practice.
(b) Wet edges that remain wet all or most of the year shall be
planted with wildflowers, grasses and shrubs, Plants to be
located on rims or banks, which remain dry most of the year,
shall be planted with species tolerant of dry soil conditions.
(c) Wooded areas.
[1] Where stormwater management practices adjoin wooded
areas, trees and shrubs shall be selected and planted
§ 194-311 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-311
187:521
outside the practice so as to blend with existing
surroundings.
[2] Plantings in such areas shall be of sufficient density to
eliminate the need for mowing.
[3] It is recommended that clusters of trees and shrubs be
planted around stormwater management facilities but well
away from outfalls and any constructed berms, where
applicable, to provide for wildlife habitat, wind control and
buffering and screening.
[4] Vegetation shall be planted during appropriate times of
the year, predominantly between late March and mid May
or from early October until evidence of ground freezing,
depending upon the species selected. Most deciduous
trees and shrubs can be planted in either spring or fall.
Evergreens are best planted in late summer or early fall.
(d) Slopes.
[1] Where slopes are gentle, a mixture of meadow grasses and
wildflowers (for wet meadows) shall be planted.
[2] On steep slopes as defined by the City of Coatesville Code
of Ordinances, dense spreading shrubs (shrubs tolerant of
dry soils) shall be planted. Heavy mat mulch shall be used
during the period of establishment.
[3] No woody plant materials or trees shall be located on a
constructed or natural berm acting as the impoundment
structure of a stormwater management practice. Trees
shall be located downstream of an impoundment berm a
sufficient distance from the toe of the constructed slope to
assure that the toe of the slope is outside the dripline of
the species planted at maturity but in no case less than 15
feet.
(3) In cases where stormwater management practices are to be
located in proximity to wetlands or waterways, the applicant's
planting plan and schedule shall consider the sensitive conditions
existing therein and be modified accordingly to reflect existing
flora.
(4) Stormwater management practices shall be screened in a manner
which complements the existing landscape and provides sufficient
access for maintenance.
H. Additional design requirements.
(1) The top of any fill or toe of the slope of any fill shall be located 25
feet from any property line with the exception of a downstream
property line where the toe of the embankment shall be placed a
§ 194-311 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-311
187:522
sufficient distance to allow for energy dissipating devices, but in no
case less than 40 feet unless approved otherwise by the City.
(2) Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge water directly over a
sidewalk but shall connect with the gutter or storm sewer.
(3) Inlet capacity. All inlets must be designed to accommodate the fiftyyear
peak flow rate. The capacity of each inlet shall be indicated on
the stormwater plan. The capacity of all C, M, or S type inlets shall
be determined from the following source:
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation
Design Manual, Part 2
Highway Design
(4) Storm drainpipes shall be designed to follow straight courses. No
angular deflections of storm sewer pipe sections in excess of 5°
shall be permitted. No vertical curves shall be permitted in the
storm drainpipe system.
(5) Storm sewers shall be constructed of reinforced concrete, ductile
iron, or solid wall polyvinyl chloride (SDR 35 minimum wall
thickness) and have a minimum diameter of 15 inches and a
minimum grade of 1/2%.
(6) Pipe material and thickness. All storm sewers shall be a material
which meets the one-hundred-year life expectancy criteria
contained in the following:
(a) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PADOT) strike-off
letter Number 430-95-43, dated June 19, 1995, as amended
(Policy on Design, Fabrication, and Installation of Pipes), and
any subsequent amendments;
(b) Revisions made to the PADOT Design Manual Part 2, Chapter
10, after June 19, 1995, as amended.
(7) Pipe capacity. The capacity of all pipe culverts shall, as a minimum,
provide the required carrying capacity as determined by the
following source:
United States Department of Commerce
Bureau of Public Roads
Hydraulic Engineering Circular No. 5
Hydraulic Charts for the Selection of Highway Culverts
(8) At all inlets or manholes, the maximum allowable headwater depth
shall be one foot below the top of the inlet grate of the manhole
cover.
§ 194-311 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-311
187:523
(9) A minimum of 18 inches of cover shall be maintained over all storm
drainpipes. The top of storm drainpipes shall be at least 1/2 foot
below subgrade elevation.
§ 194-311 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-311
187:524
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 194-401. General requirements.
For any regulated activity, unless exempt per the provisions of § 194-106:
§ 194-402. SWM site plan contents.
The SWM site plan shall consist of a general description of the project
including items described in § 194-304, calculations, maps, and plans. A
note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and erosion and
sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of the computations
and erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the associated maps
by title and date. All SWM site plan materials shall be submitted to the
municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat, and well
organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall not be accepted for review
and shall be returned to the applicant. The following items shall be included
in the SWM site plan:
A. Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
B. No regulated activity shall commence until the municipality issues
written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates compliance
with the requirements of this chapter and, if required, a letter of
adequacy has been issued by the Conservation District for an erosion
and sediment control plan.
C. The preliminary or final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans, and the issuance of any building or occupancy
permit shall not proceed until the applicant has received written
approval of a SWM site plan from the municipality.
D. The SWM site plan approved by the municipality shall be on site
throughout the duration of the regulated activity.
A. General.
(1) A general description of the proposed project;
(2) A listing of all regulatory approvals required for the proposed
project and the status of the review and approval process for each.
Final approval or adequacy letters must be submitted to the
municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the municipality's issuing
final approval of the SWM site plan. Proof of application or
documentation of required permit(s) or approvals for the programs
listed below shall be part of the SWM site plan, if applicable:
(a) NPDES Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction
Activities;
(b) PADEP permits as needed:
§ 194-401 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-402
187:525
[1] PADEP Joint Permit Application;
[2] Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management);177
[3] Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management);178
(c) PennDOT Highway Occupancy Permit;
(d) Erosion and sediment control plan letter of adequacy; and
(e) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
(3) A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved SWM site plan shall be submitted to and
approved by the municipality, and that a revised erosion and
sediment control plan shall be submitted to, and approved by, the
Conservation District or municipality (as applicable) for a
determination of adequacy prior to construction of the revised
features.
(4) The following signature block signed and sealed by the qualified
licensed professional responsible for the preparation of the SWM
site plan:
"I (name), on this date (date of signature), hereby certify to the
best of my knowledge that the SWM site plan meets all design
standards and criteria of the City of Coatesville Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
B. Maps or plan sheets. Map(s) or plan sheets of the site shall be
submitted on minimum twenty-four-inch-by-thirty-six-inch sheets and
shall be prepared in a form that meets the requirements for recording
at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds and the
requirements of the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan and O&M
agreement (Article VII). If the SALDO has additional or more stringent
criteria than this chapter, then the SALDO criteria shall also apply.
Unless otherwise approved by the Municipal Engineer, the contents of
the maps or plan sheets shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) A location map, with a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet or
greater, showing the site location relative to highways, municipal
boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks.
(2) The name of the project, tax parcel number(s), and the names,
addresses and phone numbers of the owner of the property, the
applicant, and firm preparing the plan.
(3) Signature and seal of the qualified licensed professional(s)
responsible for preparation of the maps and plan sheets.
177. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
178. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 106.
§ 194-402 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-402
187:526
(4) The date of SWM site plan submission and revision dates, as
applicable.
(5) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet.
(6) A North arrow.
(7) Legal property boundaries, including:
(a) The total project property boundary and size with distances
marked to the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(b) Boundaries, size and description of purpose of all existing
easements and deed-restricted areas of the project property,
with distances marked to the nearest foot and bearings to the
nearest degree.
(8) Existing natural resources and natural or man-made hydrologic
features that are located within the site or receiving discharge
from, or that may otherwise be impacted by, the proposed
regulated activity, including but not limited to:
(a) All existing natural resources, hydrologic features and
drainage patterns including natural waterways, water bodies,
wetlands, streams (intermittent and perennial), ponds, lakes,
vernal pools, etc., natural infiltration areas and patterns, areas
of significant natural evapotranspiration, and other water
features and aquatic resources.
(b) Any existing man-made drainage features, BMPs, conveyances,
facilities, open channels, swales, drainage patterns, or other
flood, stormwater or drainage control features.
(c) For the site, discharge points and locations of concentrated
flows and their drainage areas.
(d) For named waters, show names and their watershed
boundaries within the site.
(e) Special management areas (as per § 194-301P).
(f) For the water bodies, streams and wetlands identified in
§ 194-402B(8)(a), label or otherwise show the following
attributes, if applicable:
[1] The designated use as determined by PADEP (25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93);
[2] Impairments listed on the PADEP "Integrated List" (as
updated) and the listed source and cause of impairment;
[3] Name, date, and target pollutant(s) for any approved total
maximum daily load (TMDL); and
§ 194-402 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-402
187:527
[4] Drainages to water supply reservoirs.
(g) Areas that are part of the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity
Inventory (PNDI) and a list of potential impacts and clearances
received (for regulated activities involving one acre or more
proposed earth disturbance).
(h) Woods, vegetated riparian buffers and other areas of natural
vegetation.
(i) Topography using contours (with elevations based on
established bench marks) at intervals of two feet. In areas of
slopes greater than 15%, five-foot contour intervals may be
used. The datum used and the location, elevation and datum of
any bench marks used shall be shown.
(j) Areas classified by the municipality as steep slopes.
(k) Soil names and boundaries, general type of soils with
hydrologic soil group noted, and in particular note areas most
conducive to infiltration BMPs, such as Groups A and B, etc.,
estimated permeabilities in inches per hour, and location and
other results of all soil tests and borings.
(l) If present, areas with underlying carbonate geologic units,
existing sinkholes, subsidence or other karst features, and any
associated groundwater recharge areas with increased
vulnerability to contamination.
(m) Any contaminated surface or subsurface areas of the site.
(n) Water supply wells.
[1] Location of existing well(s) on the project property and
delineation of the(ir) recharge area(s) (if known), or a fiftyfoot-
diameter assumed recharge area;
[2] Location of existing well(s) within 50 feet beyond the
boundary of the project property boundary (if public water
supply is proposed for the regulated activity).
(o) Current FEMA one-hundred-year floodplain boundaries,
elevations, and floodway boundaries for any special flood
hazard areas on or within 100 feet of the property.
(p) Boundaries of a fifty-foot construction nondisturbance buffer to
protect streams (intermittent and perennial), wetlands and
other water bodies during construction of the proposed
regulated activity.
(9) Location of the proposed regulated activity, limits of earth
disturbance (disturbed area), and BMPs and conveyances relative
to the location of existing natural resources and hydrologic
§ 194-402 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-402
187:528
features and special management areas resulting from the site
design process of § 194-304.
(10) Description of existing and proposed ground cover and land use
including the type and total area.
(11) Existing and proposed man-made features including roads, paved
areas, buildings, and other impervious and pervious surfaces on the
project property (or an appropriate portion of the property as
determined in consultation with the Municipal Engineer) and
within the proposed disturbed area, and including the type and
total area of the following:
(a) Existing impervious surfaces;
(b) Existing impervious surfaces proposed to be replaced;
(c) Existing impervious surfaces to be permanently removed and
replaced with pervious ground cover;
(d) New or additional impervious surfaces; and
(e) Percent of the site covered by impervious surfaces for both the
existing and proposed postconstruction conditions.
(12) The total extent of the upstream area draining through the site.
(13) All BMPs, conveyances and other stormwater management
facilities shall be located on the plan sheets, including design
drawings, profile drawings, construction details, materials to be
used, description of function, etc.
(14) Complete delineation of the flow paths used for calculating the
time of concentration for the predevelopment and postconstruction
conditions shall be included.
(15) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
on-lot wastewater facilities (including subsurface tanks and leach
fields), and water supply lines within the site and within 50 feet
beyond the proposed limits of earth disturbance.
(16) A grading plan, including all areas of proposed earth disturbance
and the proposed regulated activity and delineating the boundary
or limits of earth disturbance of the site. The total disturbed area of
the site shall be noted in square feet and acres.
(17) Proposed final grade elevations and contours at intervals of two
feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour
intervals may be used.
(18) For each proposed BMP and conveyance included in the SWM site
plan (including any to be located on any property other than the
property being developed by the applicant), the following shall be
included on the SWM site plan map or plan sheets:
§ 194-402 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-402
187:529
(a) Identification of the person responsible for ongoing
inspections, operation, repair, and maintenance of the BMP or
conveyance after completion of construction.
(b) Delineation of the land area, structures, impervious surfaces,
and conveyances draining to and from the BMP or conveyance.
(c) Easements, as per the requirements of Article VII, that shall
include:
[1] Boundaries labeled with distances shown in feet and
bearings to the nearest degree;
[2] Notes or other documentation, as needed, to grant the
municipality the right of access to all BMPs and
conveyances for the purposes of inspection and
enforcement of the requirements of this chapter, and any
applicable O&M plans and O&M agreements;
[3] Notes or other documentation, as needed, to grant the
municipality the right of access to all roadways necessary
to access all BMPs and conveyances, where roadways are
not to be dedicated to the municipality;
[4] Notes or other documentation as needed to grant the
owner of any BMP or conveyance the right of access for
the purpose of inspection, operation, maintenance, and
repair of the BMP or conveyance that is to be owned,
operated and maintained by a person other than the
municipality, and other than the owner of the property on
which the BMP or conveyance is located;
[5] A minimum twenty-foot-wide perimeter (or other width as
determined in consultation with the Municipal Engineer)
around all BMPs and conveyances;
[6] Sufficient vehicular ingress to and egress from a public
right-of-way or roadway, as determined in consultation
with the Municipal Engineer; and
[7] Accompanying notes or other documentation as needed,
and in accordance with Article VII describing the type,
purpose and total area of easements, who the easement is
granted to, and the rights, duties and obligations of the
parties with respect to every BMP or conveyance.
(d) Boundaries of land areas (if any) for which deed restrictions
are required for the purpose of protecting and prohibiting
disturbance to a BMP or conveyance, indicating the area to
which the restriction applies with distances shown in feet and
bearings to the nearest degree, and a written description of the
type, purpose and nature of the restriction.
§ 194-402 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-402
187:530
(e) Other items that may be needed to comply with all other
requirements of Article VII.
C. A written description of the following information shall be included in
the SWM site plan:
(1) Existing features, conditions, natural resources, hydrologic
features, and special management areas [as listed in
§ 194-402B(8)];
(2) How the site design achieves the requirements of § 194-304, and, if
applicable, where they could not be achieved and why;
(3) The overall stormwater management design concept for the project
and how the site design achieves the requirements of §§ 194-301
through 194-311 of Article III;
(4) Proposed features and conditions, proposed erosion and sediment
control features, proposed BMPs, conveyances, and any other
stormwater facilities;
(5) A description of the effect of the project (in terms of flow alteration
and runoff volumes, water quality and peak flows, etc.) on existing
natural resources, hydrologic features and special management
areas, adjacent and downgradient properties, and any existing
municipal or other stormwater conveyance system(s), that may be
affected by or receive runoff from the regulated activity (whether
located within or outside of the area of the regulated activity), and
specifics of how erosion, water quality and flow impacts will be
avoided or otherwise mitigated;
(6) Proposed nonpoint source pollution controls and justification and
confirmation that the proposed project will not result in any
increased pollutant loadings to any existing stream or stream
impairment identified by PADEP, or to any receiving water body;
(7) Expected project time schedule; and
(8) Description of construction stages or project phases, if so
proposed.
D. A detailed site evaluation conducted by a qualified licensed professional
for projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas, such as
contaminated sites and brownfields, as described in § 194-301O and R
of this chapter.
E. Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation, such as
hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations, assumptions, BMP
loading ratios, etc., consistent with the guidelines and criteria
presented in the PA BMP Manual (as amended) or other guidance
acceptable to the Municipal Engineer, and used in the design of the
BMPs, conveyances and other features proposed to be utilized for
§ 194-402 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-402
187:531
§ 194-403. SWM site plan submission.
A complete SWM site plan that complies with all applicable provisions of
§ 194-402 shall be submitted to the municipality for review and approval, as
follows:
stormwater management, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate
that the requirements of this chapter have been met, specifically
including the requirements in §§ 194-301 and 194-304 through
194-309.
F. Inspections, operation and maintenance requirements. The following
documents shall be prepared and submitted to the municipality for
review and approval as part of the SWM site plan, in accordance with
the requirements of Article VII, for each BMP and conveyance included
in the SWM site plan (including any to be located on any property other
than the property being developed by the applicant):
(1) An O&M plan;
(2) An O&M agreement;
(3) Any easement agreements that are needed to ensure access,
inspection, maintenance, operation, repair and permanent
protection of any permanent BMP(s) and conveyances associated
with the regulated activity;
(4) Any written deed, deed amendment or equivalent document (if
needed) to be recorded against a subject property, as shown on the
SWM site plan maps or plan sheets, or recorded plan sheets for the
purpose of protecting and prohibiting disturbance to a BMP or
conveyance; and
(5) Written approval, easement agreements, or other documentation
for discharges to adjacent or downgradient properties when
required to comply with § 194-301G and Article VII of this chapter.
G. An erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as prepared
for and submitted to the Conservation District and/or municipality. A
letter of adequacy from the Conservation District, if applicable, must be
submitted to the municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the
municipality's final approval of the SWM site plan.
H. A highway occupancy permit from the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PennDOT) District Office must be submitted to the
municipality prior to (or as a condition of) the municipality's final
approval of the SWM site plan when utilization of a PennDOT storm
drainage system is proposed.
A. The SWM site plan shall be coordinated with the applicable state and
federal permit process and the municipal SALDO review process. All
permit approvals or letters of adequacy not yet received by the
§ 194-402 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-403
187:532
§ 194-404. SWM site plan review.
applicant at the time of submittal of the SWM site plan to the
municipality must be submitted to the municipality prior to (or as a
condition of) the municipality's final approval of the SWM site plan.
B. For projects that require SALDO approval, the SWM site plan shall be
submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary plan submission
where applicable for the regulated activity.
C. For regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval, the SWM
site plan shall be submitted by the applicant for review in accordance
with instructions from the municipality.
D. The number of copies of the SWM site plan to be submitted by the
applicant for review shall be in accordance with instructions from the
municipality.
E. The corresponding review fee shall be submitted to the municipality
simultaneously with the SWM site plan, per the municipality's fee
schedule.
F. Any submissions to the municipality that are found to be incomplete
shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the applicant
within 21 days with a notification in writing of the specific manner in
which the submission is incomplete.
G. Financial security, per the requirements of § 194-110, shall be
submitted to the municipality prior to approval of the SWM site plan.
A. The SWM site plan shall be submitted to the municipality for review by
the Municipal Engineer for consistency with this chapter and the
respective PA Act 167 stormwater management plan(s). The Municipal
Engineer will review the SWM site plan for any subdivision or land
development for compliance with this chapter and the municipal
SALDO provisions not otherwise superseded by this chapter.
B. If applicable, the applicant shall have received a "letter of adequacy"
from the Conservation District or other PADEP approval for the
proposed regulated activity prior to (or as a condition of) final approval
by the municipality.
C. The Municipal Engineer will notify the applicant and the municipality in
writing, within 45 calendar days, whether the SWM site plan is
consistent with the requirements of this chapter. If the SWM site plan
involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification shall
occur within the time period allowed by the MPC (as amended).179 If a
longer notification period is provided by other statute, regulation, or
ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the municipality.
179. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 194-403 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-404
187:533
(1) If the Municipal Engineer determines that the SWM site plan is
consistent with this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall forward
a letter of consistency to the municipality, who shall then forward a
copy to the applicant.
(2) The municipality may approve the SWM site plan with conditions
reasonably defined to make the SWM site plan compliant with the
terms of this chapter, and, if so, shall provide the conditions for
approval in writing.
(3) If the Municipal Engineer determines that the SWM site plan is
inconsistent or noncompliant with this chapter, the Municipal
Engineer will forward a letter to the municipality, with a copy to the
applicant citing the reason(s) and specific chapter sections for the
inconsistency or noncompliance. Inconsistency or noncompliance
may be due to inadequate information to make a reasonable
judgment as to compliance with this chapter. Any SWM site plans
that are inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised by the
applicant and resubmitted in accordance with § 194-406 when
consistent with this chapter. Resubmission will commence a new
municipal review and notification time period.
D. The municipality will not grant final approval to any proposed
subdivision, land development, or regulated activity specified in this
chapter if the SWM site plan has been found to be inconsistent with this
chapter.
E. All required permits from PADEP shall be obtained and submitted to the
municipality prior to (or as a condition of) final approval of any
proposed subdivision, land development, or other regulated activity by
the municipality.
F. No building permits for any regulated activity will be approved by the
municipality if the SWM site plan has been found to be inconsistent
with this chapter, as determined by the Municipal Engineer. All
required permits from PADEP shall be obtained prior to issuance of a
building permit.
G. The municipality's approval of a SWM site plan shall be valid for a
period not to exceed five years commencing on the date that the
municipality approved the SWM site plan. If stormwater management
facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not been
constructed, or if constructed, as-built plans of these facilities have not
been approved within this five-year time period, then the applicant may
seek reinstatement of approval of the expired SWM site plan. If the
municipality determines that the expired SWM site plan is consistent
and compliant with current regulations and requirements, then the
expired SWM site plan will be reinstated; otherwise, it will be rejected.
The applicant will be prohibited from conducting any regulated activity
until a reinstated or newly approved SWM site plan is obtained in
accordance with § 194-406 of this chapter.
§ 194-404 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-404
187:534
§ 194-405. Revision of SWM site plans.
§ 194-406. Resubmission of inconsistent or noncompliant SWM site
plans.
Any SWM site plan deemed inconsistent or noncompliant may be revised
and resubmitted with the revisions addressing the Municipal Engineer's
concerns documented in writing. The submission shall be addressed to
the municipality in accordance with § 194-403 of this chapter, distributed
accordingly, and be subject to review as specified in § 194-404 of this
chapter. The applicable municipal review fee shall accompany a
resubmission of a SWM site plan previously determined to be inconsistent
or noncompliant.
H. All or portions of the final approved SWM site plan shall be recorded (as
"record plans") per the instructions of the municipality.
I. Upon completion of construction, the applicant shall be responsible for
completing final as-built plans of all BMPs, conveyances, or other
stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM site
plan as per the requirements of § 194-502 of this chapter.
A. A submitted SWM site plan under review by the municipality shall be
revised and resubmitted for any of the following reasons. The revised
SWM site plan shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 194-403 and
subject to review as specified in § 194-404 of this chapter.
(1) A change in stormwater management BMPs, conveyances, facilities
or techniques;
(2) Relocation or redesign of stormwater management BMPs,
conveyances, or facilities; or
(3) Soil or other site conditions are not as stated on the SWM site plan
as determined by the Municipal Engineer, and the new conditions
necessitate design changes.
B. A revision to an approved SWM site plan shall be submitted to the
municipality, accompanied by the applicable municipal review fee.
§ 194-404 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-406
187:535

ARTICLE V
Performance and Inspection of Regulated Activities; Final As-Built
Plans.
§ 194-501. Performance and inspection of regulated activities.
§ 194-502. Final as-built plans.
A. All regulated activities shall be conducted, operated and maintained in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Articles III, VII, and VIII
of this chapter. When a SWM site plan is required by this chapter, all
regulated activities shall be performed in accordance with the
requirements of the final approved SWM site plan.
B. The Municipal Engineer or other municipal designee shall be provided
access to the site to inspect all phases of the erosion and sediment
control measures and installation of the permanent BMPs and
conveyances at such times as deemed appropriate by the Municipal
Engineer or other municipal designee.
C. Periodic inspections may be made by the Municipal Engineer or other
designee during construction. A set of design plans approved by the
municipality shall be on file and available for viewing at the site
throughout the duration of the construction activity.
D. Inspections, including but not limited to a final inspection, of all
constructed BMPs, conveyances, or other stormwater facilities, and
related improvements may be conducted by the Municipal Engineer or
other designee to confirm compliance with this chapter and with the
final approved SWM site plan prior to the issuance of any occupancy
permit, use permit, or other form of final approval of the project by the
municipality.
E. Upon completion of construction, every permanent stormwater BMP,
conveyance or other stormwater facility constructed or used as part of
the regulated activity shall be operated, maintained and inspected by
the landowner, or other designated person, in accordance with the
O&M plan and O&M agreement approved by the municipality.
F. The municipality or its designee may periodically inspect any
permanent stormwater BMP, conveyance or facility for compliance with
this chapter, an approved O&M plan, or an approved O&M agreement,
per the provisions of Article IX. The municipality may inspect at any
time it has reason to believe a violation exists. The municipality may
pursue enforcement for violations consistent with the provisions of
Article IX.
A. For regulated activities involving one acre or more of earth
disturbance, the applicant shall provide to the municipality final as-built
plans (signed and sealed by a qualified licensed professional) of all
§ 194-501 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-502
187:537
BMPs, conveyances, other stormwater facilities, and related
improvements shown in the final approved SWM site plan.
B. The final as-built plans shall include the following for all BMPs,
conveyances, other stormwater facilities and related improvements:
(1) The location, elevations, dimensions, and as-built conditions of all
BMPs, conveyances, other stormwater facilities, and related
improvements including topographic contours and all typical
details for storm drainage and conveyance systems, stormwater
management facilities and impervious surfaces (existing, proposed,
or constructed) included in the approved SWM site plan; and
(2) Explanation of any discrepancies or variations from the final
approved SWM site plan, other related approved construction
plans, calculations and specifications (and approved revisions
thereto).
C. The final as-built plans shall include a certification of completion signed
and sealed by a qualified licensed professional verifying that all
permanent BMPs and conveyances have been constructed according to
the final approved SWM site plan and related approved construction
plans, calculations and specifications.
D. All areas of the regulated activity draining to BMPs must be stabilized
prior to submittal of the as-built plans.
E. After receipt of the as-built plans by the municipality, the municipality
or its designee may review the as-built plans for consistency with this
chapter, the final approved SWM site plan, other related approved
construction plans, and subsequent approved revisions thereto, as well
as actual conditions at the site, and the municipality may conduct a final
inspection, as per § 194-501D.
F. The as-built plans must be received, reviewed and determined to be
acceptable by the municipality prior to:
(1) Close out of the drainage permit or other close out of the project by
the municipality;
(2) Release of the financial security or other performance guarantee;
and
(3) Dedication of the stormwater facilities to the municipality, or
conveyance to a homeowners' association, or other person
responsible for operation, maintenance and repair.
G. Final occupancy permit(s) or use permit or other final approval to use
or operate the constructed improvement may not be issued by the
municipality until the final as-built plans have been accepted.
H. Upon final acceptance of the final as-built plans by the municipality, the
applicant shall review and, if required by the municipality, revise and
§ 194-502 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-502
187:538
re-record the O&M plan and the O&M agreement to reflect the final
as-built conditions and information for each permanent BMP or
conveyance, in accordance with the requirements of Article VII.
I. All or portions of the final as-built plans shall be recorded if required by
the municipality.
§ 194-502 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-502
187:539

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 194-601. Site plan review and inspection fees established.
§ 194-602. Expenses covered by fees.
A. Fees have been established by the municipality as adopted by
resolution on file at City Office. All fees listed in § 194-602A shall be
paid by the applicant at the time of stormwater management
application.
B. A review and inspection fee schedule has been established by resolution
of the municipal governing body based on the size of the regulated
activity and based on the municipality's costs for reviewing SWM site
plans, O&M plans and agreements and as-built plans, and conducting
inspections pursuant to § 194-501. The municipality shall periodically
update the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that review
costs are adequately reimbursed.
A. The fees required of the applicant by this chapter shall at a minimum
cover:
(1) Administrative costs;
(2) The review of the SWM site plan by the municipality, the Municipal
Engineer and other municipal consultants;
(3) Coordination and meetings with the applicant;
(4) The inspection of erosion and sediment control measures, BMPs,
conveyances and other related improvements during construction;
(5) Review of project communications, reports, and additional
supporting information;
(6) Other site inspections;
(7) The final inspection upon completion of the BMPs, conveyances,
and other stormwater management facilities and related
improvements presented in the SWM site plan; and
(8) Review of final as-built plan submission and revised calculations,
and inspections as needed.
B. The applicant shall also reimburse all expenses incurred by the
municipality for any additional work or municipal consultant fees
required to enforce any permit provisions regulated by this chapter,
correct violations, and ensure proper completion of remedial actions.
§ 194-601 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-602
187:541

ARTICLE VII
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Responsibilities and Easements
§ 194-701. General requirements for protection, operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs and conveyances.
The following shall apply to all regulated activities in accordance with the
requirements of the subsequent sections of this Article VII.
A. Continuing operations and maintenance responsibilities of all
permanent BMPs, conveyances, or other stormwater management
facilities shall be reviewed and approved by the municipality along with
the SWM site plan. The municipality may require an offer of a
dedication of such facilities as part of the requirements for approval of
the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the
municipality will accept the facilities. The municipality reserves the
right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance responsibility
for any portion of or all of the BMPs, conveyances or other stormwater
controls and facilities.
B. An operation and maintenance (O&M) plan shall be submitted to the
municipality for review and approval for all existing and proposed
permanent BMPs and man-made conveyances or other stormwater
facilities identified in the SWM site plan. Multiple BMPs or conveyances
may be addressed by a combined O&M plan where all such facilities are
similar in O&M requirements and ownership.
C. The O&M plan(s) and O&M agreement(s) shall name the person
identified in the SWM site plan who shall be the owner of and be
responsible for ongoing inspections, operation, repair, and maintenance
of each BMP or conveyance following completion of construction.
D. For any BMP or man-made conveyance (including any to be located on
any property other than the property being developed by the applicant)
to be owned by a person other than the municipality:
(1) An O&M agreement shall be submitted to the municipality for
review and approval; and
(2) The O&M plan shall be attached to, incorporated within, and
recorded as a public record along with a fully executed O&M
agreement, all of which shall be recorded as a restrictive covenant
that runs with the land and shall be binding upon the landowner
and any heirs, administrators, successors in interest or assigns of
the landowner.
E. The following shall be provided for all BMPs and conveyances
(including any to be located on any property other than the property
being developed by the applicant) by an O&M or other agreement or by
otherwise establishing covenants, easements, deed restrictions, or by
dedication to the municipality:
§ 194-701 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-701
187:543
§ 194-702. Operation and maintenance plans.
The following items shall be included in the O&M plan, unless otherwise
approved by the Municipal Engineer:
(1) Permanent protection of the BMP or conveyance from disturbance
or alteration;
(2) Right of entry and access for the municipality for inspection and
enforcement of this chapter (including § 194-903G) and any
applicable O&M plan or O&M agreement; and
(3) Right of entry and access for the person owning the BMP or
conveyance and responsible for fulfilling the O&M requirements
when that person is not the municipality and is different from the
owner of the property on which the BMP or conveyance is located
(such as may be applicable for § 194-301G of this chapter).
F. All O&M and other agreements, covenants, easements and deed
restrictions shall:
(1) Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval;
(2) Be recorded as a public record, upon approval, against each
parcel(s) which is part of the SWM site plan or otherwise contains
any BMP or conveyance comprising part of the regulated activity
which is the subject of an O&M agreement; and
(3) Run with the land and be binding upon the landowner, its heirs,
administrators, successors in interest, and assigns.
G. The materials, documents and content required by this Article VII may
be prepared in conjunction with and incorporated with similar
materials, documents and content required for other permit or approval
applications, such as those required by PADEP for the postconstruction
stormwater management plan.
A. A plan sheet(s) or map(s) showing each BMP and man-made
conveyance and which shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Property(ies) identification (owner name and address; and property
address and/or lot and/or tax parcel number, etc.), property
boundaries and tax parcel number of the land parcel on which the
BMP or conveyance is located.
(2) Name, address, phone number, date prepared, signature and seal
of the licensed professional responsible for preparation of the plan
sheet or map.
(3) Clear identification of the location, dimensions, and function of
each BMP or conveyance covered by the O&M plan.
§ 194-701 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-702
187:544
(4) The location of each BMP and conveyance relative to roadways,
property boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks and existing
natural drainage features such as streams, lakes, ponds, or other
bodies of water within the immediate vicinity of, or receiving
discharge from, the BMP or conveyance.
(5) Delineation of the land area, structures, impervious surfaces and
conveyances draining to and from the BMP.
(6) Representative elevations and/or topographic contours at intervals
of two feet, or other as acceptable to the Municipal Engineer.
(7) Other features including FEMA floodplain and floodway
boundaries, sinkholes, etc., located within the immediate proximity
of each BMP and conveyance.
(8) Locations of areas of vegetation to be managed or preserved that
function as a BMP or conveyance.
(9) The locations of all surface and subsurface utilities, on-lot
wastewater facilities, sanitary sewers, and waterlines within 20
feet of each BMP or conveyance.
(10) The following as it pertains to any easements, covenants and deed
restrictions established for each applicable BMP or conveyance:
(a) Boundaries delineated with bearings and distances shown that
encompass the BMP or conveyance and that includes a twentyfoot
perimeter area surrounding these features and sufficient
vehicular ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way and
roadway;
(b) Labels specifying the type and purpose of the easement,
covenant, or deed restriction and who it benefits; and
(c) Labels with reference to any corresponding easement
agreement, covenant, deed restriction or other document to be
recorded.
(11) The plan sheet or map shall be prepared at sufficient scale for
municipal review, and ultimately for the use by the person
responsible for operation and maintenance, and shall also be
prepared at a legible scale that meets the requirements for
recordation along with (and as an attachment to) the O&M
agreement and O&M plan at the Chester County Office of the
Recorder of Deeds.
B. The following information shall be included in the O&M plan and
written in a manner consistent with the knowledge and understanding
of the person who will be responsible for the maintenance activities:
(1) The name and address of the following:
§ 194-702 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-702
187:545
(a) Property(ies) on which each BMP or conveyance is located;
(b) Owner of the property;
(c) Owner of each stormwater BMP or conveyance who is
responsible for implementation of the O&M plan;
(d) Person responsible for maintaining adequate liability
insurance and payment of taxes; and
(e) Person preparing the O&M plan.
(2) A description of each BMP and conveyance and how the BMPs and
conveyances are intended to function.
(3) A description of actions necessary to operate, inspect, and maintain
each BMP or conveyance, including but not limited to:
(a) Lawn care, vegetation maintenance, landscaping and planting;
(b) Clean out of accumulated debris and sediment (including from
grates, trash racks, inlets, etc.); and
(c) Other anticipated periodic maintenance and repair.
(4) The following statement shall be included:
"The landowner acknowledges that, per the provisions of the
municipality's Stormwater Management Ordinance, it is unlawful
to modify, remove, fill, landscape, alter or impair the effectiveness
of, or place any structure, other vegetation, yard waste, brush
cuttings, or other waste or debris into any permanent stormwater
management BMP or conveyance described in this O&M plan or
to allow the BMP or conveyance to exist in a condition which does
not conform to this O&M plan, without written approval from the
municipality."
(5) Inspection and maintenance schedules.
(6) Explanation of the purpose and limitations of any easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions associated with any BMP or
conveyance that are to be recorded against the property.
C. A statement that no BMP or man-made conveyance may be used by the
owner or others for any purpose other than its intended stormwater
control function, or, if approved by the Municipal Engineer, a statement
of specific allowable uses of the BMP (i.e., recreational benefits that
may be associated with certain BMPs owned by a homeowners'
association, or allowable uses by an individual residential landowner).
D. A statement that establishes a reasonable time frame for remedy of
deficiencies found by the owner during his or her inspections.
§ 194-702 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-702
187:546
§ 194-703. Operation and maintenance agreements.
§ 194-704. Easements and deed restrictions.
E. Language needed to fulfill the requirements of § 194-705B, C and D of
this chapter.
A. An O&M agreement shall be required for any BMP or man-made
conveyance to be owned by a person other than the municipality, and
the agreement shall:
(1) Be between the owner of the BMP or conveyance and the
municipality, and shall be substantially the same as the O&M
agreement in Appendix E;180
(2) Incorporate the approved O&M plan(s) for all BMPs or
conveyances to be covered by the O&M agreement;
(3) Set forth the rights, duties and obligations of the owner of the BMP
or conveyance and the municipality, and be consistent with the
approved O&M plan(s);
(4) Be recorded as a deed restriction or restrictive covenant that runs
with the land and shall be binding upon the landowner, its heirs,
administrators, successors in interest, and assigns;
(5) Be submitted to the municipality for review prior to approval of the
SWM site plan;
(6) Upon approval by the municipality, be signed by the designated
owner of the BMP or conveyance and submitted for signature by
the municipality; and
(7) When fully executed, be recorded by the landowner at the Chester
County Office of the Recorder of Deeds following municipal
approval of the O&M plan and prior to the start of construction.
B. Other items or conditions may be required by the municipality to be
included in the O&M agreement where determined necessary by the
municipality to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance
of all permanent BMPs and conveyances.
C. After approval of the final as-built plans per the requirements of Article
V, the applicant shall review and, if necessary and if required by the
municipality, revise and re-record the O&M plan and O&M agreement
to reflect the final as-built conditions of each BMP and conveyance if
different from the information included in the original recorded
documents.
A. Easements shall be established in connection with any regulated
activity for all permanent BMPs and conveyances that will not be
180. Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the City offices.
§ 194-702 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-704
187:547
dedicated to or otherwise owned by the municipality (including any to
be located on any property other than the property being developed by
the applicant) and shall:
(1) Include all land area occupied by each BMP or conveyance;
(2) Include a twenty-foot-wide perimeter (or other width as determined
in consultation with the Municipal Engineer) surrounding the
feature(s);
(3) Provide sufficient vehicular ingress and egress from a public rightof-
way and roadway;
(4) Permanently protect every BMP and conveyance from disturbance
or alteration where not otherwise protected by a recorded O&M
agreement, covenant, deed restriction or other means;
(5) Grant the municipality the right, but not the duty, to access every
BMP and conveyance from a public right-of-way or public roadway
to conduct periodic inspections and to undertake other actions that
may be necessary to enforce the requirements of this chapter, or of
any applicable O&M plan or O&M agreement; where roadways will
not be dedicated to the municipality, the municipality shall be
granted access to the private roadways as necessary to access
every BMP and conveyance;
(6) Grant the owner of each BMP and conveyance the right to access,
inspect, operate, maintain, and repair the BMP or conveyance
when the feature is to be owned, operated and maintained by a
person other than the municipality and other than the owner of the
parcel on which it is located;
(7) Be shown, with bearings and distances noted, on the SWM site plan
map/plan sheets, O&M plan map/plan sheets, final as-built plans,
and be signed and sealed by a qualified licensed professional;
(8) Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement
shall run with the land and bind the landowner granting the
easement, its heirs, administrators, successors in interest and
assigns, into perpetuity; and
(9) Be recorded at the Chester County Office of the Recorder of Deeds
following municipal approval and prior to the start of construction.
B. For any BMP or conveyance to be owned by a person other than the
municipality or the landowner owning the parcel upon which a BMP or
conveyance is located, an easement agreement shall be prepared and
executed between the landowner and the owner of the BMP or
conveyance which shall:
(1) Describe the ownership interests of all parties to the easement
agreement, including the ownership of the BMP or conveyance;
§ 194-704 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-704
187:548
(2) Include a written legal (metes and bounds) description of the
easement area, with reference to a recorded plan sheet showing
the legal boundaries of the easement area (or an accompanying
plan sheet/map), signed and sealed by a qualified licensed
professional;
(3) Grant an easement from the landowner to the owner of each BMP
and conveyance, establishing the right and obligation to occupy,
access, inspect, operate, maintain, and repair the BMP or
conveyance;
(4) Include a description of the purpose of the easement and the
responsibilities of the parties involved;
(5) Incorporate by reference or be recorded with the corresponding
O&M plan and O&M agreement;
(6) Restrict the landowner's use of the easement area of the parcel on
which the BMP or conveyance is located, consistent with the rights
granted to the owner of the BMP or conveyance;
(7) Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval prior to
approval of the SWM site plan;
(8) Upon approval by the municipality, be signed by the owner of the
BMP(s) or conveyance(s) and the landowner and submitted for
signature by the municipality;
(9) Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement will
run with the land affected by the easement and that the easement
agreement is binding upon the parties to the easement agreement,
their heirs, administrators, successors in interest and assigns, into
perpetuity;
(10) Contain additional provisions or information as required by the
municipality; and
(11) When fully executed, be recorded by the landowner at the Chester
County Office of the Recorder of Deeds against all parcels affected
by the terms of the easement agreement, within 90 days of the
municipality's approval of the corresponding O&M plan.
C. For any BMP or conveyance which is designed to receive runoff from
another parcel or parcels and which is owned by the landowner of the
parcel upon which the BMP or conveyance is located, in addition to any
easement or easement agreement required pursuant to § 194-704A or
B, an easement agreement shall be prepared and executed between the
landowner of the parcel or parcels draining to the BMP or conveyance
and the owner of the BMP or conveyance. This easement agreement
shall:
§ 194-704 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-704
187:549
(1) Describe the ownership interests of all parties to the easement
agreement, including the ownership of all affected parcels and of
the BMP or conveyance;
(2) Provide for the grant of a drainage easement from the owner of the
BMP or conveyance to the landowner of the parcel(s) draining to
the BMP, which shall extend from the shared parcel boundary(ies)
to the receiving BMP and shall include the connecting flow path(s)
or conveyance;
(3) Include a written legal (metes and bounds) description of the
easement area, with reference to a recorded plan sheet showing
the legal boundaries of the easement area (or an accompanying
plan sheet/map), signed and sealed by a licensed professional.
(4) Incorporate by reference or be recorded with the corresponding
O&M plan and O&M agreement;
(5) State that the purpose of the easement agreement is to ensure the
continuous right of the discharging parcel to discharge onto the
parcel containing the BMP and into the BMP or conveyance;
(6) Restrict the BMP or conveyance owner's use of the easement area
of the parcel upon which the BMP or conveyance is located,
consistent with the purpose of the easement granted;
(7) Establish the duty and responsibility of the landowner of the parcel
or parcels draining to the BMP or conveyance to maintain the
existing drainages on the discharging parcel or parcels as designed
and constructed to discharge to the receiving BMP;
(8) Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the easement will
run with the land and will bind all parties to the easement
agreement, their heirs, administrators, successors in interest and
assigns, into perpetuity;
(9) Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval prior to
approval of the SWM site plan;
(10) Contain all additional provisions or information as the municipality
may require upon review; and
(11) Be executed by the parties to the easement agreement and
recorded at the Chester County Recorder of Deeds Office against
the draining parcel(s) and the parcel upon which the BMP or
conveyance is located within 30 days of the municipality's approval
of the corresponding O&M plan.
D. For any area(s) shown on the SWM site plan maps/plan sheets or asbuilt
plan sheets as requiring, or area(s) that is otherwise determined to
require, deed restriction(s) for the purpose of protecting and
prohibiting disturbance to a BMP or conveyance, such deed restrictions
§ 194-704 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-704
187:550
§ 194-705. Other postconstruction responsibilities.
will be incorporated into a written deed, restrictive covenant, or
equivalent document. The deed or other document shall:
(1) Include a clear and understandable description of the purpose,
terms and conditions of the restricted use;
(2) Include the written legal description (metes and bounds
description) of the area to which the restrictions apply that is
consistent with the boundary shown on the O&M plan sheets and
SWM site plan maps/plan sheets;
(3) Make reference to any corresponding O&M plan(s) and O&M
agreement(s);
(4) Include language legally sufficient to ensure that the terms of the
restriction run with the land and shall be binding upon the
landowner, its heirs, administrators, successors in interest, and
assigns;
(5) Be submitted to the municipality for review and approval prior to
approval of the SWM site plan;
(6) Upon approval by the municipality, be signed by the landowner and
owner of the BMP or conveyance and submitted to the
municipality; and
(7) Be fully executed and recorded at the Chester County Office of the
Recorder of Deeds within 30 days of the municipality's approval of
the O&M plan.
A. The provisions of § 194-804 of this chapter shall apply to any permanent
BMP or conveyance that is constructed as part of an approved SWM
site plan or covered by an approved O&M plan.
B. The person responsible for the operation and maintenance of a BMP or
conveyance shall make records of the installation and of all
maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records in perpetuity.
These records shall be submitted to the municipality, if requested.
C. Upon final inspection, the municipality shall inform the person
responsible for the operation and maintenance whether the submission
of periodic (annual or other frequency) inspection and maintenance
reports will be required.
D. The owner of each BMP and conveyance shall keep on file with the
municipality the name, address, and telephone number of the person
responsible for maintenance activities and implementation of the O&M
plan. In the event of a change, new information shall be submitted by
the BMP or conveyance owner to the municipality within 30 working
days of the change.
§ 194-704 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-705
187:551

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 194-801. Prohibited discharges.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter the municipality's separate storm
sewer system or the waters of the commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into the
municipality's separate storm sewer system or the waters of the
commonwealth that are not composed entirely of stormwater, except:
(1) As provided in Subsection C below; and
(2) Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined by
the municipality to be significant contributors to pollution to the
municipality's separate storm sewer system or to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities;
(2) Potable water sources including waterline and fire hydrant
flushings;
(3) Irrigation drainage;
(4) Air-conditioning condensate;
(5) Springs;
(6) Water from crawl space pumps;
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used;
(8) Diverted stream flows;
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(10) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains;
(11) Lawn watering;
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater;
(14)Water from individual residential car washing; and
§ 194-801 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-801
187:553
§ 194-802. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 194-801C
above:
§ 194-803. Roof drains and sump pumps.
(15) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants to the
municipality's separate storm sewer system or to the waters of the
commonwealth, or is notified of such significant contribution of
pollution by PADEP, the municipality will notify the responsible person
to cease the discharge.
E. Upon notice provided by the municipality under Subsection D, the
discharger shall, within a reasonable time period, as determined by the
municipality consistent with the degree of pollution caused by the
discharge, cease the discharge.
F. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter a separate storm sewer system,
and any connections to the separate storm sewer system from indoor
drains and sinks.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to a separate storm sewer system, which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the
municipality.
A. Roof drains and sump pump discharges shall not be connected to
sanitary sewers.
B. Roof drain, sump pump, foundation and footing drain discharges:
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, shall discharge to infiltration
or vegetative BMPs, or to vegetated or other areas with adequate
capacity;
(2) May be connected to streets, storm sewers, or roadside ditches
only if determined necessary or acceptable by the Municipal
Engineer; and
(3) Shall be considered in stormwater management calculations to
demonstrate that conveyance and receiving facilities have
adequate capacity.
§ 194-801 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-804
187:554
§ 194-804. Alteration of BMPs.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, alter, or impair the
effectiveness of any stormwater BMPs, conveyances, facilities, areas or
structures unless the activity is part of an approved maintenance
program, without the written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, additional
vegetation, yard waste, brush cuttings, or other waste or debris into a
BMP or conveyance, or within a stormwater easement, that would limit
or alter the functioning of the stormwater BMP or conveyance, without
the written approval of the municipality.
§ 194-804 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-804
187:555

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties
§ 194-901. Public nuisance.
§ 194-902. Right of entry.
§ 194-903. Enforcement.
A. Any regulated activity conducted in the violation of any provision of this
chapter is hereby deemed a public nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
C. A separate violation will be found to exist for each section of this
chapter found to have been violated.
D. To the extent that the municipality does not enforce any provision of
this chapter, such action or inaction shall not constitute a waiver by the
municipality of its rights of future enforcement hereunder.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized officers or
agents of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon any
property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of all erosion and sediment
controls and permanent stormwater BMPs, conveyances, or other
stormwater facilities both during and after completion of a regulated
activity, or for compliance with any requirement of this chapter.
B. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on or in any BMP, conveyance or other stormwater
facility in the municipality such devices as are necessary to conduct
monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges from such BMP or
conveyance, or other stormwater facilities.
C. Failure of the landowner or representative to grant access to the
municipality within 24 hours of notification, verbal or written, is a
violation of this chapter.
A. The Municipal Engineer or other designee is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. The municipal
governing body may delegate enforcement duties, including the initial
determination of chapter violation and service of notice, if notice is
given, to such other officers or agents as the municipality shall deem
qualified for that purpose.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the landowner of the real property on
which any regulated activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has
occurred to comply with the applicable terms and conditions of this
chapter.
§ 194-901 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-903
187:557
C. All municipal inspections for compliance with the approved SWM site
plan shall be the responsibility of the municipality or its designee.
D. During any stage of the work of any regulated activity, if the Municipal
Engineer or other designee determines that the erosion and sediment
control measures, permanent BMPs, conveyances or other stormwater
facilities are not being installed or maintained in accordance with the
approved SWM site plan, the municipality may suspend or revoke any
existing permits or other approvals until the deficiencies are corrected
or until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved, if and as
determined to be necessary by the Municipal Engineer or other
designee.
E. In the event that the Municipal Engineer or other designee finds that a
person has violated a provision of this chapter, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued by the municipality, or
any O&M plan or O&M agreement approved by the municipality, the
municipality may order compliance by written notice of the violation to
the landowner.
F. Such notice may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs
and/or forfeiture of financial security;
(6) Implementation of stormwater controls, BMPs, and conveyances;
and
(7) Operation, maintenance or repair of BMPs, conveyances or other
stormwater facilities.
G. Such notice shall set forth the nature of the violation(s), citing to
specific sections of this chapter which have not been met, and establish
a time limit for commencement of correction and completion of
correction of the violation(s). The notice shall provide for a right of the
landowner's appeal to the municipal governing body in accordance with
§ 194-906 of this chapter. Said notice shall further advise that, if
applicable, should the violator fail to take the required action within the
established deadline, possible sanctions, clearly described, may be
imposed, or the work may be done by the municipality or designee, and
the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
§ 194-903 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-903
187:558
§ 194-904. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 194-905. Violations and penalties.
H. Failure to comply within the time specified in such notice shall also
subject such person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such
penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the
municipality from pursuing any and all other remedies available in law
or equity.
A. Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit or approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other law or
regulation applicable to the regulated activity;
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity that constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, or endangers the life, health, safety, or property of
others; or
(4) Failure to correct a violation within the allowed time period allowed
per notice given by the municipality.
B. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, unless there is immediate
danger or threat of such danger to life, public health or property, at the
request of the applicant, the municipality's governing body shall
schedule a hearing on the violation and proposed revocation or
suspension, pursuant to public notice. The expense of a hearing shall be
the applicant's responsibility.
C. A suspended permit or approval may be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The Municipal Engineer or other designee has inspected and
approved the corrections to the BMPs, conveyances or other
stormwater facilities, or the elimination of the hazard or nuisance;
and
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
D. A permit or approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit or approval in
accordance with this chapter.
A. Any person violating or permitting the violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 plus all the
court costs for each violation, recoverable with costs. The
establishment of a violation for purposes of setting fines or penalties for
such violation shall be in accordance with a citation to a magisterial
§ 194-903 SHOPPING CARTS § 194-905
187:559
§ 194-906. Appeals.
§ 194-907. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective as required by the City Code 30 days after
adoption.
district judge with jurisdiction and venue over the location of the
violation and such an action will be subject to the procedures provided
for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules
of Criminal Procedure. A separate offense shall arise for each day or
portion thereof a violation is found to exist and may be determined for
each section of this chapter which is found to have been violated.
B. In addition, the municipality may, through its solicitor, institute
injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other legal or
equitable forms of remedy or relief. Such relief may include costs, fees,
and charges, including the municipality's attorney's fees (charged at
the hourly rate approved by the governing body of the municipality) and
costs, as may be permitted by law.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the municipality
shall have the right at any or all times deemed necessary by the
Municipal Engineer or designee to enter upon any property within the
municipality to inspect and, upon determination of a violation of this
chapter, to correct the violation, with all expenses associated with
correcting the violation to be charged to the property owner
responsible for the violation.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipal Engineer or other
designee relative to the provisions of this chapter, as same apply to the
permitting process, may appeal to the municipality's governing body
within 30 days of that action. All appeals are in accordance with the
Local Agency Law, set forth at 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. The costs of an
appeal to the City Council shall be established by resolution of City
Council sufficient to cover the costs of the proceedings.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality's governing
body relative to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the County
Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place
within 30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 194-905 COATESVILLE CODE § 194-907
187:560
Chapter 197
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Historical Commission — See Ch. 27.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 41.
Animals — See Ch. 72.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 79.
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Licensing of building contractors — See Ch.
84.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 86.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 102.
Fees — See Ch. 108.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 115.
Improvement policies — See Ch. 142.
Lifesafety standards — See Ch. 151.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 156.
Noise — See Ch. 161.
Nuisances — See Ch. 164.
Plumbing — See Ch. 176.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 185.
Solid waste — See Ch. 190.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 193.
Use registration — See Ch. 214.
Zoning — See Ch. 224.
§ 194-907 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 194-907
197:561

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 197-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Coatesville
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1995."
§ 197-2. Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are:
A. To assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation and
use.
B. To assist in the harmonious, orderly, efficient and integrated
development of the city.
C. To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the city.
D. To ensure that the arrangement and design of subdivisions and land
developments conform to the Comprehensive Plan; the Open Space,
Recreation and Environmental Resources Plan; the Act 537 Sewage
Facilities Plan; Chapter 224, Zoning; and all other applicable
ordinances, codes, regulations, plans and maps.
E. To facilitate and accommodate existing and future pedestrian and
vehicular movement, fire protection and the rendition of other essential
services, through a coordinated system and design of streets and alleys.
F. To ensure the coordination and conformity of subdivision and/or land
development plans with the public improvement plans of the city
regarding such facilities as streets, alleys, parks, sewers and other
facilities, utilities or improvements.
G. To establish minimum standards for the design and construction of
improvements, which aid in the use and enjoyment of land, such as
streets, alleys, sidewalks, adequate drainage and water and sewage
facilities.
H. To establish a uniform and equitable procedure for the review and
processing of subdivision and/or land development plans.
I. To establish standards to ensure that developments
are environmentally sound by requiring preservation of existing
natural features to the greatest extent possible in areas to be affected
by excavation, construction or other land development activities.
J. To establish minimum standards for the design and construction of
improvements to preclude adverse environmental effects, such as
flooding, soil erosion, sedimentation, deforestation and water pollution.
§ 197-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-2
197:563
§ 197-3. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be the minimum
requirements necessary to meet the foregoing purposes. However, when
interpreting the provisions of this chapter, the following shall be noted:
§ 197-4. Authority and control.
In accordance with Article V, § 501, of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended,181 the Coatesville City Council shall
have the authority to regulate subdivision and/or land development within
the city by enacting this Subdivision and Land Development Chapter.
Through such authority, the following shall apply:
K. To establish standards for the administration of this chapter.
L. To address the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, especially those in Article V of Act 247, as amended, pertaining to
subdivision and land development.
A. Where the life, health, safety or property of persons may be menaced or
jeopardized by the application of any of the requirements of this
chapter due to special or unique conditions, more stringent or
restrictive requirements may be applied or imposed by the City Council
to eliminate or alleviate such menace or jeopardy.
B. Where the provisions of this chapter will inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant due to special or unique conditions, reasonable
modifications to such provisions may be made by the City Council as
will not be contrary to the foregoing purposes or to the public interest,
upon prior recommendation of the City Planning Commission, in
accordance with § 197-76.
C. Where it is desirable to effect economy and ingenuity in the layout of
subdivisions and land developments and to protect sensitive natural
features, modifications of site requirements may be made in accordance
with the guidelines set forth in § 197-76, and the City Council may alter
site requirements for encouraging other practices which are in
accordance with modern and evolving principles of site planning and
land development.
D. Where the provisions of this chapter impose more stringent
requirements than those of any other applicable code, statute,
ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail;
where the provisions of any other code, statute, ordinance, code or
regulation impose more stringent requirements than those of this
chapter, such code, statute, ordinance or regulation shall prevail.
A. No subdivision, resubdivision or land development of any lot, tract or
parcel of land within the city shall be made and no street, alley, sanitary
181. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501.
§ 197-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-4
197:564
§ 197-5. Jurisdiction.
sewer, capped sewer, storm sewer, water main, street tree or other
such facilities in connection therewith or other improvements of any
kind shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use
or travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting
thereon, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
Chapter 224, Zoning, as amended, and all other city codes, ordinances,
regulations, plans and maps, as amended from time to time.
B. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit to erect, alter or add to
any building or other structure or portion thereof upon land in a
subdivision or land development may be issued and no building may be
erected in a subdivision or land development unless and until a
subdivision and/or land development plan, filed in accordance with this
chapter, has been approved and, where required, recorded and proof of
such supplied to the city in accordance with § 197-15; unless and until
the required improvements in connection therewith along, upon or
through the lot or lots to be sold or built upon and to an existing
improved street or alley have been constructed and approved or, in lieu
thereof, the city has been assured of the completion of such
construction and the maintenance thereof by means of a completion
and maintenance guaranty in the form of a bond or other security
sufficient to cover the cost of the required improvements and their
maintenance as set forth in Article IX.
C. The following are subject to the regulations of this chapter:
(1) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or more
residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially
or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots,
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or the division or
allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of or for the purpose of streets common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
(2) A subdivision of land, including the division or redivision of a lot,
tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot
lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease,
partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer
of ownership or building or lot development.
A. The Coatesville City Council shall have jurisdiction of subdivision and
land development within the city. In order that the actions of the City
Council under this chapter may be correlated with all relevant data and
procedures, the City Council hereby designates the City Planning
Commission as the agency to which the following responsibilities are
assigned:
§ 197-4 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-5
197:565
(1) To review, upon filing with the City Manager, all applications for
either preliminary or final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans.
(2) To engage in preliminary consultations with the applicant relating
to such plans.
(3) To make recommendations to the City Council concerning
approval, disapproval, modification and conditions of approval of
such plans.
(4) To make recommendations to the City Council concerning the
rationale for the granting of modifications to the provisions,
requirements and standards of this chapter.
(5) Review the Subdivision and Land Development Chapter and make
recommendations to the City Council on proposed amendments to
it.
(6) In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and surveys, with the consent of the owner.
B. The Coatesville City Council may designate to the City Planning
Commission or to other boards or commissions of the city the following
responsibilities:
(1) To review and make recommendations to the City Council
concerning the adequacy or appropriateness of open space, parks
or recreation proposed through preliminary or final subdivision
and/or land development plans.
(2) To review and make recommendations to the City Council
concerning the impact upon historic resources of the city proposed
through preliminary or final subdivision and/or land development
plans.
(3) To review and make recommendations to the City Council
concerning the consistency with the City Act 537 Plan and
adequacy of any public sanitary sewerage system proposed
through preliminary or final subdivision and/or land development
plans.
C. The Coatesville City Council hereby designates the City Manager as the
person to determine whether or not any preliminary or final plan
submission is complete and acceptable to the city for the purpose of
establishing the date of filing.
(1) The City Manager or designated representative shall, within 10
business days, inspect such submission to see if the following have
been submitted:
(a) The required application form and filing fee.
§ 197-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-5
197:566
§ 197-6. Repealer.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed, except as they relate to pending applications submitted prior to
the effective date of this chapter and previously approved subdivision and/
or land development plans in accordance with § 508(4) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.182
(b) The required number of copies.
(c) The required types of plans, reports and other papers.
(d) The required checklist.
(e) Planning modules as required by the preliminary plan
submission.
(2) In the event that the submission is found to be incomplete, the City
Manager or designated representative shall notify the applicant in
writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, and inform the
applicant that the date of filing will not be effective until all
required forms, fees, types and copies of plans and papers are
submitted.
D. The City Manager or his or her representative shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter and the accompanying design standards and
requirements.
E. Inspection of actual construction under any approved subdivision and/
or land development plan shall be the responsibility of the city, which
shall undertake reasonable measures to provide an adequate inspection
of all projects.
F. In the event of any action inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter, the City Council or its authorized representative may issue a
cease and desist order or take such other appropriate action as is
deemed necessary under the circumstances.
182. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 101508(4).
§ 197-5 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-6
197:567

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 197-7. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated below:
§ 197-8. Definitions.
A. The present tense includes all other tenses; the singular includes the
plural, and the plural includes the singular; the masculine gender
includes the feminine and neuter; the word "used" includes the words
"designed or "arranged"; the word "person" includes any individual,
estate, trust, fiduciary, partnership, association, corporation or any
other organization or entity, including the principal officers thereof or
any person or entity acting directly or indirectly by, through or under
any of the foregoing; the word "occupied" includes the words "designed
or intended to be occupied"; the word "structure" includes "building";
the word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is always
permissive; and the words "as amended," as applied to any code,
statute, ordinance, regulation, plan or map, includes replacements,
supplements or restatements thereof; and, reference to a particular
Article, section or subsection which inherently refers to other Articles,
sections or subsections includes all Articles, section or subsections
referred to.
B. The word "city" means the City of Coatesville, Chester County,
Pennsylvania; the term "City Council" means the City Council of
Coatesville; and the term "Planning Commission" means the Planning
Commission of the city.
C. The terms "such as" and "including" are intended to introduce matters
which are illustrative of the meaning of the sentence, clause or phrase
in which such terms appear without limiting or derogating from the
general application of the sentence, clause or phrase in which such
terms appear.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and
phrases have the meanings indicated herein:
ABUTTING OWNER — The owner of record of a lot which is contiguous
at any point to the lot in question or which is contiguous to that section
of street or alley on which the subject lot has frontage, i.e., a lot across
from the subject lot.
ACCELERATED EROSION — Removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of man's activities and natural processes
at a rate greater than would occur from natural processes alone.
§ 197-7 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:569
ACCELERATION LANE — An added roadway lane which permits
integration and merging of slower-moving vehicles into lanes of the
main vehicular flow.
ACCEPTABLE OUTFALL — The point where stormwater can be
released to a channel or other body of water without causing erosion
to or sedimentation of the receiving channel or other body of water.
The outlet shall include structural and vegetative measures to assure
nonerosive velocities or rates of flow.
ACCESS — A way or means of approach to provide physical ingress to
and egress from a parcel, tract or other lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the principal
permitted building on a lot and used for purposes customarily
incidental to those of such principal building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure subordinate to the principal
permitted building or use on a lot.
ACCESSORY USE — A use conducted on the same lot as, and
subordinate to, a principal permitted use to which it is related and
which is located either within the same structure(s) or in an accessory
building or structure; a use which is clearly incidental to and
customarily found in connection with a particular principal permitted
use.
ACCESSWAY — A drive, driveway, aisle, private street or alley or other
pavement which connects parking areas, buildings and other structures
to a street, highway or alley.
ADAPTIVE REUSE — The conversion of an existing building or
structure into some other form of permitted use.
ADVERSE EFFECTS — Results contributing to a harmful or degraded
condition and/or producing an unfavorable result, such as harmful
or degraded conditions to the environment caused by adverse
environmental impacts.
AGENT — Any person or entity, other than the landowner or developer,
who, acting upon written authority for the landowner or developer, files
subdivision and/or land development plans with the city for the purpose
of obtaining approval thereof.
AISLE — An accessway within a parking area or parking lot which
provides space for the maneuvering of vehicles.
ALLEY — A street typically providing secondary vehicular access to the
side or rear of the lot.
ALLEY, PRIVATE — See "street, private."
ALTERATION — Any change in the exterior or structural portions of
a building; any change to or in a building which would alter its use
classification; or any change which would substantially alter an existing
sewage system, traffic condition or other infrastructure element.
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:570
ALTERATION OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — See "structural
alteration."
ALTERNATIVES — Choices between or among two or more plans,
layouts, approaches, solutions and/or results.
ANTECEDENT CONDITIONS — Specified characteristics of the land
surface (e.g., meadow) prior to a proposed disturbance or prior to
a rainfall event (e.g., amount of moisture in the soil); the basis for
calculating increases in runoff attributable to the disturbance or storms
which must be controlled.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, who has filed a complete
application for subdivision and/or land development, including heirs,
successors, assigns and grantees. The term "applicant" may include a
landowner or developer who has filed an application for conditional use,
special exception or variance.
APPLICATION FORM — A form available from the City Manager
(included in the Appendix of this chapter), which is to be used to
provide information to aid in the review of a subdivision and/or land
development plan and for general administrative purposes, and which
shall be signed by the landowner.
APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION AND/OR LAND DEVELOPMENT —
The action taken to complete, sign and file the application form as
required by this chapter, which shall also include the filing of the
number and type of plans, documents and other submissions required
by this chapter for the review and/or approval of a preliminary or
tentative plan and thereafter a final plan, together with the necessary
fees in accordance with the prevailing application fees; and the
application, whether preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed
and approved prior to the conveyance or other transfer of lots and/
or the commencement of construction and development, including an
application for the approval of a subdivision plan and an application for
the approval of a land development plan.
ARCHITECT — A person duly registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to practice architecture.
BAY WINDOW — A window within a building which may project beyond
the building line.
BEARINGS AND DISTANCES — See "metes and bounds."
BENEFICIAL EFFECTS — Results contributing to an improvement in
condition and/or producing a favorable outcome or result.
BERM — An earthen embankment which serves purposes, such as
directing the flow of surface water runoff, preventing soil erosion or
supporting plant materials to aid in screening.
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES — Characteristics of the natural
environment manifest in its flora and fauna. The disposition of these
characteristics is typically expressed in vegetation and/or wildlife units,
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:571
such as tree, woodland or forest stands and related understory and
ground cover growth; and aquatic and terrestrial wildlife and/or their
habitats.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BUFFER AREA — An area adjacent to a property boundary which is
landscaped and maintained for a width as required in certain districts
of Chapter 224, Zoning, and for certain types of land development
in a manner as required in Article VIII, § 197-50, Landscaping
requirements.
BUILDABLE AREA (BUILDING ENVELOPE) — The area of a lot
remaining after the minimum yard and setback requirements of
Chapter 224, Zoning, have been met within which a principal permitted
building shall be located. Such setback requirements include yard
setback and setbacks from floodway and floodplain areas, and such
features as areas of very steep slope and easements. Where a "buildable
area" is shown on a plan as extending into a Floodplain Conservation
Overlay District or any other area which may involve a conditional use
or special exception, those portions of the "buildable area" extending
into any such areas shall be delineated, depicted and otherwise noted
on all plans in an accurate and conspicuous manner to disclose the
specific uses which may occur in such areas.
BUILDER — A person, who is not necessarily the owner of the land
or agent of the same, who by contract or other agreement is charged
with the construction of buildings or other structures or of making any
construction improvements on any parcel of land.
BUILDING — Any combination of materials to form a permanent
structure having enclosing walls and a roof, whether or not assembled
on the premises.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal crosssection
areas of the buildings on a lot, excluding cornices, eaves,
gutters or chimneys projecting not more than 18 inches, bay windows
not extending through more than one story and not projecting more
than five feet, one story open porches projecting not more than 10 feet,
steps and balconies.
BUILDING AND STRUCTURE HEIGHT — A vertical distance measured
between the mean level of the ground surrounding the structure and
the highest point of the roof of the building or top of the structure.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of the aggregate building area of
all buildings on a lot to the gross acreage of that lot.
BUILDING LINE — For the purpose of determining the minimum width
of a lot, in the case of a normal lot, the straight line parallel to the
edge of the right-of-way at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of
the front yard required for the district in which the lot is located and,
in the case of an interior lot not fronting on a public street for its full
width, a line preferably parallel to the property line nearest and at right
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:572
angles to the access right-of-way and at a distance from that property
line equal to the depth of the front yard required for the district in
which the lot is located.
BUILDING PERMIT — A document issued by the city granting
permission for the construction, repair, alteration of or addition to a
structure.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE; SIDE YARD BUILDING SETBACK LINE —
The line normally perpendicular to the front yard street right-of-way
line and equal to the minimum depth of the side yard designated for
each district in Chapter 224, Zoning.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE; REAR YARD BUILDING SETBACK LINE
— The line normally parallel to the front yard street right-of-way line
and equal to the minimum depth of the rear yard designated for each
district in Chapter 224, Zoning.
BUILD-TO LINE — The line on which dwellings shall be placed in
accordance with Chapter 224, Zoning, measured from the right-of-way
line.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured at a point four and
one-half (4 1/2) feet from the ground surface at the center of the base of
the tree for all existing trees greater than 12 inches in diameter; and at
a point six inches from the ground surface at the center of the base of
the tree for all street trees or shade trees to be planted in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
CAPPED SEWERS — Sanitary sewage facilities which are installed and
capped where existing sanitary sewer facilities are not accessible and
available but are proposed in the Official Sewage Facilities Plan of the
city. Such facilities shall include sanitary sewers, force mains, pumping
stations and all other appurtenances necessary to serve the entire
subdivision and/or land development.
CARTWAY — That street or alley within which vehicles are permitted,
including travel lanes but not including shoulders, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks or drainage swales.
CATCH BASIN — An inlet which has a sump below the pipe to collect
debris and is designed to intercept and redirect surface waters.
CENTER LINE OF STREET OR ROAD OR ALLEY — A line equidistant
from and parallel to the street, right-of-way or property lines on each
side of the street or road or alley.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A statement signed by the Code
Enforcement Officer setting forth that a building, structure or use
legally complies with Chapter 224, Zoning, and other applicable codes
and regulations and that the same may be used for the purposes stated
therein.
CHANNEL — An area which conveys the normal continuous or
intermittent flow of water.
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:573
CHECKLIST — Forms available from the City Manager (included in the
Appendix of this chapter) which are to be used to provide information
relative to the completeness of the subdivision and/or land development
plan submission.
CITY ENGINEER — A professional engineer (P.E.) licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for
the city or a firm of such engineers employed by the city or retained as
a consultant thereto.
CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE —
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of street center lines.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Any part of a development used jointly by
the occupants of the development, including but not limited to open
space, recreation facilities, roadways, parking areas, storage buildings
and maintenance facilities.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area
of water or a combination of land and water within a development
site, designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas
set aside for public facilities.
COMMON PARKING — Any parking area used by three or more
dwelling units and having space for six or more motor vehicles.
COMMUNITY FACILITIES — The services which provide for various
community health, education, safety, leisure and like needs and the
locations at which these services are provided. Typical "community
facilities" include schools, parks and recreation areas, libraries,
hospitals and other health-care facilities, fire protection, police,
ambulance and rescue service and postal services.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system, whether
publicly or privately owned, for the collection of sewage of a liquid
nature from two or more lots and the treatment and/or disposal of the
For local streets and alleys: the longest line of unobstructed vision
along a street cartway from a point three and one-half (3 1/2) feet
above the center line of the street to the top of an object six inches
high on the same center line (object sight distance).
(1)
For all other streets and alleys: the longest line of unobstructed
vision along a street cartway from a point three and one-half (3 1/
2) feet above the center line to an object four and one-quarter (4 1/
4) inches above the pavement (vehicle sight distance).
(2)
AASHTO's A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets,
latest edition, shall govern all sight distance situations, unless
the city requires more stringent control to improve known or
potentially hazardous conditions.
(3)
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:574
sewage on one or more of the lots or at any other site for final disposal
in whole or in part into the soil.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — An individual well or series
thereof serving more than one lot or more than one building which,
along with its appurtenant facilities, is administered and maintained by
such private organizations as a homeowners' association, community
association or other like organization or agency and in compliance with
the prevailing federal, state and county regulations, as well as those of
any entity which may have a permitted franchise within the city.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — Constitutes the requisite number of
plans, all supplementary information, data and documents, together
with a completed and signed application form provided by the city and
the appropriate filing fee as required by this chapter.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The City of Coatesville Comprehensive
Plan, as may be amended from time to time, including maps, tables and
text, which constitutes a policy guide for decisions regarding land use,
circulation, community facilities and utilities within the city.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which may not be appropriate to a
particular zoning district as a whole but which may be suitable in
certain locations within the district only when express standards and
criteria are met by the applicant, who shall have the burden of proving
that the standards and criteria can be satisfied. "Conditional uses" are
approved or denied by the City Council after recommendations by the
Planning Commission.
CONDOMINIUM — Any dwelling unit, regardless of dwelling type,
which has all of the following characteristics:
CONSTRUCTION — Any disturbance of the land or the erection of
structures thereon, including the cutting of trees or clearing of brush;
provided, however, that staking or the clearing for survey lines or
performing engineering or other scientific tests to obtain data shall not
be deemed as construction.
CONTINUOUS VISUAL BUFFER — A visually impenetrable screen
created through the effective use of plant materials, fencing, walls and/
or earthen berms.
The unit (the interior and associated exterior areas designated for
private use in the development plan) is owned by the occupant.
(1)
All or a portion of the exterior open space and any community
interior spaces are owned and maintained in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980, as amended,183
and in accordance with the provisions of open space, streets or
other development features in Chapter 224, Zoning, and this
chapter.
(2)
183. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101.
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:575
CONTOUR — An invisible line on the surface of the earth along which
all points are at the same elevation above sea level. Such lines are
represented on maps relative to data furnished by such agencies as
the United States Geological Survey (USGS) or other organizations duly
certified to produce such information.
CONVERSION(S) — The change of a use of a building or structure or
the intensity or density of the use, building or structure.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way or easement for pedestrian travel across
or within a block.
CUL-DE-SAC — A single-access street intersecting a through street at
one end and terminating in a permanent vehicular turnaround at the
other end.
CULTURAL ENVIRONMENT — A representation of man's influence
on land and/or water through the use, organization, adornment and
maintenance of property and structures.
CULVERT — A structure designed to convey water under a street, alley,
sidewalk or other pedestrian walk.
CURB — A stone or concrete boundary marking the edge of the cartway
or paved area.
CUT — A portion of land or other area from which earth has been
removed or will be removed by excavation or the depth below the
original ground surface or excavated surface.
DATE OF FILING — The date on which a complete application for
subdivision and/or land development has been submitted to the City
Manager and accepted by the city.
DATUM — A reference point from which elevations are measured.
The standard "datum" is sea level as established by the United States
Geological Survey (USGS).
DBH (denoting "diameter at breast height") — The measurement of a
tree at a point four and one-half (4 1/2) feet above the average grade at
the base of a tree.
DECELERATION LANE — An added roadway lane that permits vehicles
to slow down and leave the main vehicular flow.
DECK — A structure, typically made of wood, which serves as an
outdoor patio-like space in the rear or on the side of a building.
DEDICATION — A gift or other donation of property by the owner
thereof to the city or other entity.
DEED — A legal document conveying an estate or other right, title or
interest in property.
DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS — Characteristics related to the
distribution, density and vital statistics of populations.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Standards appearing in Article VIII.
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:576
DETENTION BASIN — A structure designed, built and used to retard
surface water runoff for a period of time sufficient to cause the
deposition of sediment and to reduce the rate of runoff leaving a site to
the predevelopment rate.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, equitable owner, authorized agent of
such landowner or tenant with permission of such landowner who
makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land
development.
DEVELOPMENT — The construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure; any
mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; or any use or extension
of the use of land.
DISABLED (HANDICAPPED) ACCESS — Access provided in the form
of a ramp, curb cut or other gradually sloped surface to accommodate
pedestrian travel, in accordance with the prevailing regulations of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
DITCH — A small drainage channel.
DIVERSION TERRACE — Channel or ditch and a ridge constructed
across a sloping land surface on the contour or with predetermined
grades to intercept and divert surface runoff before it gains sufficient
volume and velocity to create harmful erosion.
DRAINAGE — A system for conveying stormwater runoff, surface water
or groundwater from the land by facilities or structures which serve
to control or otherwise manage runoff and minimize sedimentation and
soil erosion during and after construction or development.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted to use private land
to facilitate the flow of water as deemed necessary by the city within
which the owner shall erect no permanent structures but may use the
land in any other way not inconsistent with the grantee's rights.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any trench, ditch, swale, gutter, pipe, culvert,
storm sewer or other similar depression or structure designed,
intended or constructed for the purpose of controlling stormwater
runoff within a subdivision or conveying stormwater runoff or
groundwater within and away from a subdivision, land development
area or contiguous areas.
DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan which depicts existing and proposed
drainage as required by this chapter.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any watercourse or trench, ditch, swale, gutter,
piped flow or other similar depression or structure in which water flows
in a definite direction either continuously or intermittently and has a
definite channel, bed and banks and includes any area adjacent thereto
subject to inundation by reason of overflow.
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:577
DRIVEWAY — A gravel or paved surface on a lot which provides access
for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other structure
from a street or alley.
DRIVEWAY (LANE) — A private means of vehicle access from a public
or private street or alley to a single lot; provided, however, that two
contiguous lots may share a common "driveway" where the applicable
requirements of this chapter and Chapter 224, Zoning, are complied
with on each lot.
DRIVEWAY, SHARED — A commonly shared or used gravel or paved
way on a lot, which provides access for vehicles to a maximum of two
dwellings or other structures from a street or alley.
DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied exclusively for
residential purposes, including a mobile home.
DWELLING UNIT — A residential building or portion thereof, forming
a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family.
EARTHMOVING ACTIVITY — Land disturbance activity resulting in the
movement of earth or stripping of vegetative cover from the earth.
EASEMENT — A right, privilege or other interest granted or reserved
for the use of land for a particular purpose; the land to which such right
or privilege pertains.
ECONOMIC AND FISCAL CHARACTERISTICS — Characteristics
related to the expenditures and revenues in conjunction with the
management of income of a household, private business, community,
association and/or government.
EGRESS — An exit.
END LINE — The line which represents the termination area of a
shared driveway.
ENGINEER — A person duly registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to practice professional engineering.
ELEVATION — A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference
level or a scale drawing of the front, rear or side of a building.
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building,
an increase in size of another existing structure or an increase in that
portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.
ENVIRONMENT — The conditions, resources and/or characteristics
which exist within and surround the area to be affected by a proposed
subdivision and/or land development, including natural elements, such
as land, water, air, minerals, natural flora and natural fauna; and manmade
components, such as objects of historic or aesthetic significance
infrastructure, and man-related attributes of a social and economic
nature.
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:578
EXCAVATION — Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil,
rock, minerals, mineral substances or organic substances other than
vegetation from water or land or beneath the surface thereof, whether
exposed or submerged.
FENCE — A structure typically placed on or near property lines to
define the edge of a yard and/or to contain a use and/or to visually
screen a use.
FILED or DULY FILED — The complete submission of a preliminary
or final plan with the proper forms, plans, documents and other
submissions and fees as required by this chapter, according to the
timetable set forth herein.
FILL — Material, such as sand, gravel, earth and other suitable and
approved composition, or any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or
moved to a new location above the natural surface of the ground or on
top of a stripped or otherwise cut surface.
FLOOD — The general and temporary inundation or partial and
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of
streams, rivers, watercourses or other inland water from any source.
FLOOD (ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR) — A flood that, on the average, is
likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance
of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area, adjoining a creek,
stream or other watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete
inundation; an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or
runoff of surface waters from any source. The "floodplain" shall include,
but is not limited to, the area of the Floodplain Conservation Overlay
District as per Chapter 224, Zoning.
FLOODING — A general or temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of areas from the overflow of inland waters and/or the
unusual and rapid accumulation of water on or under the ground.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry
and discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of
this chapter, the "floodway" shall be capable of accommodating a flood
of the one-hundred-year magnitude.
FLOODWAY FRINGE — The area as described in Chapter 224, Zoning,
and delineated on the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District Map.
FRONTAGE — The length of any one property line of a lot, which
property line abuts a street line, ordinarily regarded as the front of the
lot. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots,
all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered front lot lines
and subject to the applicable yard requirements.
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:579
GRADE — The slope of a street, road or other installation expressed as
a percent or the elevation of existing, finished or proposed conditions
as hereinafter defined.
GRADE, EXISTING — The elevation, relative to a given datum, of the
ground surface prior to any excavation, cut or fill.
GRADE, FINISHED — The elevation, relative to a given datum, of the
ground surface after completion of any excavation, cut or fill.
GRADE, PROPOSED — The elevation, relative to a given datum, of the
ground surface proposed to be achieved by excavation, cut or fill.
GRADING — The changing of the surface of the ground by cutting,
filling or excavation, including land in its cut or filled condition.
GROSS ACREAGE — The acreage of a lot within the title lines.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or
from the center line of a common wall separating two buildings, but not
including interior parking spaces, loading spaces for motor vehicles or
any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of geologic structures
and rock or soil interstices which have the capacity to store water or
permit the transfer of water to a geologic storage area.
GUARANTY, COMPLETION — The financial security that may be
accepted by the city as a guaranty that improvements required as
part of an application for subdivision and/or land development are
completed to the satisfaction of the city.
GUARANTY, MAINTENANCE — The financial security that may be
accepted by the city as a guaranty that improvements required as part
of an application for subdivision and/or land development will be in
first-class condition, state of repair and working order for a specific
period of time. Such financial security shall be similar to that accepted
for a completion guaranty.
GUTTER — That portion within a street right-of-way, outside the
cartway, designed for surface drainage, whether paved or otherwise.
HEDGE — An alignment of plant material typically used to define a
yard and/or contain a use and/or to screen a use. Typical "hedges" in
Coatesville are privet "hedges."
HISTORIC RESOURCE(S) — All structures and uses which are
designated as Class I, II or III in accordance with Chapter 224, Zoning.
HISTORIC SITE — Buildings, structures and areas which are on the
National Register of Historic Places or on the State Inventory of
Historic Places and are valued due to their significance as example and/
or locations of events, customs, skills and/or arts of the past, including
those having a present significance.
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:580
HYDRIC SOILS — A soil that formed under saturated conditions. See
the Appendix for list of hydric soils in the city.
IMPACT — The power of an event to produce changes in a condition.
In the context of "impact" exerted on the environment, changes which
affect the existing conditions and/or quality are of greatest concern.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT — A report prepared in accordance with
§ 197-77 herein, which describes the adverse impacts which could be
exerted by a proposed subdivision or land development and the
mitigation measures to be employed to reduce or lessen the potential
adverse impacts.
IMPACT MITIGATION PLAN — A plan which depicts measures to
mitigate adverse impacts described in an impact assessment report,
such as traffic controls, landscaping (screening or buffering), the use
of retaining walls to save trees, the use of stormwater management
techniques to control flooding and the like.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which has materials that do not
normally absorb rainfall or surface water, such as buildings, paved
parking areas, paved walks and similar surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A body of water, such as a pond or detention or
retention basin, confined by a headwall, dike, floodgate or other barrier,
in the nature of a dam.
IMPROVEMENT — The act of creating improvements.
IMPROVEMENT(S) — Physical additions and changes to land, such as
grading, paving, curbing, fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers,
capped sewers, storm sewers, storm drains, catch basins, culverts,
sidewalks, monuments, crosswalks, bridges, earthworks, streetlights,
wells, on-site sewage disposal systems, street trees and other plantings
and other structures, that may be necessary to produce usable and
desirable land development.
IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT — A list of improvements approved
by the city which the landowner or developer agrees to install as a
prerequisite to final plan approval.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct the flow
of rain into storage in geologic structures, e.g., French drains, seepage
beds, seepage trenches and the like.
INFRASTRUCTURE — The basic installations and facilities on which
the continuance and growth of a community depend, such as roads,
schools, electrical transmission facilities, transportation and
communication systems.
INGRESS — An entrance.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A public or quasi-public use, such as a school,
church, museum or other similar nonprofit entity.
INTERIOR LOT — See "lot, interior."
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:581
INTERIOR WALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian travel across or
within a block, having a minimum width of 10 feet.
INVERT — The lowest visible surface of a drainage conduit or channel.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A sketch, preliminary or final plan,
submitted in compliance with the requirements of this Subdivision and
Land Development Chapter, showing the provision for development of
a tract of land. See also, "subdivision plan."
LANDOWNER — The record holder of legal title to land; the rightful
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such
option or contract is subject to any condition); a lessee if he or she
is authorized expressly under the lease to exercise the rights of the
owner; or other person having a proprietary interest of the land which
is the subject of an application for subdivision and/or land development.
LAND PLANNER — A design professional who is recognized as a
certified planner by the American Institute of Certified Planners, an
Institute of the American Planning Association.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A design professional duly registered by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to practice landscape architecture.
LANDSCAPED AREA or LANDSCAPED BUFFER — That portion of a
tract or lot in which plantings have been installed in accordance with
the landscaping requirements of Article VIII. The "landscaped area"
includes the buffer planting strip, as well as plantings which serve a
functional and/or aesthetic purpose when located around and between
buildings, roads, parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, sitting areas,
service or maintenance structures, courtyards and the like.
LANDSCAPING — The installations which result from the
implementation of a landscape plan and the landscaping requirements
of § 197-50, including such assets as trees, shrubs, paving, fences,
walls, hedges, berms and the like.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:582
LAND USE — The use to which land is used, arranged and the like
typically expressed in terms of the type of activity or development
which exists, such as agricultural, residential, municipal and the like,
whether such use is principal or accessory.
LOAD-BEARING FILL — Any facility, earthwork or fill placed in a
controlled manner and compacted to support structural foundations
and the buildings and other structures thereon, vehicular traffic or
improvements in accordance with the highest standards of professional
engineering.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET — A space, accessible from a street or
way, in a building or on a lot, for the temporary use of vehicles while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LONG-TERM EFFECTS — Results which are manifest for or extending
over a long period of time.
LOT — A contiguous area of land held or to be held in one ownership
separately described by metes and bounds and not divided by a street,
not including any land within the limits of a street right-of-way upon
which said lot abuts, even if such right-of-way is maintained by the
owner of the lot; a designated parcel, tract or area of land established
by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and recorded in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County by deed description.
LOT AREA — The area enclosed by the property lines of a lot as
herein defined exclusive of the rights-of-way of dedicated streets, fire
lanes, rights-of-way or easements proposed for dedication or public
utility easements other than those directly servicing the lot; provided,
however, that the area of land comprised by any additional road rightsof-
way which the City Council may require shall not be subtracted when
computing a minimum lot area.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more
streets, including shared driveways, or upon two parts of the same
street, including shared driveways, forming an interior angle of less
than 135º.
LOT COVERAGE — The ratio of the total building area, plus any
impervious surfaces and pervious surfaces used for parking, to the
gross acreage of the lot.
LOT DEPTH — The distance along a straight line drawn from the
midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line. In
the case of the corner lot, the "lot depth" shall be achieved along the
longest dimension of the lot.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot which does not adjoin a street but is connected
thereto by an access strip of the required minimum width. Minimum
lot area and other dimensional requirements shall be those of the
applicable zoning district and shall be met on that portion of the lot
exclusive of the access strip.
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:583
LOT LINE — A legally recorded property boundary line. In the case of
any lot abutting a street, the "lot line" for the portion of the lot abutting
the street shall be deemed to be the same as the street line and shall
not be the center line of the street or any other line within the street
line.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from the street rightof-
way. For interior lots, the "lot line, front," is the line generally parallel
to the street right-of-way at the nearest point to the right-of-way where
the lot attains substantially the minimum required lot width.
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines at the
required building setback line. When there is only one side lot line, as
in the case of two-family or single-family attached dwellings, the "lot
width" shall be measured between the side lot line and the center line
of the party wall of the end dwelling unit. In the case of a corner lot, the
"lot width" shall be measured between the side lot line and the front lot
line opposite.
METES AND BOUNDS — A method of describing the boundaries of
land by directions or bearings and distances from a known point of
reference, including the content of the land and each lot in square feet
and acres and fractions thereof.
MITIGATION — The act of precluding a potentially adverse effect and/
or making a potentially adverse effect less severe through measures
which will improve a condition and/ or lessen the impact.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erections thereon of a single mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MONUMENTS and MARKERS — Structures which mark and identify
lot lines and street lines or corners of lots and streets in accordance
with Article VIII.
MULTIPLE-DWELLING BUILDINGS — A building providing separate
living quarters for three or more families.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — See Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code (MPC).184
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:584
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT — A composition of land, water and/or air
represented by its inherent physical and biological resources.
NATURAL FEATURES — Physical and biological resources manifest in
land or water, such as wetlands, springs, ponds, streams, soils, rock,
slopes, trees and other vegetation.
NEIGHBORHOOD BLOCK/TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD BLOCK —
A section of the City of Coatesville as delineated on the Coatesville
Historic District Map in Appendix C of this chapter, that has the pattern
and form which is typical to the city, including buildings placed at a
build-to line, front porches (which are unenclosed) and a small front
yard which is landscaped.
NET ACREAGE — The acreage of a lot, excluding any area within
existing or designated future road rights-of-way, existing utility rightsof-
way and access strips for interior lots, or other areas as defined
under "lot area."
NET FLOOR AREA — The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular
parking or loading and all floors below the first or ground floor, except
when used or intended to be used for human habitation or service to
the public.
NOTABLE TREES — Trees of twelve-inch caliper or greater which are
within a woodland or forest area or are freestanding.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article IV
of the MPC, as amended.185
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — The plan adopted by the
city and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources, which sets forth recommendations for the provision of
adequate sewage systems in the city in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537.186
ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL — A single system of piping, septic tanks
or other facilities serving a single lot, collecting and disposing of
sewage into the soil on the lot where such system is used through septic
tank filter fields and in compliance with the prevailing federal, state,
county and municipal regulations.
ON-SITE WATER SUPPLY — An individual well on the lot where the well
services one lot and/or water supply on a lot occupied or to be occupied
serving a permitted building and in compliance with the prevailing
federal, state and county regulations.
PNDI SITE — A site listed on the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity
Inventory (PNDI) , due to its biological resource value, the regulations
for which are addressed under § 197-51. PNDI is a comprehensive
184. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
185. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
186. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:585
computerized inventory of Pennsylvania's most significant natural
areas. The database, which is maintained by the Department of
Environment Protection, contains the status and location of plants,
animals, geological landmarks, natural communities and other natural
features considered exemplary, unique, rare or endangered in the
state.187
PARKING LOT — A paved area for five or more motor vehicles which
serves as a temporary location for the vehicles when not in use/transit.
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space, available for the
temporary parking of one motor vehicle, exclusive of passageways,
driveways or other means of circulation or access. A "parking space"
shall include either covered garage spaces or uncovered parking lot
space. The size of "parking spaces" shall be as required in Article VIII.
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS — Open spaces which are used
for leisure pursuits in the form of a playground, playfield, tot-lot, fitness
trail, pathway or like amenity.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of water at a given
point and time resulting from a predetermined storm.
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC) —
Pennsylvania Act 247 of 1968 (P.L.805), as amended 6-23-1982 (P.L.
613, 173) and further amended by Act 170 of 1988, also cited as 53
P.S. § 10101 et seq., or any subsequent act of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania which replaces, supplements or repeals any or all of the
provisions of Act 247.
PERMEABLE — Porous and/or pervious to water or other liquids.
PHYSICAL RESOURCES — Characteristics of the natural environment
manifest in its landforms, soils, geological structure of surface and/
or man-made impoundments, watercourses, groundwater and the like.
The disposition of these characteristics is typically expressed in
physiographic, topographic and/or hydrologic units, such as rock
formations, slopes, elevations, soil types, watersheds, surface water
types, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers or aquifer recharge areas and the
like.
PLAN — A draft, diagram or drawing or set thereof showing the present
and proposed physical features of and improvement to land and the
proposed development thereto; see also Article III for classification and
procedures for "plans." The term "plan" includes profiles, cross-sections
and the like.
PLAN, AS-BUILT — A plan prepared by a surveyor or engineer, showing
dimensions and locations of all improvements as actually constructed.
PLAN, CONSTRUCTION IMPROVEMENT — A plan prepared by a
registered professional engineer or registered landscape architect,
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:586
showing the construction details of streets, sewers, drainage, bridges
and other required improvements.
PLAN, FINAL — A subdivision plan and/or land development plan
prepared for official recording purposes, depicting all features required
in Articles VI and VII and all plans, documents and submissions
required therein.
PLAN, LAND DEVELOPMENT — See "land development plan."
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A subdivision and/or land development plan
filed as a basis for consideration and approval prior to preparation of a
final plan depicting all features required in Articles V and VII, including
an improvements construction plan, conservation plan and all other
plans, documents and submissions required therein.
PLAN, PROFILE — A plan prepared by an engineer, architect or
landscape architect, showing the vertical section of the existing grade
and proposed grade along the center line of any proposed street and
any street appurtenances to be constructed or installed, which must
include cross-sections of the street and other improvements
construction.
PLAN, RECORD — A final plan prepared for recording by an engineer or
surveyor, showing the ultimate width of streets or alleys, the lot lines,
easements, existing structures, streams, floodplains, building setback
lines and the original required endorsements of the city and any other
relevant information pertaining to a subdivision and/or land
development as required by this chapter.
PLAN, SITE DEVELOPMENT — See "site development plan."
PLAN, SKETCH — A schematic plan indicating topographic, vegetative
and other salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings and
the general layout of the proposed subdivision and/or land development
in sufficient detail to allow for disclosure of all significant review
matters prior to the filing of a preliminary plan for a proposed
subdivision and/or land development.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a
number of dwelling units or combination of residential and
nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not
correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling or use, density, or intensity,
lot coverage and required open space to the regulations established
in any one district created, from time to time, under the provisions of
Chapter 224, Zoning.
PLANTINGS; PLANTING SCREEN — Trees, shrubs and ground covers
which are installed and maintained in accordance with a landscaping
plan as set forth in Article VIII.
PLAT — A map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries
and location of individual properties and streets. A map or plan of a
subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or final.
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:587
PORCH — An accessory structure attached to a building, typically
on the front or side and typically unenclosed but with a roof, which
provides cover and shade, as well as a change in the scale of a building
to serve as a better transition for the height of the building relative to
the front yard, sidewalk and streetscape.
PRIMARY EFFECTS — Results of a direct nature which have a principal
influence on a particular condition or state.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes the following: parks, playgrounds,
trails, paths and other recreational areas and public areas; sites for
schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly operated
facilities; and publicly owned or operated historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the City Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and
obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second publication
shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Any system, other than
an on-lot sewage disposal system, which is administered and operated
by a governmental agency, authority or commission for the collection,
conveyance, treatment and disposal of wastes from customers, in
compliance with prevailing federal, state and municipal regulations.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — Any system for water distribution and
water supply, other than an on-lot water supply system, which is owned,
administered and operated by an organization which is regulated by a
governmental agency, authority or commission.
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Outdoor recreation activities which are
intensive in nature, both in terms of participation and in use of the
land or facility where such activity takes place. "Active recreation"
usually involves a group or groups of participants and requires some
knowledge or skill for adequate participation.
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Outdoor recreation activities for individuals
or small groups which are usually performed in a natural setting with
minimal site preparation and facilities.
REGULARLY SCHEDULED PUBLIC MEETING — A meeting of the
Planning Commission which is open to the public and is advertised,
during which various items of business are reviewed and discussed at
regular, scheduled intervals throughout the year.
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:588
RESTRICTION — A limitation on property which may be created in a
deed; lease; mortgage; through certain zoning, subdivision or other city
codes, ordinances, regulations, plans or maps; or conditions of approval
of an application for subdivision and/or land development.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT — A restriction on the use and enjoyment of
land usually set forth in the deed.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division of lots or the relocation of
lot lines of any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and
approved or recorded or the alteration of any streets or alleys or the
establishment of any new streets or alleys within any such subdivision.
"Resubdivision" does not include conveyances made so as to combine
entire existing lots by deed or other instrument.
RETAINING WALL — A wall which retains soil or land and serves as a
grade transition.
RETENTION BASIN — A reservoir, formed from soil or other material,
which is designed to retain permanently a certain amount of
stormwater from a catchment area and which also may be designed
to detain temporarily additional stormwater runoff from the catchment
area. "Retention basins" also may receive freshwater from year-round
streams. "Retention basins" always contain water and thus may be
considered man-made ponds.
REUSE — A use for an existing building or parcel or lot of land other
than the use for which it was originally intended or made.
REVIEW — An examination of the sketch, preliminary and/or final plan
by the City Planning Commission, City Engineer, other city officials,
representatives and bodies and the City Council to determine
compliance with this chapter and its regulations, design standards and
all other city ordinances, codes, regulations, plans or maps.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land granted or reserved for public or
private use.
ROAD — A type of street and has the same meaning as such.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution or the water-carried waste resulting
from the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing machines,
sinks, dishwashers or any other source of water-carried waste of human
origin.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe that conveys sanitary sewage.
SCALE — The relationship between distances on a map and the actual
ground distances.
SCREEN PLANTING — The plantings which are used in a buffer
planting strip or other landscaping arrangement to create a continuous
visual buffer.
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:589
SCREENING — The use of plant materials, fencing, walls and/or
earthen berms, or combinations thereof, to aid in the concealment of
such features as parking areas and vehicles within them and to provide
privacy between two or more different land uses or activities; a visual
and/or sound buffer or other barrier.
SECONDARY EFFECTS — Results of an indirect nature which have
an influence on a particular condition or state derived from a primary
effect.
SECTION — An area or tract which is part of a proposed planned
residential development which will be developed according to a
timetable for development over a period of years included by the
applicant in the development plan.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of
origin by water.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A retention or detention basin located and
designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt and other stormwater
transported material through trapping, screening, settling, etc.
SEPTIC SYSTEM — An underground system with a septic tank and
filter field used for the decomposition of domestic wastes and its safe
disposal.
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle that receives the discharge
of sewage from a building, sewer or part thereof and is designed and
constructed so as to permit settling of solids from this liquid, digestion
of the organic matter and discharge of the liquid portion into a disposal
area.
SEPTIC TANK FILTER FIELD — A system of open jointed pipes
intended to distribute septic tank effluent into the ground for
absorption and evaporation.
SETBACK LINE — That line that is the required minimum distance
from the ultimate right-of-way of a street line or any other lot line that
establishes the area within which any permitted use must be erected or
placed. (See "building setback line.")
SEWAGE — The total of organic waste and wastewater generated
by residential, industrial, commercial, institutional or other
establishments.
SEWERAGE — All effluent carried by sewers, whether it is sanitary
sewage, residential, commercial or industrial wastes or stormwater
runoff, or the entire system of sewage collection, conveyance,
treatment and disposal.
SEWERED AREA — That portion of the city designated in the Official
Sewage Facilities Plan in which there is or may be constructed a public
sewer system.
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:590
SHADE TREE — A woody plant, usually deciduous, which normally
grows with one main trunk and has a canopy which screens and filters
the sun in the summer and winter, respectively.
SHORT-TERM EFFECTS — Results which occur immediately or within
a short period of time, such as a week.
SIDEWALK — A paved, surfaced or leveled area, paralleling and
separated from the cartway of the street or alley, used as a pedestrian
walkway.
SIGN — A visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing
the subject thereof to the attention of others. "Signs" include letters,
numbers, symbols, trademarks, illustrations or designs as they may
appear on signs, billboards, banners, storefronts, marquees, canopies
and other stationary locations on or off the premises of the activity to
which the message pertains.
SILT — Finely divided particles of soil or rock, often carried in cloudy
suspension in water and eventually deposited as sediment.
SINGLE-ACCESS STREET — See "street, single-access."
SITE — A tract or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots on a
tract which form an area for a development project.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan illustrating the proposed
development of a property.
SOIL EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments or the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind and
ice.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — A plan and
related narrative report required in accordance with Article VIII.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test in accordance with criteria
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Sewage Enforcement Officer conducted to determine the suitability of
the soil for on-site sewage disposal facilities and infiltration structures
by measuring the absorptive capacity of the soil at a given location and
depth.188
SOIL SURVEY — A report entitled, Soil Survey, Chester and Delaware
Counties, Pennsylvania, published May 1963 by the United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, and updated
from time to time.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse or other discarded materials,
including, but not limited to, nonliquid waste materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, institutional, agricultural and residential
activities.
SPECIMEN TREE — A shade tree or street tree.
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:591
STAGE — A section or sections of which an applicant proposes to
commence development at the same time, as part of a timetable for
development of any development over a period of years.
STEEP SLOPE(S) — Those areas of land which are characterized by a
change in elevation of 15% or more but not exceeding 25% over the
specified distance or contour as specified in Article VIII.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries stormwater, surface water
and groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and residential,
commercial and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Water which surfaces, flows or collects during and
subsequent to rain or snowfall.
STORMWATER DETENTION — Any storm drainage technique that
retards or detains runoff, in rate, volume or otherwise, such as a
detention or retention basin, parking lot storage, rooftop storage,
porous pavement, dry wells or any combination thereof.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan for controlling surface
water runoff so that it will preclude erosion or flooding and/or the
adverse effects of impervious areas on surface water runoff as required
by the city codes, ordinances, regulations, plans and maps.
STREAM — Any perennial current or flow of water, especially one
running along the surface of the earth.
STREET — A public or privately owned right-of-way abutting and
furnishing access to more than one lot and serving primarily as a means
of motor vehicle travel; also used to provide space for installation
of improvements, such as sewers, other utilities, street trees and
sidewalks.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the outside
boundary or right-of-way line of a street, alley or highway legally open
or officially platted or between a lot and a privately owned street or
alley.
STREET, LOCAL — A street intended to serve a principal role in
collecting traffic from and between residential neighborhoods and
other areas within the city.
STREET, LOCAL, CUL-DE-SAC — See "cul-de-sac."
STREET, PRIVATE — A street not offered or required to be offered for
dedication or a street not duly accepted by the City Council as a public
street but nevertheless designed to public street standards.
STREET, SINGLE-ACCESS — A street which is either a cul-de-sac or a
dead-end or a stub street.
STREET TREE — A shade tree within a street right-of-way in
accordance with Article VIII. "Street trees" recommended for use
within the city are listed in the Appendix of this chapter.
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:592
STRIPPING — Cutting or any other activity which removes the
vegetative surface cover, such as tree removal, clearing, grubbing and
removal of topsoil.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in or addition to the
supporting or structural members of a structure, such as the bearing
walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any change which could
convert an existing structure into a different structure or adapt the
structure to a different use.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object or improvement having an
ascertainable stationary location on land or in the water, whether or not
affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, conveyance or other transfer of
ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
"subdivision" by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
of any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION PLAN — A sketch, preliminary or final plan, submitted in
compliance with this chapter showing the provision for the subdivision
of a tract of land. See also "land development plan."
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the City
Engineer, at least 90% of those improvements required as a condition
of final plan approval have been completed in accordance with the
approved plan, so that the project will be able to be used, occupied or
operated for its intended us. (Ninety percent shall be determined based
on the cost of the required improvements for which financial security is
posted pursuant to Article IX.)
SURVEYOR — A person duly registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to practice surveying.
SWALE — An elongated depression in the ground which collects and
channels surface water runoff.
TENURE — The form of occupancy of a unit, i.e., fee simple sale, rental,
condominium, cooperative, etc.
THROUGH LOT — A lot that abuts a street on two sides, which are
opposite or not adjacent.
TRACT — An area, lot, parcel, site or property which is the subject of a
subdivision and/or land development application.
TRANSPORTATION (CIRCULATION) — A system for the movement of
people or goods, including conveyers, such as streets or alleys, and
highways; accessory facilities, such as parking facilities and driveways;
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:593
and attributes of conveyance, such as traffic volumes, trip generation
and traffic controls.
TREE MASS — A natural contiguous grouping of trees.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is proposed
to be subdivided and/or developed or is otherwise designed, arranged,
intended or for which it is proposed or may be occupied or maintained.
"Uses" may include those which are accessory, conditional, permitted
principal (by-right) and/or special exception, as regulated in Chapter
224, Zoning.
UTILITIES — Facilities, such as sewers, water mains, fire hydrants,
streetlights and other facilities of the same general character;
installations of a community which pertain to their consumption and
emission characteristics, including facilities, such as those used for
water supply, sewage disposal, refuse disposal, storm drainage,
communications and electrical transmission.
VERY STEEP SLOPE(S) — The area of land which is characterized by
a change in elevation of 25% or more over the specified distance or
contour as specified in Article VIII.
VISUAL RESOURCES — Characteristics of the natural and/or cultural
environment which are visible. The "visual resources" of a particular
area are typically expressed in terms of their visibility, character and/or
attractiveness relative to their amenity value and/or quality or lack of
it.
WALKWAY — A thoroughfare for pedestrian travel.
WATER CONNECTION — Consists of all pipes, fittings, and
appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the
distribution system within the mobile home.
WATERCOURSE — A stream, such as a creek, run or other body of
running water, in which water flows in a definite direction or course,
either continuously or intermittently.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and the
use of groundwater and surface water resources within the city.
WETLANDS — Areas with hydric soils that are inundated or saturated
by surface and/or ground water which support hydrophytic vegetation,
such as swamps, bogs, marshes and the like, such areas being
regulated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.189
WETLANDS MARGIN — The transitional area extending from the outer
limit of the wetland. For the purposes of this chapter, the "wetlands
margin" shall extend 100 feet from the wetland boundary or to the limit
of the hydric soils, whichever is less.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 197-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-8
197:594
WOODLAND and FOREST — Those areas of extensive vegetation in
which the dominant plants are trees that are indigenous to the area,
such areas being illustrated in the Open Space, Recreational and
Environmental Resources Plan. "Woodlands" shall be defined
specifically as one-fourth (1/4) acre or more of contiguous wooded land
where the largest trees measure at least six inches diameter at DBH
and are inclusive of the outer dripline of the trees or a grove of trees
forming a canopy where 10 or more trees measure at least six inches
DBH.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The City of Coatesville Zoning Ordinance, as
amended; Chapter 224 from the Code of the City of Coatesville.
B. Words not defined above shall have the meanings given in the
Municipalities Planning Code,190 Chapter 224, Zoning, or other city
codes and ordinances and, if not defined in the aforementioned
documents, the most recent edition of Webster's Unabridged
Dictionary.
190. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 197-8 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-8
197:595

ARTICLE III
Procedure
§ 197-9. General procedures.
A. Whenever any subdivision and/or land development is proposed and
before any permit for the erection of a building shall be granted, the
landowner or developer shall apply for and obtain approval of such
proposed subdivision and/or land development in accordance with the
procedures set forth herein for a preliminary plan and a final plan.
B. Whenever conditional use approval or a variance or a special exception
is required for any use proposed or inherent in any proposed
subdivision and/or land development, all applications therefor shall be
filed and all plans, documents and other submissions required to
accompany the same shall be filed with the City Council or Zoning
Hearing Board, whichever is applicable, prior to filing for review of a
preliminary plan for subdivision and/or land development approval.
C. Whenever the landowner or developer chooses to do so, a sketch plan
may be submitted in accordance with the procedures for same set forth
herein.
D. The applicant or his or her agent shall submit the required number of
prints and accompanying information for each subdivision and/or land
development plan to the City Manager 10 calendar days prior to the
City Council meeting at which the plan may be discussed and/or
reviewed.
E. Plans shall be accepted for review only when the application contains
all plan requirements: a fully completed application form, a completed
checklist (refer to the Appendix) and payment of fees in accordance
with the fee schedule adopted by resolution by the City Council. The
submission shall be reviewed by the City Manager or his or her
representative to determine whether the submission is complete. If the
submission is incomplete, the submission shall be returned to the
applicant.
F. Plans shall be referred to the Planning Commission for advisory review
prior to action by the City Council. Approval or disapproval by the City
Council shall be in accordance with the procedures specified in this
chapter and in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The City
Council shall act on plans and notify the parties involved of its action
within the time and in the manner as established by this chapter and
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. Each new or revised
preliminary or final plan requiring an additional review shall be
considered a new submission, and the requirements as to time of review
and accompanying data required for each new or revised plan shall be
as set forth in § 197-12K.
§ 197-9 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-9
197:597
§ 197-10. Classification of major or minor subdivisions and/or land
developments.
G. Whenever an application for a major subdivision and/or land
development is proposed which may effect adjacent municipalities,
reviews and reports from such municipalities may be solicited by the
city.
H. Two phases are required in the procedure for approval of subdivision
and/or land development plans: preliminary and final. These phases are
required to enable the Planning Commission and the City Council to
have an adequate opportunity to review the submission and to ensure
that all recommendations are reflected in the final plan and that all
ordinance requirements are addressed.
I. The table below indicates the required plans for the different types of
plan submissions.
Plan Approval Phase
Type of Submission Preliminary Final
Major subdivision Required Required
and/or land development Required Required
Minor subdivision Optional Required
J. The specific procedures for all plans shall be in accordance with
§§ 197-11, 197-12 and 197-13 and requirements in accordance with
Articles IV, V, VI and VII.
K. All plan submissions must be accompanied by the following:
Plan Approval Phase
Required Plans/ Reports/
Papers Preliminary Final
Title plan Optional Required
Conservation plan Required Required
Improvements construction
plan and profile(s) plan
Required Required
Construction detail plan Required Required
Stormwater management
report
Required (feasibility
demonstrated)
Required
(complete report)
Impact assessment report Required Required
A. Major and minor subdivisions and/or land developments.
(1) The determination of which subdivisions and/or land developments
are major or minor shall be made in accordance with the following
criteria:
§ 197-9 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-10
197:598
§ 197-11. Sketch plan.
A sketch plan for any proposed subdivision and/or land development, at
the option of the landowner or developer, may be submitted to the city
Major Subdivision and/or Land
Development
Minor Subdivision and/or
Land Development
Any project involving a special
exception, variance or conditional
use approval
Any project involving the
construction of a street or alley,
the widening of an existing street
or alley or the installation of
utilities
Any industrial use
Any project within the Floodplain
District
Commercial use 5,000 square
feet or greater (gross floor area)
Commercial use less than
5,000 square feet (gross floor
area)
Institutional use 10,000 square
feet or greater (gross floor
Institutional use less than
10,000 square feet (gross
area) floor area)
5 or more residential lots or
dwelling units, either as part of a
single subdivision or land
development or as a a cumulative
total over a 5-year period
4 residential lots or dwelling
units or less, provided that the
cumulative number of lots or
dwelling units over a 5-five
year period does not exceed 4
Outdoor recreational use
Residential conversions of 3
dwelling units or more
Residential conversions of 2
dwelling units or less
Residential conversion to mixed/
multiple uses (e.g., from all
residential to residential and
commercial)
Lot line changes for 3 or more
lots
Lot line changes for 2 lots, not
involving any activity which
would constitute a major
subdivision or land
development
Home occupations within an
accessory building detached from
the principal permitted
residential building
Home occupations within the
principal permitted residential
building
§ 197-10 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-11
197:599
for review. The submission of a sketch plan does not constitute submission
of an application for approval of a subdivision and/or land development
plan. However, it does represent a basis for an informal discussion between
the city and the landowner or developer which may prove to be valuable
to the prospective applicant in formulating plans, documents and other
submissions for preliminary plan approval. In the event that the landowner
or developer submits a sketch plan, the following shall apply:
A. The applicant shall submit the required fees, a sketch plan checklist
and 13 copies of the sketch plan to the City Manager at least 14 days
prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the plan may be
reviewed. The City Manager shall forward the required number of the
properly submitted sketch plan and required application form and
checklist to the agencies as designated below:
(1) One copy shall be retained by the City Manager for city files.
(2) One copy shall be forwarded to the City Engineer for review and
comment.
(3) One copy shall be forwarded to the City Council.
(4) Seven copies of the plan(s), documents and other submissions and
one copy of the application form shall be used for informal review
purposes by the Planning Commission.
(5) One copy shall be forwarded to the City Fire Marshal.
(6) One copy of the plan(s), documents and other submissions shall be
forwarded to the City Code Administrator and one copy of the same
to the Building Inspector for review and comment.
(7) One copy shall be available for referral to other planning agencies
or consultants.
B. In addition to furnishing copies of the sketch plan, the landowner or
developer shall identify the name, address and telephone number of the
holder of legal title to the land involved, the nature of the landowner's
interest in the land (whether holder of legal or equitable title or
otherwise) and the name, address and telephone number of the agent, if
any. Such information shall be provided in writing.
C. The city may submit a copy of the sketch plan to the Chester County
Planning Commission, which may provide an advisory recommendation
to the City Planning Commission.
D. The Planning Commission shall review the sketch plan and shall
indicate any and all review comments pertaining to the plan to the
landowner or developer by written correspondence.
E. The Planning Commission's review shall take into consideration the
requirements of this chapter and Chapter 224, Zoning, and pay
particular attention to the following: the arrangement, location and
§ 197-11 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-11
197:600
§ 197-12. Preliminary plan.
The preliminary subdivision and/or land development plan shall be prepared
in accordance with this chapter, including this Article and Articles V and
VII. When a preliminary plan is filed, the following shall apply:
width of streets and alleys and their relation to the topography of the
site; the arrangement, size and location of lots and proposed structures,
if any; drainage; sewage disposal and water supply; the relation of
the subdivision and/or land development to the natural features of
the site; the potential further development of adjoining lands which
may not yet be subdivided; the compatibility of the sketch plan with
the Comprehensive Plan; and the requirements set forth in Article IV
pertaining to the sketch plan submission.
F. Neither the Planning Commission, City Council nor the applicant shall
be bound by the sketch plan.
A. The applicant shall complete and sign the application form provided by
the city and shall accompany such application form with the type and
number of plans, preliminary plan checklist, documents and other
submissions required and the appropriate filing fee(s). The applicant
must identify the name, address and telephone number of the record
holder of legal title to the land involved (if different from the applicant),
the nature of the applicant's interest in the land (whether holder of
legal or equitable title or otherwise) and the name, address and
telephone number of the agent, if any. No application shall be deemed
filed unless all requirements have been met and all fees therefor paid in
full.
B. Sixteen black-line or blue-line prints of the plans forming the
preliminary plan and 14 neatly bound, clear and legible copies of all
required documents and other submissions shall be submitted to the
City Secretary to be distributed along with copies of the application
form as follows:
(1) One copy of the application form and other documents and one
copy of the plan(s) and profiles shall be retained by the City
Manager for city files.
(2) One copy of the application form and other documents and one
copy of the plan(s), documents and other submissions shall be
forwarded to the City Engineer for review and comment.
(3) One copy of the plan(s), documents and other submissions shall be
forwarded to the City Council.
(4) Seven copies of the plan(s) and seven copies of documents and
other submissions shall be used for review purposes by the
Planning Commission.
§ 197-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-12
197:601
(5) One copy of the plan and documents shall be forwarded to the City
Fire Marshal.
(6) One copy of the plan(s), documents and other submissions and one
copy of the application form shall be forwarded to the Chester
County Planning Commission for review and comment.
(7) One copy of the plan(s), documents and other submissions shall be
forwarded to the City Code Administrator and one copy of the same
to the Building Inspector for review and comment.
(8) Two copies of the plan and other documents and submissions shall
be available for referral to other planning agencies or consultants.
C. Where any one or a combination of the following items is involved,
additional sets of plans shall be required and submitted for the City
Engineer and to the city:
(1) Pumping stations.
(2) Sewage treatment plants.
(3) Public water supply systems.
(4) Traffic control systems.
D. The preliminary plan and application for subdivision and/or land
development shall be submitted at least 10 calendar days prior to the
regular monthly public meeting of the City Council. If deemed a
complete application, the preliminary plan shall be formally accepted
by the City Council and the ninety-day review period shall commence at
the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting following
the City Council meeting where formal acceptance was granted.
E. The City Engineer shall submit review comments on said plan by letter
or memorandum to the Planning Commission with copies to the City
Manager and the City Council.
F. The applicant shall notify the abutting owners that a preliminary plan
proposed for the subject tract has been filed. Such notification shall
occur at least 10 days prior to the meeting at which time the
preliminary plan is to be presented to and discussed by the Planning
Commission. Evidence of such notification in the form of a certified mail
receipt shall be presented to the Planning Commission at said meeting.
G. The city shall request the Chester County Planning Commission to
review the preliminary plan and submit an advisory recommendation
report to the City Planning Commission.
H. The City Planning Commission may perform the following:
(1) Review all applicable reports from the Chester County Planning
Commission, City Engineer, City Planning Consultant, City of
Coatesville Authority, Pennsylvania Department of Transportation,
§ 197-12 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-12
197:602
Chester County Conservation District and other reviewing
agencies.
(2) Discuss the submission with the applicant.
(3) Recommend revisions so that the plan will conform to city
ordinances.
I. The City Planning Commission shall perform the following:
(1) Determine whether the preliminary plan meets the requirements of
this chapter, Chapter 224, Zoning, and the Comprehensive Plan of
the city; and
(2) Recommend approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of
the preliminary plan and communicate such by letter to the City
Council and the applicant. In the case of a recommended
disapproval, the Planning Commission shall indicate the specific
deficiencies and the ordinance provisions which have not been met.
J. The City Planning Commission may not be prepared to review the
application at its scheduled public meeting first following the date of
filing, in which case the discussion of the application may be scheduled
for a subsequent meeting.
K. During the course of the Planning Commission's review of the
preliminary plan and prior to any action by the City Council within the
required ninety-day period, the preliminary plan may be revised by the
applicant as requested by the city. The submittal of a revised plan which
involves change(s) requiring an additional review shall restart the
required ninety-day period. Sixteen copies of any revised preliminary
plan and accompanying data shall be submitted, which shall note the
dates of any and all revisions and a summary of the nature thereof. The
revised preliminary plan shall be submitted to the City Manager at least
10 calendar days prior to the regular monthly public meeting of the City
Council. The revised preliminary plan shall be distributed by the City
Manager on the basis as set forth in § 197-12B.
L. After a report on the preliminary plan has been submitted to the City
Council by the Planning Commission, the City Council shall place such
preliminary plan on its agenda for review and action.
M. Before acting on any preliminary plan, the City Council or the Planning
Commission may hold a public hearing thereon after public notice.
N. City Council review.
(1) The City Council shall, within the review period:
(a) Review the recommendation of the City Planning Commission
and other reviewing agencies.
§ 197-12 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-12
197:603
(b) Determine whether the preliminary plan meets the objectives
and requirements of this chapter, other ordinances of the City
of Coatesville and other applicable regulations.
(c) Approve or disapprove the preliminary plan.
(2) The City Council may make its decision to grant approval of a
preliminary plan subject to conditions, changes or additions.
(3) Whenever the City Council approves a preliminary plan subject to
conditions, the applicant shall indicate, in writing, whether such
conditions are accepted or rejected within 15 days of notification of
the decision by the City Council. Any approval by the City Council
subject to conditions which is not accepted or rejected by the
applicant within the fifteen-day period shall be rescinded
automatically.
(4) In the case where the Planning Commission has concluded that the
preliminary plan meets all requirements of a final plan, then, upon
the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Council
may consider the preliminary plan as a final plan and may act
thereupon accordingly.
O. Approval of the preliminary plan shall constitute approval of the
subdivision and/or land development as to the character and intensity
but shall not constitute approval of the detail required of the final plan
or authorize the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
P. If the preliminary plan is disapproved, the applicant, if he or she desires
to proceed, shall file a revised preliminary plan following the same
submission and review procedures required for the previous
preliminary plan submission.
Q. The City Council shall render a decision on every preliminary plan and
communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days following the
date of the regular monthly public meeting of the Planning Commission
next following the date of the meeting of the City Council where formal
acceptance of the complete application was granted, provided that
should the Planning Commission meeting occur more than 30 days
following the filing of such application, said ninety-day period shall be
measured from the 30th day following the day the complete application
has been filed.
R. The decision of the City Council shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to the applicant at
the address shown on the application form not later than 15 days
following the decision or at the end of the above-mentioned ninety-day
period, whichever shall occur first.
S. In the event that the preliminary plan is not approved in terms as filed,
the decision shall specify the defects found in the preliminary plan for
subdivision and/or land development and describe the requirements
§ 197-12 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-12
197:604
§ 197-13. Final plan.
The procedure for approval of final subdivision and/or land development
plans shall be identical to the procedure as outlined for preliminary plans in
§ 197-12, except that:
which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite to the provisions
of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
T. If the preliminary plan is approved by the City Council, the applicant
may proceed to submit a final plan for approval as set forth in § 197-13
and Article VI.
U. A preliminary minor subdivision and/or land development plan, upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission, may be permitted to
proceed to a final minor plan submission in accordance with the
comments of the Planning Commission and the City Council.
A. Within one year after the date of approval of the preliminary plan, the
applicant shall file a final plan and all supplementary information, data
and documents, together with a completed and signed application form
provided by the city and the appropriate filing fees, at least 10 calendar
days prior to the regularly monthly public meeting of the City Council.
No such application shall be deemed filed unless all requirements have
been met and all fees therefor paid in full.
B. Unless an extension of time has been granted by the City Council upon
written request of the applicant, a final plan filed after the one-year
period shall be considered a new preliminary plan, which shall be
required to comply with all preliminary plan application procedures of
this chapter and shall be subject to a preliminary plan application fee.
C. The City Council may authorize submission of the final plan in sections,
each covering approximately one-third (1/3) of the entire area proposed
for subdivision and/or land development or one-third (1/3) of the
number of buildings or other structures proposed for land development
as shown on the approved preliminary plan, provided that the first final
plan section shall be submitted within the aforementioned one-year
period and the last final plan section shall be submitted within three
years after the date of preliminary plan approval.
D. The final plan shall conform in all respects to the preliminary plan.
E. Sixteen copies of the plans, including the final plan checklist,
documents and other submissions comprising the final plan shall be
filed with the City Manager, who shall distribute copies of the final plan
along with copies of the application form to those who also received the
preliminary plan as set forth in § 197-12B, provided that the required
fees and financial security associated with the completion guaranty
have been filed therewith.
§ 197-12 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-13
197:605
F. The applicant shall prepare a planning module for land development as
required by Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.
G. The applicant shall submit a final plan that includes all the
requirements set forth in Article VI.
H. As per § 197-9K, all final plan submissions must include the following
plans:
(1) Title plan (required).
(2) Conservation plan (required).
(3) Improvements construction plan (required).
(4) Profile(s) plan (required).
(5) Construction detail plan (required).
(6) Stormwater management report.
(7) Impact assessment report (as required in § 197-77).
I. Highway occupancy permits.
(1) No plan which will require access onto a street or highway under
the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT) shall be finally approved unless the plan contains a
notice that a highway occupancy permit is required and has
received preliminary approval from PennDOT pursuant to § 420 of
Act 428 (P.L. 1242, No. 428), (36 P.S. § 670-420), as amended,
known as the "State Highway Law," before access to a state road is
permitted. The Department of Transportation shall, within 60 days
of the date of receipt of an application for a highway occupancy
permit:
(a) Approve the permit, which shall be valid thereafter unless,
prior to commencement of construction thereunder, the
geographic, physical or other conditions under which the
permit is approved change, requiring modification or denial of
the permit; in which event, the Department shall give notice
thereof in accordance with regulations.
(b) Deny the permit.
(c) Return the application for additional information or correction
to conform with Department regulations.
(d) Determine that no permit is required; in which case, the
Department shall notify the city and the applicant in writing.
(2) If the Department shall fail to take any action within the sixty-day
period, the permit will be deemed to be issued. The plan shall be
marked to indicate that access to the state street or highway shall
§ 197-13 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-13
197:606
be only as authorized by a highway occupancy permit. The
Department shall not be liable in damages for any injury to persons
or property arising out of the issuance or denial of a permit or
for failure to regulate any access. Further, the city shall not be
held liable for damages to persons or property arising out of the
issuance or denial of a permit by the Department.
J. The City Council shall, within the review period:
(1) Review the recommendations of the City Planning Commission and
other reviewing agencies.
(2) Determine whether the final plan meets the requirements of this
chapter, other ordinances of the city and other applicable
regulations.
(3) Review the recommendations of the Department of Environmental
Protection, if any, and determine whether the plan is in
conformance with the city's Official Sewage Facilities Plan.191
(4) Approve or disapprove the final plan. Approval of the final plan may
include certain conditions of approval. Whenever the final plan is
approved subject to conditions, the applicant shall indicate, in
writing, whether such conditions are accepted or rejected within
15 days of notification of the decision by the City Council. Any
approval by the City Council subject to conditions which is not
accepted or rejected by the applicant within the fifteen-day period
shall be rescinded automatically.
K. The decision of the City Council shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to the applicant at
the address shown on the application form not later than 15 days
following the decision or at the end of the above-mentioned ninety-day
period, whichever shall occur first.
L. In the event that the final plan is not approved in terms as filed, the
decision shall specify the defects found in the final plan and describe
the requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
to the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
M. The applicant, if he or she desires to proceed, shall file a revised final
plan with the City Manager, following the same submission and review
procedures required for the initial final plan submission.
N. If the final plan is approved:
(1) Approval shall not be final until entry into contract and production
of completion and maintenance guaranty as set forth in Article IX.
(2) Six exact copies of the approved final plan shall be signed in
accordance with § 197-15.
191. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 197-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-13
197:607
§ 197-14. Subdivision and land development agreement.
Every applicant who seeks to obtain final plan approval, unless exempted as
a minor plan, shall execute an agreement satisfactory to the City Solicitor
before the final plan is signed by the City Council and recorded in
accordance with § 197-15 respectively. The agreement shall include but
need not be limited to the following:
O. Approval of the final plan shall not authorize the sale or transfer of lots
or the development of land until construction is permitted to commence
in accordance with § 197-16, nor shall such approval constitute a
waiver or release or assumption by the city of any requirements of any
city ordinances, codes, regulations, plans or maps.
P. Every final plan approval shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) The applicant shall execute a subdivision and land development
agreement in accordance with § 197-14, unless exempted as a
minor plan submission.
(2) The applicant shall execute a completion guaranty in accordance
with Article IX where deemed applicable by the City Council.
(3) The applicant shall tender a deed of dedication to the city, if
requested by the City Council for public improvements, easements
and other appurtenances and improvements thereto after such
improvements are completed and such completion is certified as
being satisfactory by the City Engineer.
(4) The applicant shall be responsible for the filing with the city of
copies of all required permits, approvals, agreements, clearances
and the like from all required governmental agencies (such as the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and/or the city),
authorities and companies which may provide water supply or
sewage disposal facilities and pipeline easement holders or others.
(5) The applicant shall pay any fees which may be outstanding in
accordance with Article XI, prior to the time when the final plan is
signed by City Council.
(6) The applicant shall be provide proof of recording the final plan in
accordance with § 197-15.
A. That the applicant agrees that he or she will accurately lay out and
properly construct all improvements and follow all practices according
to the plans, profiles, notes and other forms of documentation filed as
part of the final plan as approved or where any or all of these
improvements or practices are required as conditions of approval; and
that the applicant will file an as-built plan in accordance with § 197-17
to confirm the same.
§ 197-13 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-14
197:608
B. That the applicant shall complete the improvements and engage in the
practices as referenced in § 197-14A within the time or times specified
by the City Council and in accordance with § 197-16.
C. That the applicant guarantees completion and maintenance of all
improvements by means of acceptable forms of financial security to the
city as set forth in Article IX.
D. That the applicant agrees to tender a deed of dedication to the city if
requested by the City Council for public improvements, easements and
other appurtenances and improvements thereto, except that the city
shall not accept any offer of dedication of the same by ordinance or
resolution until their completion is certified as being satisfactory by the
City Engineer and an as-built plan is submitted and approved by the
city.
E. That the applicant shall pay the city all of its costs in connection with
snow removal from the streets in the subdivision or land development
that are to be offered for dedication until such time as such dedication
is duly accepted by the City Council.
F. That the applicant shall comply fully with all of the terms and conditions
of this chapter as the same relate to the subdivision or land
development and all other city codes, ordinances, regulations, plans
and maps.
G. That the applicant shall pay the city plan review fees, establish a threeparty
agreement and account for the creation, maintenance and/or
inspection of improvements and pay the City of Coatesville Authority
security and fees in lieu of or the park and recreational facilities
required by this chapter.
H. That the applicant shall obtain all necessary permits as applicable, such
as those from DEP, from PennDOT, building permit and from the Zoning
Hearing Board.
I. That the applicant, in the event that any proposed street not be
intended to be offered for dedication or not accepted by the City
Council, shall accept stipulations which shall be noted on the final plan,
such as the following:
(1) That the city shall not be responsible for repairing or otherwise
maintaining any undedicated streets.
(2) That the method of assessing repair and maintenance costs of
undedicated streets shall be established in recorded deed
restrictions so as to be binding on all successors, assigns or
grantees.
(3) That, if dedication shall be sought at any time, the street shall
conform in its entirety to city design standards for the same in all
respects; or that the owners of the lots shown on the approved final
§ 197-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-14
197:609
§ 197-15. Recording of final plan.
plan, at their own expense, shall restore the street to conform with
or otherwise render the street in conformance with such standards.
J. The subdivision and land development agreement shall be structured
by the City Solicitor to include provisions relating to the above, as well
as other matters pertaining to certificates of insurance, water and
sewer availability, emergency access, a three-party escrow agreement
and the like.
A. Within 90 days after the approval of the final plan by the City Council,
the applicant executes the subdivision and land development
agreement and the completion and maintenance guaranty, as set forth
in Article IX, the applicant shall thereupon cause one copy of the final
plan to be recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in and for
Chester County, Pennsylvania, and shall notify the City Council in
writing, certified mail return receipt requested, of the date of such
recording and the Plan Book and page in which the same has been
recorded. Should the plan not be recorded within such period, the
action of the City Council in approving the final plan shall be considered
automatically rescinded.
B. The final plan to be recorded shall be an exact counterpart of the
approved final plan and shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds before
proceeding with the sale of lots or construction of buildings or other
structures or improvements.
(1) Eleven prints of the completed and signed record plan shall be
provided and distributed in the following manner:
Number of
Prints Recipient
1 Applicant
1 Recording
2 City files
4 Chester County Planning
Commission (3 of which are for the
Recorder of Deeds office)
1 City Engineer
2 Attached to escrow agreement
(2) The following information shall appear on the record plan, in
addition to the information required in Article VI for the final plan:
(a) The impressed seal of the surveyor who prepared the plan.
(b) The impressed corporation seal, if the applicant is a
corporation.
§ 197-14 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-15
197:610
(c) The impressed seal of a notary public or other qualified officer
acknowledging the owner's statement of intent.
(d) A statement to the effect that the applicant is the owner of the
land proposed to be subdivided or developed and that the
subdivision or land development shown on the final plan is
made with his or her or their free consent and that it is desired
to record the same.
(e) The following signatures, placed directly on the plan in black
ink:
[1] The signature of the owner or owners of the land. If the
owner of the land is a corporation, the signatures of the
president and secretary of the corporation shall appear.
[2] The signature of the notary public or other qualified
officer, acknowledging the owner's statement of intent.
[3] The signatures of the licensed professional engineer or
surveyor who prepared the plan(s).
[4] The signature of the City Engineer.
[5] The signature of the chairperson or member of the City
Council.
[6] The signature of the City Manager.
(f) The Chester County Planning Department stamp, certifying
that it reviewed the final plan.
(g) The City of Coatesville Seal, certifying approval.
C. Effect of recording.
(1) After a subdivision or land development has been duly recorded,
the streets, parks and other public improvements shown thereon
shall be considered to be a part of the Official Map of the city.
(2) Streets, alleys, parks and other public improvements shown on a
subdivision and/or land development plan to be recorded may be
offered for dedication to the city by formal deed of dedication, and
intent thereof shall be noted on the plan, or the owner may note on
the plan that such improvements have not been offered for
dedication to the city.
(3) Every street, alley, park or other improvement shown on a
subdivision and/or land development plan that is recorded, as
provided herein, shall be deemed to be a private street, alley, park
or improvement until such time as the same has been offered for
dedication to the city and accepted, by resolution, and recorded at
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County or until it has
§ 197-15 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-15
197:611
§ 197-16. Commencement and completion of construction and
improvements.
§ 197-17. As-built plan.
been condemned for use as a public street, alley, park or
improvement.
D. Amendments to approved final plans. Proposed amendments to
approved final plans shall be acted on in the same manner as the
original approved plan.
A. No construction shall be commenced until the city has issued building
permits or other required permits.
B. No construction shall be commenced until the applicant files with the
City Manager all permits, approvals, clearances and the like from
government agencies (such as those from the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and/or the city), authorities and companies which may
provide water supply or sewage disposal facilities and pipeline
easement holders or others.192
C. The applicant shall commence construction of improvements within one
year from the approval date of the final plan, unless approved otherwise
by the City Council.
D. In the case where development is projected over a number of years,
each section except for the last section shall contain a minimum of 25%
of the total number of lots, dwelling units or buildings as depicted in the
final plan, unless a lesser percentage is approved by the City Council.
E. A copy of the recorded plan shall be available at the construction site.
A. After final plan approval and upon completion of all required
improvements, the applicant shall submit an as-built plan prepared by
an engineer or surveyor, showing the location, dimension and elevation
of all improvements in accordance Articles VI and IX.
B. Said plan shall indicate that the resultant construction grading,
drainage and soil erosion and sedimentation control practices are in
conformance with the previously approved drawings and specifications.
Said plan shall note any and all deviations from the previously approved
drawings and specifications.
C. Two copies of the as-built plan shall be filed with the city, who shall
distribute one copy to the City Council and one to the City Engineer.
D. The as-built plan shall be submitted before the final release of escrow
funds for any major subdivision and/or land development.
192. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 197-15 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-17
197:612
ARTICLE IV
Sketch Plan Requirements for Major Subdivision and/or Land
Development
§ 197-18. Purpose.
The purpose of the sketch plan is to provide an opportunity for the applicant
to consult early with the city before preparing a preliminary plan. During
the sketch plan review process, matters pertaining to access, circulation,
lot layout, building layout and conceptual drainage design can be analyzed
relative to existing conditions, the Comprehensive Plan, Chapter 224,
Zoning, and proposals for traffic control, water supply and sewage disposal.
§ 197-19. General requirements.
§ 197-20. Sketch plan requirements.
A. Subdivision and/or land development plans may be prepared by an
architect, landscape architect, engineer, surveyor, land planner or other
design professionals. When a sketch plan is prepared by someone other
than the above-mentioned design professional, a property owner can
submit a to-scale drawing, provided that the plan is in conformance
with § 197-20 below.
B. The applicant shall identify the name, address and telephone number of
the holder of legal title of the land involved and the nature of the
landowner's interest, whether holder of legal title, equitable title or
other.
C. All sketch plans should be in conformance with Article III, § 197-11,
regarding sketch plan procedure.
D. All sketch plans should meet the plan requirements of § 197-20 below.
E. Upon submission of a sketch plan, the landowner or developer shall and
does authorize the city and its representatives to enter the site for the
purpose of site evaluation.
A. A sketch plan at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet
should be submitted. It should depict and note the following:
(1) The name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) The name and address of the owner of record and the applicant.
(3) The name and address of the person who prepared the plan.
(4) The zoning requirements and the degree to which the plan
conforms to such requirements, including:
(a) The applicable districts (including overlay districts, such as the
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District).
§ 197-18 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-20
197:613
(5) A location map showing the relation of the site to adjoining
properties and streets within 1,000 feet.
(6) North arrow and date.
(7) Written and graphic scale.
(8) Total acreage of the site, together with the approximate gross and
net lot area for each proposed lot.
(9) Boundaries of the property.
(10) Names of the abutting owners, adjoining lot lines and structures on
abutting lots within 100 feet of the property.
(11) Streets and alleys on or adjacent to the site, with existing cartways
and existing and proposed rights-of-way.
(12) Existing man-made features, such as buildings and their uses,
driveways, sewer lines, storm drains, culverts, bridges, utility
easements, waterlines and other significant man-made features
within the site.
(13) Proposed general street and lot layout, with building setback lines
and buildable areas as defined in Article II.
(14) Types and number of buildings proposed and proposed height of
buildings and other structures.
(15) The location of sidewalks and crosswalks and, where applicable to
residential and other development, the location of school bus stops.
(16) Proposed open space and/or recreation areas, including notes on
the plan describing the proposed use, activity area and/or
improvement.
(17) Proposed methods and techniques for water supply and sewage
disposal.
(18) Natural features map. The following information shall be clearly
and legibly depicted on a natural features map, which shall be a
separate sheet of the sketch plan submission:
(a) Contour lines measured at vertical intervals of not less than 10
feet, including the date and source of the contours.
Topographic data derived from the United States Geological
Survey quadrangle maps may be used for the sketch plan
submission.
(b) Steep slopes as specified in Article VIII.
(c) Floodway and floodway-fringe areas as related to the
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District Map.
§ 197-20 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-20
197:614
(d) Wetlands derived from sources, such as the National Wetland
Inventory Maps. Sources for any wetlands plotted shall be
indicated.
(e) PNDI sites based on the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Index
and addressed in § 197-51.
(f) Other significant natural features within the lot, such as
watercourses, soils and tree masses, and any proposed
changes in these features and the approximate location of such
features within 50 feet of the lot. (This includes properties
across streets.)
(19) Additional requirements. In the case of a land development, the
following additional requirements shall apply:
(a) The proposed location of all buildings and other structures.
(b) The proposed location of parking areas and parking lots.
(20) A copy of the sketch plan checklist for a major subdivision and/or
land development, completed and signed by the engineer or other
design professional who prepared the plan.
(21) A note indicating ownership of the subject tract or proof that the
applicant is an authorized agent of the owner.
(22) Notes indicating any modifications, waivers, variances, special
exceptions and/or conditional uses that are required.
(23) Information pertaining to dumps, quarries, sinkholes, bedrock
outcrops, toxic waters or other potential hazards or constraints
(where applicable).
(24) The location of trash storage areas.
(25) The location of all fencing, hedges and walls.
(26) The location of all lights, street trees and shade trees.
(27) The location of any freestanding sign, benches, planters or other
site accessories, where applicable.
(28) The location of all disabled (handicapped) access and parking.
§ 197-20 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-20
197:615

ARTICLE V
Preliminary Plan Requirements
§ 197-21. Purpose.
§ 197-22. General requirements.
§ 197-23. Specific requirements.
A. The purpose of the preliminary plan is to obtain formal approval before
proceeding with the preparation of detailed final plans.
B. The preliminary plan submitted shall reflect any changes which may
have been recommended during a sketch plan review. All information
and procedures relating to the preliminary plan shall comply with this
chapter except where variations therefrom may be specifically
recommended by the City Planning Commission and approved by the
City Council pursuant to the requirements of §§ 197-12 and 197-76.
A. The preliminary subdivision and/or land development plan and all plans
forming a part thereof required by this chapter shall be submitted on
clear and legible, black-line or blue-line paper prints, with a sheet size
no larger than thirty by forty-two (30 x 42) inches.
(1) All preliminary plans shall conform to § 197-12, regarding
preliminary plan procedure.
(2) All preliminary plans shall meet the requirements of this section
and § 197-23 below.
B. Upon submission of a preliminary plan, the landowner or developer
shall and does authorize the city and its representatives to enter the
site for the purpose of site evaluation.
C. The preliminary plan checklist, which appears in the Appendix to this
chapter, shall be completed and submitted as part of the preliminary
plan application.
A. A preliminary plan shall reflect the following drafting standards:
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of no less than one inch equals
50 feet.
(2) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the
total number of sheets.
(3) All plans shall be clear and legible.
B. The preliminary plan shall include all of the information required in
§ 197-20 for a sketch plan and the following:
(1) A location map which highlights the location of the property within
the city and depicts properties of abutting owners, adjoining and
§ 197-21 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-23
197:617
nearby roads, zoning district boundaries and municipal boundaries
within 1,000 feet. The location map shall be drawn at the scale of
one inch equals 800 feet. In the case of development of a section of
the entire tract, the location map shall show the relationship of the
section to the entire tract.
(2) Proposed subdivision or land development name or identifying title.
(3) North arrow, date and written and graphic scales.
(4) The name, complete mailing address and telephone number of the
applicant, landowner, developer and the authorized agent, if any.
(5) The name, complete mailing address, signature and seal of
engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, land planner or architect
responsible for having prepared the plans forming a part of the
preliminary plan and any other documents or submissions forming
a part of the preliminary plan.
(6) Property boundaries, with dimensions, bearings and distances, and
the source of boundary information, such as deed, survey or
existing recorded plans.
(7) When the preliminary plan includes only a portion of a landowner
or developer's entire property or such portion is contiguous to
another property of the landowner or developer, the dimensions,
metes and bounds of the balance of such entire property or other
property.
(8) Tax parcel numbers for all properties which are the subject of the
subdivision and/or land development.
(9) Names of abutting owners.
(10) Zoning on and adjacent to the property, including notes regarding
the relevant area and bulk regulations for each zoning district that
pertains to the property, with an indication of conformance to the
same, such as the percent of any lot area covered by impervious
surfaces and the percent of any lot covered by buildings.
(11) If the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District overlays the
property, it accurately and conspicuously delineated and noted as
per Chapter 224, Zoning, and the Floodplain Conservation Overlay
District Map. Such delineation and notation shall include graphic
symbolism to distinguish the floodway area and the floodway-fringe
area.
(12) Existing contours at vertical intervals of two feet based on contour
information derived from an actual topographic survey for the
property, due evidence of which shall be submitted, including the
date and source of the contours. Slopes shall be accurately and
conspicuously directed as follows:
§ 197-23 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-23
197:618
(a) Very steep slopes (25% plus) and steep slopes (15% to 25%)
shall be shown for all portions of the property on the basis of a
two-foot contour interval.
(b) The plan shall also include a legend which clearly
differentiates between such steep and very steep slopes as per
Article VIII.
(13) Datum to which contour elevations refer and reference to known,
established benchmarks and elevations.
(14) All existing surface water resources, such as watercourses,
wetlands, ponds and springs, and other natural drainage features.
(15) Existing tree masses, hedgerows and freestanding trees of 12
inches in caliper or greater, indicating which are to be removed and
which are to remain. The edge of the woodland to remain shall be
shown as a scalloped line. In addition, the types of vegetation
associations which exist on the tract shall be noted in terms of their
species, type and sizes.
(16) Soil types as identified in the Soil Survey of Chester and Delaware
Counties, including a table listing the soil characteristics
pertaining to slope, depth to seasonal high-water table and depth to
bedrock, flood hazard potential and hydric soils.
(17) Location of existing man-made features, such as buildings and
their uses, sidewalks, driveways, wells, sewer lines, septic tanks
and other on-lot sewage disposal systems, storm drains, culverts,
bridges, utility easements, utility poles, water lines and mains, fire
hydrants and other significant man-made features, within the lot
and the approximate location of such features within 100 feet of the
lot. (This includes properties across streets or alleys.)
(18) All existing streets or alleys on or adjacent to the property,
including name, right-of-way width and cartway width and state
route numbers.
(19) The classification of the street(s), alley(s) or highway(s) adjoining
the property.
(20) All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way and
dimensions, bearings and distances for the same and the purpose
for which such easements or rights-of-way have been established.
(21) Total acreage of the property and the gross and net acreage of
individual lots proposed therein and the number of lots, dwelling
units, buildings and other structures and all uses proposed.
(22) Proposed lot lines with dimensions, lot numbers in consecutive
numerical order, proposed minimum setback areas and the
proposed buildable area (using a dashed line to reflect the
minimum yard and setback requirements). Where a buildable area
§ 197-23 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-23
197:619
is shown on a plan as extending into a Floodplain Conservation
Overlay District or any other area which may involve a conditional
use or special exception, those portions of the buildable area
extending into any such areas shall be delineated and otherwise
noted on all plans in an accurate and conspicuous manner to
disclose the specific uses which may occur in such areas.
(23) Proposed location, method and flows for water supply and sanitary
sewage disposal on each lot.
(24) An identification of the historic resources associated with the lot,
such as areas or structures which are significant. Areas or
structures included on the National Register of Historic Places and
the Pennsylvania Inventory of Historic Places shall be identified.
(25) Additional requirements. In the case of a land development, the
following additional requirements shall apply:
(a) Location, alignment and width of all proposed streets, alleys,
sidewalks, crosswalks, bus stops, driveways, rights-of-way and
easements, the identification of street names and the purpose
for which private rights-of-way or other easements are
proposed.
(b) Building locations and parking areas, when applicable, and
provisions for traffic control, loading areas and loading docks,
lighting, signage, curbing, fencing, walls and other proposed
site structures.
(c) A preliminary landscaping plan depicting proposed street
trees, shade trees, hedges, buffer area plantings and other
related improvements, in accordance with the landscaping
design standards of Article VIII.
(d) A preliminary lighting plan depicting proposed light standards,
locations, height, cutoff angle and illumination value, in
accordance with Article VIII.
(e) Proposed method of water supply and sanitary sewage disposal
for each lot and a schematic layout of waterlines, sewer lines
and capped sewers when applicable.
(f) A plan depicting recreational and open space areas with
acreage, structures and facilities.
(g) Location and description of all off-site improvements.
C. The preliminary plan shall also be accompanied by the following:
(1) A copy of the deed for the subject tract.
(2) A statement on the plan of the types of buildings, other structures
and/or dwelling units proposed to be constructed, indicating
§ 197-23 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-23
197:620
whether the same will be of uniform construction or different in
design and whether the same will be custom or production styled.
The statement is to be accompanied by an elevation drawing of the
proposed buildings or dwelling units.
(3) A preliminary phasing schedule, if applicable, for the proposed
sequence of the subdivision and/or land development. The phasing
schedule shall indicate the order in which construction activities
will occur.
(4) A planning module for land development as required by Act 537,
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.193
(5) When connection to public water and/or public sewer facilities is
proposed, assurance of the availability of such service. This
assurance shall be in the form of a letter signed by an officer of the
company or authority concerned, indicating its ability and
willingness to make such service available within the phasing
schedule cited under § 197-31C(3).
(6) A written report indicating the feasibility for public water supply
and sanitary sewage disposal. Whenever on-lot systems are
proposed, the feasibility report shall reflect the following:
(a) With regard to water supply, there shall be an objective
description of the ability of achieving a reliable, safe and
adequate water supply for an individual or community well,
whenever such well is proposed, within the capacity of
available resources. The description shall reference geologic
and hydrogeologic data relative to groundwater conditions and
potential yields. In addition to such information regarding
water supply, the description shall indicate the demand for
water from the proposed subdivision and/or land development
and its related uses and users.
(b) With regard to sanitary sewage disposal, there shall be an
objective description of the ability of achieving a successful
system for the disposal of sewage. The description shall
reference soils data relative to limitations for septic tank, filter
fields or other systems, and indicate various indices of
suitability for such a system, such as permeability and depth to
seasonal high-water table. In addition, percolation test results
shall be discussed and exhibited.
(7) A preliminary soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, in
accordance with § 197-24.
(8) A preliminary stormwater management plan, in accordance with
§ 197-25.
193. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 197-23 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-23
197:621
(9) Whenever improvements are to be constructed or installed, a
preliminary construction improvements plan in accordance with
§ 197-26.
(10) A preliminary construction detail plan, including typical details and
cross-sections for such items as streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks,
plantings, inlets, manholes, fences, walls and similar
improvements.
(11) A draft of the declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions
upon or against the property, subject to the approval of the City
Solicitor.
(12) When the proposed property involves a gas pipeline, petroleum
products transmission line, electric power transmission line or any
other pipeline or cable located thereon, a letter from the owner or
authorized agent of such a facility indicating minimum setback
distance requirements or a true and correct copy of the easement
or grant of record shall be filed.
(13) When the preliminary plan includes only a portion of the entire or
contiguous property owned by the applicant, a sketch plan which
shows the prospective future street system and other
improvements of the remaining land shall be submitted when
required by the City Council.
(14) A list of all permits, agreements, approvals, clearances and the like
required to be obtained in connection with the proposed
subdivision and/or land development and the federal, state, county
or other agencies, authorities and companies from which same are
to be obtained.
(15) A note indicating ownership of the subject tract or proof that the
applicant is an authorized agent of the owner.
(16) A draft of all other plans, documents and submissions which are
terms of any city ordinance, code or regulation may be required by
the City Council for final plan approval shall be required in
preliminary form and shall accompany and form a part of any
preliminary plan.
(17) If the applicant is not the landowner, a notarized statement signed
by the landowner indicating that the applicant has the approval of
the owner for submitting the subdivision and/or land development.
(18) Certification as to the accuracy of the plan and details of such plans
shall be prepared in accordance with Act 367, known as the
"Professional Engineers Registration Law," P.L. 913, No. 367 (63
P.S. § 151), as amended.
(19) If the proposed lot(s) abuts on a street under the jurisdiction of the
state, a note added to the preliminary plan to indicate that a
§ 197-23 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-23
197:622
§ 197-24. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, which shall accompany and
become a part of the preliminary (and final) subdivision and/or land
development plan, shall be drawn at the same scale as that of other plans
forming a part of the preliminary plan (and final) plan. The plan shall be
in accordance with Article VIII and shall be filed as a separate sheet or
drawing in addition to that submitted in accordance with §§ 197-23 and
197-31. However, the information contained in said plan shall be added so
as to overlay with that delineated in conformance with the requirements
of §§ 197-23 and 197-31, whereby the property boundaries, existing and
proposed contours, existing natural features, proposed subdivision and land
development layout and the like are reflected. In addition to the foregoing,
the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall also include all
proposed buildings, streets, alleys, driveways, parking areas and lot layout.
§ 197-25. Stormwater management plan.
A stormwater management plan, which shall accompany and become a part
of the preliminary (and final) subdivision and/or land development plan,
shall be in accordance with Article VIII and shall be drawn at the same
scale as that of other plans forming a part of the preliminary plan (and final)
plan. The stormwater management plan shall be filed as a separate sheet
or drawing in addition to that submitted in accordance with §§ 197-23 and
197-35. However, the information contained in said plan shall be added so
highway occupancy permit is required before a driveway or street
or alley can access a state highway.
(20) Information pertaining to dumps, quarries, sinkholes, bedrock
outcrops, toxic wastes or other potential hazards or constraints
(where applicable).
(21) A preliminary impact assessment and mitigation report, in
accordance with § 197-77.
(22) A description of all nonresidential uses in terms of existing and
proposed hours of operation, lighting, parking, number of people
associated with the use and other relevant characteristics.
(23) A description of the consistency of the proposed plan with the City
of Coatesville Comprehensive Plan. [Added 2-12-2001 by Ord.
No. 1157-2001]
(24) A description of the consistency of the proposed plan with the City
of Coatesville Open Space, Recreation and Environmental
Resources Plan. [Added 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1157-2001]
(25) A description of the consistency of the proposed plan with the City
of Coatesville Downtown Parking Study and Revitalization Plan,
especially the Design Guidelines contained within. [Added
2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1157-2001]
§ 197-23 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-25
197:623
as to overlay with that delineated in conformance with the requirements
of §§ 197-23 and 197-31, whereby the property boundaries, existing and
proposed contours, existing natural features, proposed subdivision and land
development layout and the like are reflected. In addition to the foregoing,
the stormwater management plan shall also include all proposed buildings,
streets, alleys, driveways, parking areas and lot layout.
§ 197-26. Improvements construction plan.
Whenever improvements are proposed, such as a new street or the
upgrading of an existing street, the improvements construction plan shall
accompany and become a part of the preliminary and final subdivision and/
or land development plans. Said plan shall be drawn at a ten-to-one ratio
of horizontal-to-vertical scale, whereby the horizontal scale shall be at least
50 feet to the inch and the vertical scale shall be five feet. However, the
horizontal scale may be 40 feet to the inch with a vertical scale of four feet
to the inch or 20 feet to the inch and two feet, respectively, when directed
by the City Engineer. Said plan shall be prepared by an engineer and shall
show thereon or be accompanied by the following:
A. On all plans, profiles and other sheets which depict the information
required in this section, the following shall be provided:
(1) Proposed subdivision and/or land development name or identifying
title.
(2) North arrow, scale and date.
(3) Name of the landowner, developer and the authorized agent, if any.
(4) Name of the engineer responsible for having prepared the plan(s),
profile(s), cross-section(s), documents and/or other submissions
forming the construction improvements plan.
B. The horizontal plan shall show details of the horizontal layout of streets
and alleys, including:
(1) Center line with bearings, distances, curve data and stations
corresponding to the profile.
(2) Right-of-way and curb lines with radii at intersections.
(3) Tie-ins by bearings and distances to intersections of all public
streets, with the names and widths thereof.
(4) Location of all proposed monuments with references thereto.
(5) Property lines and ownership of abutting properties.
(6) Proposed lot lines, storm and sanitary sewers, water and other
utility lines and fire hydrants.
§ 197-25 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-26
197:624
(7) Location and size of all drainage structures, public utilities,
sidewalks, lighting standards, street name signs and other
improvements.
C. The profile shall be a vertical section of streets and alleys, with details
of vertical alignment, including:
(1) Profiles and elevations at fifty-foot stations along the center line of
the existing ground surface and along both right-of-way lines as
well as the profile of the nearest connecting streets or alleys for a
distance of 100 feet beyond the boundary of the subdivision and/or
land development.
(2) Profiles and percentage of grade along the proposed center line
and elevations at fifty-foot intervals.
(3) The length of vertical curves and elevations at twenty-five-foot
intervals.
(4) Profile of any storm or sanitary sewer location under any proposed
street, showing the length, size, grades, material, inverts and rim
elevations of manholes and outlets.
D. The cross section of streets prepared in accordance with the design
standards and requirements in Article VIII, including:
(1) Right-of-way width and location and width of paving within the
right-of-way.
(2) Type, thickness and crown of paving.
(3) Type and size of curb, with detail of curb.
(4) Grading of sidewalk areas.
(5) Location, width, type and thickness of sidewalk, if required.
§ 197-26 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-26
197:625

ARTICLE VI
Final Plan Requirements
§ 197-27. Purpose.
The purpose of the final plan is to require formal approval by the City
Council before plans for all subdivisions and land developments are
recorded as required by § 197-35 of this chapter.
§ 197-28. General requirements.
§ 197-29. Final plan requirements.
A. The final subdivision and/or land development plan and all plans
forming a part thereof required by this chapter shall be submitted on
clear and legible black-line or blue-line paper prints. If two or more
sheets are required, a key map shall be shown on each sheet. An overall
index of sheets shall be submitted. The plan scale and size shall be the
same as that described in § 197-22A. The final plan shall reflect the
following:
(1) Conformance with § 197-13 regarding final plan procedure.
(2) All final plans shall meet the requirements of this section and
§ 197-29 below.
B. The final plan checklist, which appears in the Appendix to this chapter,
shall be completed and submitted as part of the final plan application.
A. In addition to all the requirements set forth in Article V, the final plan
shall include and contain the following:
(1) All dimensions shall be shown and noted in feet and hundredths of
a foot.
(2) Property boundaries and individual lot boundaries with
dimensions, bearings and distances, closing with an error of not
more than one foot in 10,000 feet.
(3) Total gross acreage and net acreage of the property and total net
acreage of the individual lots proposed therein to the hundredths of
a foot and the number of lots, dwelling units, buildings and other
structures proposed.
(4) Lots numbered in a logical sequence.
(5) Location of existing and proposed permanent reference
monuments and markers and a note indicating the materials and
size of same.
(6) Pedestrianways, including all sidewalks, walkways and pedestrian
rights-of-way and other improvements to be used for general public
use.
§ 197-27 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-29
197:627
(7) A final landscaping plan indicating precise types, quantities and
sizes of proposed trees, shrubs and ground covers and other
landscaping elements, in accordance with the design standards in
Article VIII and the Appendix.
(8) A final lighting plan indicating the precise location and height of
light standards, their cutoff angle and illumination value in
accordance with Article VIII.
(9) Signature blocks used for signing the final plan in accordance with
§ 197-15.
(10) The location of percolation test pits, whenever on-site sewage
disposal is proposed, and the location of the proposed on-site
sewage systems.
(11) The location of test pits where stormwater is to be disposed and a
listing of absorption rates whenever seepage pits are proposed.
(12) The location of the proposed well for on-site water supply.
(13) The following shall also be noted on the final plan:
(a) Certification of adequacy, by an engineer, of the proposed site
for the type of sewage disposal system which is proposed.
(b) The seal of the engineer responsible for having prepared the
plans forming a part of the final plan.
(c) A certification indicating the intent to make an offer of
dedication of the streets and other improvements.
(d) A certification indicating any area, street and other
improvement not to be offered for dedication or not to be
accepted.
(e) A certification indicating who is responsible for the
maintenance of the site improvements.
(f) Certification as to the accuracy of the plan and details of such
plans shall be prepared in accordance with Act 367, known as
the "Professional Engineers Registration Law," P.L. 913, No.
367 (63 P.S. § 151), as amended.
B. In addition to all materials required under § 197-23C to accompany the
preliminary plan, the following shall be submitted:
(1) A final phasing schedule, if applicable, for the proposed sequence
of the subdivision and/or land development. The phasing schedule
shall indicate the order in which construction activities will occur.
(2) A final soil erosion and sedimentation control plan reflecting in
final form the information required by §§ 197-25 and 197-31 of this
chapter.
§ 197-29 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-29
197:628
(3) A final stormwater management plan reflecting in final form the
information required by §§ 197-25 and 197-31 of this chapter.
(4) Whenever improvements are to be constructed or installed, a final
construction improvements plan and a final profile(s) plan
reflecting in final form the information required under § 197-26.
(5) Final documents, including the declaration of covenants,
easements and restrictions upon the property subject to the
approval of the City Solicitor and the final legal descriptions for all
lots.
(6) A planning module for land development as required by the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537.194
(7) An engineer's report describing percolation test results and the
ability to create a successful system for on-site sewage disposal
whenever such a system is proposed.
(8) An engineer's report evidencing the ability to create a successful
system for on-site water supply whenever such a system is
proposed.
(9) A bond, certified check or other security to guarantee the
completion and maintenance of improvements in accordance with
the provisions of Article X.
(10) All other plans, documents and submissions which were filed in
preliminary form as required in § 197-23 filed in final form to
accompany and form part of any final plan.
(11) If the proposed lot(s) abuts on a street under the jurisdiction of the
state, a note added to the final plan to indicate that a highway
occupancy permit is required before a driveway or street or alley
can access a state highway.
(12) A list of permits, agreements, approvals, clearances and the like
required to be obtained in connection with the proposed
subdivision and/or land development and the federal, state, county
or other agencies, authorities and companies from which same are
to be obtained.
(13) A final impact assessment and mitigation report, in accordance
with § 197-77.
(14) A description of the consistency of the proposed plan with the City
of Coatesville Comprehensive Plan. [Added 2-12-2001 by Ord.
No. 1157-2001]
194. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 197-29 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-29
197:629
§ 197-30. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
All illustrations and notes required under § 197-24 to accompany the
preliminary plan shall be submitted in final form as part of the final plan
submission.
§ 197-31. Stormwater management plan. [Amended 5-10-2004 by
Ord. No. 1233-2004]
In addition to all illustrations and notes required under § 197-25 to
accompany the preliminary plan, the following shall be submitted:
(15) A description of the consistency of the proposed plan with the City
of Coatesville Open Space, Recreation and Environmental
Resources Plan. [Added 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1157-2001]
(16) A description of the consistency of the proposed plan with the City
of Coatesville Downtown Parking Study and Revitalization Plan,
especially the Design Guidelines contained within. [Added
2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 1157-2001]
A. Profiles of all proposed storm sewers, including elevations, sizes, slopes
and materials, at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one
inch equals five feet vertical, as per § 197-26. Further, as a general
condition of the regulation of stormwater originating within the
jurisdiction of the City, the following four appendices are adopted and
attached to the City Code as regulating stormwater and the specific
requirements and provisions thereof and enforcement procedures
therein are recognizing as constituting the substantive law of the City
of Coatesville on the subject matter of stormwater: Appendix 1
(Prohibition against Nonstormwater Discharges); Appendix 2
(Requirement for Erosion and Sediment Controls); Appendix 3
(Postconstruction Stormwater Runoff Controls for New Development
and Redevelopment, Including Operations and Maintenance of
Stormwater); and Appendix 4 (Sanctions).
(1) Appendix 1: Prohibition Against Nonstormwater Discharges.
(a) Prohibited discharges.
[1] No person in the City shall allow, or cause to allow,
stormwater discharges into the City's separate storm
sewer system which are not composed entirely of
stormwater, except as provided in Subsection A(1)(a)[2]
below and discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
[2] Discharges which may be allowed, based on a finding by
the City that the discharge(s) do not significantly
contribute to pollution to surface waters of the
Commonwealth, are:
§ 197-29 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-31
197:630
[a] Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
[b] Uncontaminated water from foundation or from
footing drains.
[c] Potable water sources, including dechlorinated water
line and fire hydrant flushings.
[d] Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
[e] Lawn watering.
[f] Irrigation drainage.
[g] Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or
hazardous materials have not occurred (unless all spill
material has been removed) and where detergents are
not used.
[h] Routine external building wash down (which does not
use detergents or other compounds).
[i] Air-conditioning condensate.
[j] Water from individual residential car washing.
[k] Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
[l] Springs .
[m] Uncontaminated groundwater.
[n] Water from crawl space pumps.
[3] In the event that the City determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection A(1)(a)[2] significantly
contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth, or
is so notified by the Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP), the City will notify the responsible
person to cease the discharge.
[4] Upon notice provided by the City under Subsection
A(1)(a)[3], the discharger will have a reasonable time, as
determined by the City, to cease the discharge consistent
with the degree of pollution caused by the discharge.
[5] Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's
responsibilities under state law.
(b) Prohibited connections. The following connections are
prohibited, except as provided in Section B above:
[1] Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows any nonstormwater discharge,
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water, to
§ 197-31 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-31
197:631
enter the separate storm sewer system, and any
connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains
and sinks; and
[2] Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system
which has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent records and approved by the City.
(2) Appendix 2: Requirement for Erosion and Sediment Controls.
(a) Erosion and sediment control.
[1] No regulated earth disturbance activities within the City
shall commence until approval by the City of an erosion
and sediment control plan for construction activities.
[2] The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) has regulations that require an erosion and
sediment control plan for any earth disturbance activity of
5,000 square feet or more, under 25 Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
[3] In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP NPDES
construction activities permit is required for any earth
disturbance one acre of more with a point source
discharge to surface waters or the City's storm sewer
system, or five acres or more regardless of the planned
runoff (hereinafter collectively referred to as "regulated
earth disturbance activities"). This includes earth
disturbance on any portion of, part of or during any stage
of a larger common plan of development.
[4] Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth
disturbance activities from the appropriate DEP regional
office or County Conservation District must be provided to
the City. An NPDES construction permit [or permit
coverage under the statewide general permit (PAG-2)]
satisfies the requirements Subsection A(2)(a)[1].
[5] A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any
required permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be
available at the project site at all times.
(3) Appendix 3: Postconstruction Stormwater Runoff Controls for New
Development and Redevelopment, Including Operations and
Maintenance of Stormwater BMPs.
(a) Postconstruction runoff control requirements.
[1] No regulated earth disturbance activities within the City
shall commence until approval by the City of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with state water quality
requirements after construction is complete.
§ 197-31 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-31
197:632
[2] The BMPs must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses (e.g., drinking water use; cold water fishery
use) and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams and to protect and
maintain water quality in special protection streams, as
required by statewide regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter
93 (collectively referred to herein as "state water quality
requirements").
[3] To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from
regulated earth disturbance activities, state water quality
requirements can be met by BMPs, including site design,
which provide for replication of preconstruction
stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions, so that
postconstruction stormwater discharges do not degrade
the physical, chemical or biological characteristics of the
receiving waters. As described in the DEP Comprehensive
Stormwater Management Policy (#392-0300-002,
September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the
following:
[a] Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater
infiltration conditions;
[b] Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to
ensure filtering out of chemical and physical
pollutants from the stormwater runoff; and
[c] Streambank and streambed protection: management
of volume and rate of postconstruction stormwater
discharges to prevent physical degradation of
receiving waters (e.g., from scouring and erosion).
[4] The DEP has regulations that require municipalities to
ensure design, implementation and maintenance of best
management practices (BMPs) that control runoff from
new development and redevelopment (hereinafter
"development") after regulated earth disturbance
activities are complete. These requirements include the
need to implement postconstruction stormwater BMPs
with assurance of long-term operations and maintenance
of those BMPs.
[5] Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth
disturbance activities from the appropriate DEP regional
office or County Conservation District must be provided to
the City. An NPDES construction permit [or permit
coverage under the statewide general permit (PAG-2)]
satisfies the requirements Subsection A(3)(a)[1].
(4) Appendix 4: Sanctions.
§ 197-31 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-31
197:633
(a) Public nuisance.
[1] The violation of any provision of this section is hereby
deemed a public nuisance.
[2] Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation.
(b) Enforcement.
[1] Whenever the City finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this section,
the City may order compliance by written notice to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without
limitation:
[a] The performance of monitoring, analyses, and
reporting;
[b] The elimination of prohibited discharges;
[c] Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or
operations;
[d] The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution
or contamination hazards and the restoration of any
affected property;
[e] Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs;
[f] The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
[g] Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
[2] Failure to comply within the time specified shall also
subject such person to the penalty provisions of this
section. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and
shall not prevent the City from pursuing any and all other
remedies available in law or equity.
(c) Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals. Any
building, land development or other permit or approval for
regulated earth disturbance activities issued by the City may
be suspended or revoked by the governing body for:
[1] Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision
of the permit;
[2] A violation of any provision of this section; or
[3] The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or
§ 197-31 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-31
197:634
§ 197-32. Construction improvements plan.
In addition to all illustrations and notes required under § 197-26, the plan
shall contain the following:
creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which
endangers the life or property of others.
(d) Penalties.
[1] Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
guilty of a summary offense, and upon conviction shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 for each violation,
recoverable with costs, or imprisonment of not more than
90 days, or both. Each day that the violation continues
shall be a separate offense.
[2] In addition, the City, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or
proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this
section. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall have the
right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
A. Horizontal plan of storm drains and sanitary sewers, which may be
shown on a separate drainage plan, including:
(1) Location and size of line, with stations corresponding to the profile.
(2) Locations of manholes or inlets, with the grade between and
elevation of flow line and top of each manhole or inlet.
(3) Property lines and properties of abutting owners, with details of
easements.
(4) Beginning and end of proposed construction.
(5) Location of laterals.
(6) Location of all other drainage facilities and utilities in the vicinity of
storm and/or sanitary sewer lines.
(7) Hydraulic design data for culverts and/or bridge structures and
details of proposed handling of surface and/or subsurface drainage
problems.
B. Profile of storm drains and sanitary sewers, which may be shown on a
separate drainage plan, including:
(1) Profile of existing and proposed ground surface with elevations at
the top of manholes or inlets.
§ 197-31 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-32
197:635
§ 197-33. As-built plan.
The as-built plan shall be drawn to the same scale as the final plan,
conservation plan, construction improvements plan and profile plan and
shall be certified to by the engineer of the landowner or developer and
approved by the City Engineer.
(2) Profile of storm drains or sewers, showing the type and size of pipe,
grade, cradle (if any), manhole or inlet locations with the length
and slope of the pipe between structures shown and elevations at
the flow line.
C. Plans and details of bridges, street trees, retaining walls, stormwater
management structures, soil erosion and sedimentation control
structures, lighting, disabled access parking, walls, fences and all other
proposed improvements, containing sufficient information which would
customarily be included in working drawings and specifications for the
proposed construction and which would enable the City Engineer to
perform an effective evaluation of the proposed improvements and with
specific detail which would allow the contractor to build the same.
A. Said plan shall indicate the actual location, dimensions and/or
elevations of all completed improvements, including but not limited to:
(1) Principal permitted buildings.
(2) Concrete monuments.
(3) The location of the cartway and curb, for both sides of each street
and alley.
(4) Sanitary sewer main, manholes, rim and invert elevations and
laterals.
(5) Storm sewer main, inlets, rim and invert elevations and culverts.
(6) Water mains and fire hydrants.
(7) Streetlights.
(8) Street trees.
(9) Landscaping and screen planting.
(10) Berms.
(11) Permanent sedimentation, soil erosion control and stormwater
management structures with as-built storage volume and outlet
structure elevations and as-built elevations for the basin.
(12) All easements.
§ 197-32 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-33
197:636
§ 197-34. Subdivision and land development agreement.
A subdivision and land development agreement shall be executed in
accordance with § 197-14.
§ 197-35. Recording of final plan.
The recording of an approved final major subdivision and/or land
development plan shall be as described in § 197-15.
B. The as-built plan shall be submitted in complete and accurate form
prior to the final release of funds being withheld, as provided in Article
X.
§ 197-33 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-35
197:637

ARTICLE VII
Minor Plan Requirements
§ 197-36. Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to set forth a streamlined set of plan
requirements for minor subdivision and/or land development that meet the
conditions of eligibility set forth in § 197-10A.
§ 197-37. Plan requirements.
The procedures of § 197-13 and the following shall apply to preliminary/final
plans, as follows:
A. Drafting standards:
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet.
(2) Plans shall be legible.
(3) Metes and bounds shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds and in
feet and decimal parts thereof.
(4) The boundary line of the subdivision shall be shown as a heavy line.
(5) Plans shall be on sheets no larger than thirty by forty-two (30 x 42)
inches, unless otherwise permitted by the city.
B. The plan shall depict, note or be accompanied by the following
information:
(1) The name of subdivision or land development.
(2) The name and address of the owner of record and applicant.
(3) The name, address and seal of the surveyor who prepared the plan.
(4) Zoning requirements, including:
(a) Applicable district, including overlay districts, such as the
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District.
(b) Lot area and yard requirements (area and bulk requirements).
(c) The percentage of the lot(s) allowed to be covered by
impervious surfaces and buildings.
(5) Location map showing relation of site to adjoining properties and
streets within 1,000 feet at a scale no less than one inch equals 800
feet. In addition, a plan depicting the proposed lot lines must be
included at a scale of one inch equals 800 feet.
(6) North arrow and date of the plan or drawing, including revision
dates.
§ 197-36 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-37
197:639
(7) Written and graphic scales.
(8) Gross and net acreage of lots.
(9) Property boundaries.
(10) Contiguous boundaries of all adjoining properties and names of
owners and tax parcel numbers of such properties.
(11) Existing streets and/or alleys on or adjacent to the site, with
existing and future rights-of-way, names and cartway widths.
(12) Buildings (and their uses), driveways, wells, sewer lines, water
mains, fire hydrants, utility poles, septic tanks, storm drains,
culverts, bridges, utility easements and other significant man-made
features within the lot which is being subdivided.
(13) Existing contours at two-foot intervals, including the date and
source of the contours. The USGS topography may be used to fulfill
this requirement.
(14) Existing natural features, including:
(a) Soil types and description.
(b) Tree masses and notable trees, indicating which are to be
removed and which are to remain.
(c) Streams, springs and wetlands.
(d) Any PNDI sites, as addressed in § 197-51.
(15) Proposed lot boundaries, lot layout and building setback lines.
(16) Proposed driveway location(s).
(17) Any areas within the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District.
(18) Whenever the proposal is a land development, the following shall
be submitted:
(a) A grading plan indicating proposed contour and final grades
and two-foot intervals and all proposed improvements.
(b) A plan depicting the proposed buildings, sidewalks,
crosswalks, bus stops, drainage, curbing, parking, street trees,
fencing and other proposed improvements.
(c) Types of buildings proposed and proposed height of buildings
and other structures.
(d) Architectural elevations.
(19) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan as per Article VIII.
(20) A stormwater management plan as per Article VIII.
§ 197-37 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-37
197:640
(21) Property and lot boundaries with dimensions, metes and bounds,
closing with an error of not more than one foot in 10,000 feet.
(22) Location of permanent reference monuments and corner markers.
(23) A planning module for land development shall be submitted as
required by Chapter 71 of 25 Pa. Code, regarding the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act.
(24) Location of percolation test pits and proposed on-lot sewage
disposal system (if applicable).
(25) Location of proposed well for on-site water supply (if applicable) or,
whenever public water is utilized, the proposed water flow.
(26) A graphic depiction and a list of all easements shown on the plan
and, if appearing on record, the book and page numbers.
(27) Such private deed restrictions, including building setback lines, as
may be imposed upon the property as a condition to sale, together
with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may
affect the title to the land being subdivided. The plans must clearly
differentiate between existing and proposed deed restrictions. If
there are no deed restrictions a note to that effect must be placed
on the plan.
(28) A written agreement, pursuant to § 197-14.
(29) Copies of the proposed legal description for each lot, based on net
acreage.
(30) If the proposed lot(s) abuts on a street under the jurisdiction of the
state, a note shall be added to the final plan to indicate that a
highway occupancy permit is required before a driveway or street
or alley can access a state highway.
(31) A list of all permits, agreements, approvals, clearances and the like
required to be obtained in connection with the proposed
subdivision and/or land development and the federal, state, county
or other agencies, authorities and companies from which the same
are to be obtained.
(32) A note indicating ownership of the subject tract or proof that the
applicant is an authorized agent of the owner.
(33) Certification as to the accuracy of the plan and details of such plans
shall be prepared in accordance with Act 367, known as the
"Professional Engineers Registration Law, P.L. 913, No. 367 (63 P.S.
§ 151), as amended."
(34) Information pertaining to dumps, quarries, sinkholes, bedrock
outcrops, toxic wastes or other potential hazards or constraints
(where applicable).
§ 197-37 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-37
197:641
§ 197-38. Recording of final plan.
The recording of an approved final minor subdivision plan shall be as
prescribed in § 197-15.
(35) The location of trash storage areas.
(36) The location of all fencing, hedges and walls.
(37) The location of all lights, street trees and shade trees.
(38) The location of any freestanding sign, benches, planters or other
site accessories where applicable.
(39) The location of all disabled (handicapped) access and parking.
(40) A description of all nonresidential uses in terms of existing and
proposed hours of operation, lighting, parking, number of people
associated with the use and other relevant characteristics.
§ 197-37 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-38
197:642
ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards and Requirements
§ 197-39. General standards.
A. All subdivision and/or land development plans to be approved by the
City Council must comply with the standards contained within this
Article. Such standards shall be considered minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. These standards shall not be construed to be complete specifications
for construction. Detailed and complete specifications shall be the
responsibility of the applicant's engineer/design professionals.
C. Where literal compliance with the standards hereinafter specified is not
possible, the City Council may modify the standards to permit
reasonable utilization of property while securing substantial
conformance with the objectives of these regulations, in accordance
with Article X, § 197-76.
D. Land shall be developed and only uses permitted in conformance with
the Comprehensive Plan, Chapter 224, Zoning, and other ordinances,
codes and regulations in effect in the city and with the Official Sewage
Facilities Plan and other city plans and maps.
E. Land shall be developed in conformance with all pertinent statutes,
regulations, rules and codes of federal, state and county agencies
concerned with subdivision, land development, construction and
improvements or any activity arising out of or related thereto in any
way whatsoever.
F. The design of subdivisions and land developments shall minimize
disturbance to the natural terrain, natural drainage, existing topsoil
and existing trees.
G. Land subject to hazards to life, health or property, such as may arise
from fire, floods, disease or other causes, shall not be developed for
building purposes unless such hazards have been eliminated or unless
the plan shall show adequate safeguards against them.
H. The floodway (FW), as defined by the Floodplain Conservation Overlay
District and Map, and lots deemed by the City Council to be
uninhabitable shall not be considered for residential occupancy nor for
such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or
aggravate the flood hazard. Such land with a subdivision or land
development shall be set aside for such uses that will not be affected by
periodic or occasional inundation of floodwaters or conditions which
produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
I. Proposed subdivisions and/or land developments shall be coordinated
with existing nearby neighborhoods, within or adjacent to the city, so
that the community as a whole may develop harmoniously.
§ 197-39 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-39
197:643
§ 197-40. Streets and alleys.
J. The name of any subdivision or land development shall not be similar to
or conflict with the name of any existing development in or adjacent to
the city and shall be subject to the approval of the City Council and the
Fire Marshal.
K. All planning, design, construction and maintenance of lots and uses and
structures thereon shall be in accordance with recognized
architectural, engineering and related standards. All work performed in
accordance with this chapter shall be accomplished in a professional
and workmanlike manner.
L. All portions of a tract shall be developed so that landlocked areas shall
not be created.
M. The design of subdivisions and land developments shall promote the
continuation of the existing, predominant traditional neighborhood
pattern of the city with a system of streets, alleys, detached garages,
front porches and sidewalks.
A. Streets shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance
with the following general principles and criteria:
(1) Proposed streets shall conform to such county and state street and
highway plans as have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as
prescribed by law.
(2) Residential streets and alleys shall be so laid out to encourage
through traffic. The arrangement of streets and alleys shall provide
for continuation of existing or platted streets and for proper access
to adjoining undeveloped tracts suitable for future subdivision and/
or land development.
(3) Provisions for emergency access and provisions for accessibility by
emergency vehicles shall be made through the design of streets
and alleys.
(4) The proposed street and alley pattern and layout shall be properly
and logically related to existing streets and alleys.
(5) The proposed street and alley pattern and layout shall be properly
and logically related to the topography of the land with regard to
grades and conditions of drainage. However, the traditional,
existing pattern of streets and alleys shall be extended to the
maximum extent possible in order to continue the traditional
neighborhood amenities of the city.
(6) The ultimate right-of-way of a street shall be shown in any
subdivision and/or land development plans. Further, the City
Council may prescribe additional right-of-way requirements in
accordance with Subsection D.
§ 197-39 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-40
197:644
(7) The proposed street and alley pattern and layout shall provide
suitable access to each lot and permit safe and convenient
circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(8) Every lot shall abut a public street, unless approved otherwise by
the City Council.
(9) All streets shall be platted to the boundary lines of the subdivision
or land development if the subdivision or land development adjoins
lands which may be developed in the future, and the same shall be
provided with easements and/or rights-of-way for turnarounds and,
unless approved otherwise by the City Council, improved to the
property boundary, including improved turnaround areas.
(10) If lots resulting from subdivision are large enough to permit
resubdivision or if a portion of the property is not subdivided,
adequate street rights-of-way to permit further subdivision shall be
noted on the final plan.
(11) Any street or alley not designed as a through street or alley shall be
designed to meet the cul-de-sac requirements of the city. However,
cul-de-sac streets shall be minimized.
(12) Whenever a cul-de-sac or any other street with a single point of
ingress and egress is proposed, the City Council may require that a
right-of-way be shown on subdivision and/or land development
plans to allow for a future connection of such streets or alleys to
streets or alleys on an adjoining property.
(13) Streets and alleys that are extensions of or in alignment with
existing named streets and alleys shall bear the names of such
existing streets and alleys, new street and alley names shall not
duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street and alley
names in and adjacent to the city, and all street and alley names
shall be approved by the City Council and the Fire Marshal.
(14) Where streets and alleys continue into adjoining municipalities,
compatibility of design, particularly with regard to cartway widths,
shall be employed to avoid abrupt changes in the cartway width or
to other improvements (such as sidewalks and street trees) within
the right-of-way.
(15) Streets shall be designed so as to avoid edge deterioration through
the use of curbs as required in § 197-41.
(16) Where a subdivision or land development abuts a railroad right-ofway,
streets or alleys crossing the rail line shall be minimized and
placed to facilitate grade separation.
(17) Streets shall be designed for maximum safety for fire trucks and
other emergency vehicles and shall be approved by the City
Council, upon the recommendation of the Fire Marshal.
§ 197-40 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-40
197:645
B. Cul-de-sac streets shall be designed to meet the following additional
standards:
(1) Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 600 feet and shall be at least
250 feet in length. If a cul-de-sac street intersects another cul-desac
street, the maximum total length of the sum of the streets shall
not exceed 600 feet.
(2) Cul-de-sac streets shall furnish access to no more than 20 dwelling
units.
(3) When required for future extension, the turnaround right-of-way
shall be placed adjacent to the tract boundary with sufficient width
along the boundary line to permit extension of the street at full
width.
(4) Culs-de-sac shall have a closed-end turnaround, with a right-of-way
having a minimum outside radius of 50 feet, and shall be paved to a
radius of not less than 40 feet to the outside curbline.
(5) Drainage of culs-de-sac shall be directed to flow along the curbline.
Drainage shall be toward the open end of the cul-de-sac whenever
possible.
(6) No cul-de-sac turnaround shall have a grade which exceeds 4%.
(7) The minimum grade for a cul-de-sac shall be 1%. Superelevated
culs-de-sac shall be prohibited.
(8) All design standards in Subsection C shall apply as applicable.
C. Other single-access streets.
(1) Any existing dead-end street or stub street shall be permanently
extended as a through street or a cul-de-sac street, as directed by
City Council and the City Engineer.
D. In addition to the aforementioned principles and criteria set forth in
Subsections A, B and C, the following shall apply to all streets, which
shall be subject to the approval of City Council:
(1) Streets and alleys shall be designed according to their function and
laid out to preserve the integrity of their design. Streets shall be
classified, designed, built and maintained in accordance with
Ordinance No. 933-93 and as follows:
§ 197-40 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-40
197:646
Type of Street
Minimum
requirements
for Traffic and
Parking
Right-of-Way
Width
(feet)
Cartway
Width
(feet)
Local and culde-
sac street
2 traffic lanes (12
feet)
50 24
Private street 2 traffic lanes (10
feet)
50 20
Alley 1 to 2 traffic
lanes
12 to 20 12 to 20
NOTE: See text for complete details on street design standards.
(2) Additional rights-of-way and cartway widths may be required by
the City Council, due to densities of dwelling units, increased usage
of existing streets or roadways or topographical conditions. The
City Council, upon recommendation of the City Engineer or other
consultant, shall have the discretion to modify these standards in
order to lessen traffic congestion; secure safety from fire, panic and
other dangers; facilitate the adequate provision for transportation
and other public requirements; and promote the general welfare.
(3) Right-of-way widths in excess of the aforementioned standards
shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is
necessary to provide adequate road embankments. Such slopes
shall not be in excess of three to one (3:1) in fill and two and onehalf
to one (2 1/2:1) in cut.
(4) There shall be a minimum center-line grade of 1%, a maximum
center-line grade of 10% on all local streets and alleys and a
maximum center-line grade of 7% on all highways.
(5) Maximum grade within any intersection shall not exceed 2%, and
approaches to any intersection shall follow a straight course within
100 feet of the intersection. The grade of any street or alley at the
approach to an intersection shall have a leveling area and shall be
provided with a maximum grade of 4% within 25 feet of the nearest
right-of-way line of the intersecting street or alley.
(6) The slope of the crown on proposed streets shall be more than oneeighth
(1/8) inch per foot and less than one-half (1/2) inch per foot,
except on superelevated curves, where the slope shall be not less
than one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot and shall extend from the inside
to the outside edge of the paving.
(7) The finished grade on all streets and alleys shall be carried the
entire width of the right-of-way. However, grading behind the curbs
or beyond the edge of the cartway may be modified, as determined
by the City Engineer, provided that the minimum sight distances
are maintained along the vertical and horizontal curvatures of the
§ 197-40 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-40
197:647
street, and provided that no obstructions exist at intersections
within the clear sight triangle.
(8) Maximum slopes of banks measured perpendicular to the center
line of the street shall be three feet horizontal to one foot vertical in
fill areas and two and one-half (2 1/2) feet horizontal to one foot
vertical in cut areas and shall be planted and vegetated to prevent
soil erosion.
(9) Vertical curves are required for changes in grade greater than 1%.
The rate of change of grade on vertical curves shall be no more
than 4% per 100 feet of street and no more than 4% per 100 feet for
sags, provided that clear sight distance for summits is maintained
at all points along the center line. PennDOT standards relative to
vertical curves shall apply to all state roads.
(10) Changes in street direction shall be made by horizontal curves with
a minimum center-line radius of 500 feet for state roads and
highways and 150 feet for local and cul-de-sac streets. Tangents of
at least 100 feet shall be required between reverse curves and shall
be measured at the center line. The foregoing minimum radii shall
apply in all cases where the street deflects 10º or more. Variations
in radii may be permitted when topographic or other conditions so
require.
(11) Combinations of minimum radius horizontal curves with maximum
street grades shall not be permitted.
(12) A minimum curb or paving radius of 25 feet and minimum radius of
15 feet for right-of-way lines shall be provided at all local street
intersections; and minimum radii of 35 feet and 25 feet,
respectively, as above, shall be provided on all other street
intersections of state highways.
(13) At intersections, the street right-of-way line shall be parallel to the
curbline.
(14) Any person who proposes access to the right-of-way of a state
street or highway is required to obtain a highway occupancy permit
from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Prior to the
issuance of a highway occupancy permit, the city shall review the
application and forward its comments to PennDOT.
(15) Proper sight distance shall be provided with respect to both
horizontal and vertical alignment. A clear sight distance, as defined
in Article II, shall be provided along the center line of streets as
follows:
§ 197-40 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-40
197:648
Required Sight Distance
(feet)
Grade of Road
Posted
Speed
(miles
per
hour)
-10% to
-5%
-5% to
0% 0%
+0% to
5%
+5% to
10%
25 175 160 150 145 140
30 230 210 195 185 175
35 305 275 250 235 225
40 390 345 315 290 275
45 485 425 385 355 330
50 600 515 460 420 390
55 705 605 540 490 455
(16) Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all street and alley
intersections, where there shall be a clear sight triangle of 75 feet,
measured along the center lines from the point of intersection. The
triangular-shaped portion of land forming the clear sight triangle
shall not have anything erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow
in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of
motorists entering or leaving the intersection, except for utility
poles, light standards, street signs and fire hydrants.
(17) Right-angle intersections shall be used to the maximum extent
possible. No intersection angle, measured at the center line, shall
be less than 70º.
(18) No more than two streets or alleys shall cross at the same point.
(19) Proposed intersections along one side of an existing street shall
coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such
street or be offset by at least 200 feet from center line to center
line.
(20) Intersections along highways shall be a minimum of 800 feet apart.
(21) Where a subdivision or land development borders an existing street
or intersection which is determined by the City Engineer to be in
need of improvement, said street or intersection shall be improved
with the following considerations:
(a) This requirement shall apply only to city streets and those
sides of intersections which pertain to city streets, unless the
state concurs with the improvements and imposes certain
requirements along streets which they own and maintain.
§ 197-40 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-40
197:649
(b) Should the property border an undersized street or
intersection on only one side, then the improvements shall take
place only on the side of the street or intersection which is
tangent to the property.
(c) All improvements to be made to said streets and intersections
shall be determined by the City Engineer or Traffic Engineer
employed by the city.
(d) Land associated with the rights-of-way for undersized streets
and intersections shall be delineated, depicted and otherwise
noted on all subdivision and/or land development plans for the
subject property and shall be offered for dedication with the
improvements associated therewith.
(22) When a subdivision or land development fronts on an existing
street having a right-of-way less than the minimum width as
determined by the City Engineer, an ultimate right-of-way line shall
be established and dedicated, with the following considerations:
(a) The distance of the ultimate right-of-way line from the center
line of the existing right-of-way shall be one-half (1/2) the width
of the required minimum right-of-way.
(b) The ultimate right-of-way shall be delineated, depicted and
otherwise noted on all subdivision and land development plans
and shall be offered for dedication with the improvements
associated therewith.
(c) Any required setback shall be measured from the ultimate
right-of-way line. However, only the lot area contained within
the existing right-of-way width shall be subtracted when
computing the minimum lot area requirements for compliance
with Chapter 224, Zoning.
(23) Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided to aid in
ingress and egress relative to highways, with the following
considerations:
(a) Where a subdivision or land development borders a state road,
the landowner or developer shall confer with the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) regarding specific
design standards for such lanes.
(b) Where a subdivision or land development borders a city street
or alley, the landowner or developer shall confer with the City
Engineer or traffic engineer employed by the city regarding
specific design standards for such lanes.
(24) Street signs similar to those which exist in the vicinity of the
property shall be provided and erected by the landowner or
developer at all intersections, subject to the prior approval of the
§ 197-40 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-40
197:650
City Council. Said street signs and posts shall be of standard size
approved by City Council.
(25)No dwelling or other principal permitted building which depends
upon the improvement of any street for ingress and egress shall be
permitted to be occupied until all improvements are fully
completed from an existing street or alley to and across the front of
the lot on which the building is located and/or to a sufficient depth
along the side of the lot to service any driveway and driveways and
parking spaces as required by this chapter.
(26)No street shall be paved between December 1 and March 15
without written permission of the City Council.
(27) Adequate drainage shall be provided for low points along streets
and where required to intercept runoff. All street surfaces shall
have positive drainage. Storm sewers, culverts and related
installations shall be provided to drain all low points along streets
and to intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
(28) Streetlighting shall be in accordance with a plan approved by the
City Council and installed prior to dedication of streets. A copy of
the proposed final plan shall be submitted by the applicant to the
electric company for approval of the street lighting plan.
(29) An offer of a deed of dedication for streets will be considered by
City Council for the following:
(a) A street or alley serving more than five residential lots or
dwelling units.
(b) A street or alley which is an extension of an existing street or
alley.
(c) A street or alley which connects two or more existing streets or
alleys.
(30) Streets or alleys within land developments will be accepted at the
discretion of the City Council.
E. Existing streets. Along existing streets which adjoin proposed
subdivisions and/or land developments, the city may require additional
cartway, right-of-way, shoulder or other paving to create stable and/or
safe conditions, as determined by the City Council, upon
recommendation by the City Engineer or traffic engineer employed by
the city.
F. Alleys.
(1) Alleys are encouraged within residential developments to provide
access for vehicles to rear, detached garages and to maintain the
traditional street pattern of the city. The alley provides
§ 197-40 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-40
197:651
opportunities for service and delivery and eliminates the need
for curb cuts which are conventional in more suburban-type
development.
(2) Alleys shall be at least 12 feet wide and paved when they are oneway
or in a residential development. Two-way alleys shall be at
least 20 feet wide and paved. Alleys in a nonresidential
development shall be at least 22 feet wide and paved.
(3) All buildings and structures shall be at least 10 feet from the edge
of the pavement of the alley.
(4) All alleys shall be designed and built to be through alleys
connecting to existing or proposed streets.
(5) A deed of dedication for an alley may be accepted if the alley is built
in compliance with the design standards above and with the
construction standards of Subsection G below.
G. Private streets.
(1) Private residential streets may be approved by the City Council
only if they serve as access to no more than five lots that are deedrestricted
or, for other reasons, cannot be further subdivided and
are designed to meet the standards of § 197-40G(2) and the
following:
(a) No on-street parking will be allowed.
(b) Where the private street intersects the public street cartway, a
minimum of turning radius of 10 feet shall be provided.
(c) All private residential streets shall be constructed to meet the
requirements of public streets.
(d) Shoulders will generally not be required unless needed for
stormwater management or street stabilization purposes as
determined by the City Engineer.
(e) Curbs shall be provided.
(f) All other requirements of § 197-40H shall apply.
(2) Where the private residential streets serve up to five lots that are
not deed-restricted or could be further subdivided or otherwise
could serve additional lots at some future time, a fifty-foot right-ofway
shall be provided.
(3) Private streets shall be indicated as such on the record plan and
shall be subject to all requirements in Article IX. All agreements
shall indicate the corporation, association, condominium or other
legal entity responsible for the maintenance of the private streets.
H. Construction of streets.
§ 197-40 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-40
197:652
§ 197-41. Curbs.
(1) All materials used in the construction of streets and alleys and the
methods of construction and drainage thereof shall be in
accordance with the most current requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408
Specifications. This shall include but not be limited to the following
sections of the Form 408 Specifications:
(a) Subgrade construction.
(b) Crush aggregate base course.
(c) Bituminous-pavement construction.
(2) In addition to the above, all streets shall be constructed in
accordance with any other standards required by the City
Engineer.
(3) All streets maintained by the state shall conform to the PennDOT
design standards.
(4) Underground utilities shall be installed before the streets are
constructed.
(5) All utility companies shall be notified of street openings in
accordance with Act 172 and 287.195
A. Curbs shall be installed along the full length of all streets and in and
along parking areas with five or more parking spaces.
B. The dimensions of the curbs, unless specified otherwise by the City
Engineer, shall be as follows:
(1) Vertical curbing shall be poured in place Class A cement concrete,
18 inches in depth and in accordance with those requirements set
forth in the latest edition of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Specifications, Form 408. The exposed face of the
curb shall be seven inches high on all city streets and six inches
high in all parking areas. After completion of the bituminous
paving, Class BM-1 or AC-20 asphalt shall be applied to paving, and
Class BM-1 asphalt shall be applied to the joint between the curb
and the bituminous paving for a distance of one foot from the curb
towards the center of the street, to effectively seal the joint
between the curbing and the bituminous paving. All dimensions,
except those as noted above, shall be as shown on the most current
version of Drawing RC-64 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Standards for Roadway Construction, related to the
detail entitled "Plain Cement Concrete Curb."
195. Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 197-40 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-41
197:653
§ 197-42. Sidewalks and crosswalks.
C. Concrete curbs, constructed along state roads, shall be in accordance
with PennDOT's Form 408 Specifications.
D. Catch basins shall be installed along streets and alleys, in accordance
with PennDOT's Form 408 Specifications.
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of all streets as follows:
(1) Sidewalks shall be located to avoid pedestrian vehicular conflict
and promote safe pedestrian movement.
(2) The minimum width of all sidewalks shall be four feet.
(3) Sidewalks shall be located within a public right-of-way, a public
easement or a common area.
(4) Curb cuts for disabled (handicapped) access shall be provided at
street crossings, driveway crossings and in other locations as
required by the City Council.
(5) Depressed curbs shall be placed where sidewalks cross residential
driveways.
(6) Sidewalks shall be pitched laterally at a slope of not less than onefourth
(1/4) inch per foot to provide for adequate surface drainage.
All sidewalks shall have positive drainage.
(7) Sidewalks shall not exceed the allowable street grade.
(8) Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete.
(9) Sidewalks adjacent to angle parking areas shall be set back a
minimum of five feet to prevent car overhang from restricting
pedestrian movement along the sidewalk.
(10) When proposed sidewalks adjoin existing sidewalks which are
wider than four feet, a tapered transition shall be constructed.
(11) A grass planting strip of at least 18 inches in width shall be
provided between the curb and the sidewalk. The planting strip
shall be adequately graded and sodded.
(12) Pedestrian paths shall be constructed in all multifamily
subdivisions and developments and shall be a minimum of four feet
in width. Such paths shall be paved and shall be provided with
adequate drainage beneath the path in low areas.
(13) The location of all proposed pedestrian paths shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Council, upon recommendation of the City
Planning Commission.
B. Crosswalks shall be created as follows:
§ 197-41 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-42
197:654
§ 197-43. Driveways.
(1) Crosswalks shall be provided as directed by the City Council.
(2) Paved crosswalks, at a minimum width of five feet, may be required
in blocks more than 800 feet long.
(3) A line-striped crosswalk shall be painted across any street, at
intersections, and shall be a minimum of eight feet in width.
C. All sidewalks and crosswalks shall be graded to have positive drainage.
A. Individual driveways may be provided to furnish access on any lot,
unless shared driveways are utilized in accordance with Subsection J
and unless alleys are provided.
B. The width of any individual driveway shall be a minimum of nine feet
and the width of a shared driveway shall be 16 feet. Such driveways
shall have a radius at the curbline so that the driveway width shall be a
minimum of 12 feet for individual driveways where they meet a street
and a minimum of 15 feet for shared driveways.
C. The width of any driveway for any nonresidential use shall be 11 feet for
individual drives and 22 feet for shared drives. Such driveways shall
have a radius at the curbline so that the driveway width shall be a
minimum of 14 feet for individual driveways where they meet a street,
and a minimum of 25 feet for shared driveways.
D. A minimum grade of 1% shall be provided on all driveways. A maximum
grade of any driveway within the right-of-way of any street shall be 4%.
Within the property line exclusive of the right-of-way, the maximum
grade of a driveway shall be not greater than 15%. Grades adjacent to
garages shall not exceed 6%.
E. Entrance and exit drives crossing the street line shall be limited to two
per lot along the frontage of any single street, and their center lines
shall be spaced at least 100 feet apart. On all corner properties, there
shall be a minimum spacing of 100 feet, measured at the curbline,
between the center line of any entrance or exit drive and the street line
of the street parallel to said access drive.
F. The edge of all residential driveways shall be located not less than 40
feet from the tangent point of the curb radius of corner lots.
G. All driveways shall be paved with a hard-surface material, approved by
the City Engineer from the edge of the street cartway to a point in the
lot 30 feet from the edge of the cartway. The remainder of the cartway
shall be surfaced with erosion-resistant materials, approved by the City
Engineer.
H. A clear sight distance, as defined in Article II, shall be provided in
accordance with § 197-40D(15).
§ 197-42 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-43
197:655
§ 197-44. Parking areas and parking lots.
I. No private driveway shall have access to a highway if access onto
another street is possible.
J. Shared driveways shall be designed to serve no more than two
dwellings or other principal buildings. The driveways must be located
on a single lot, except approved common driveways, which may
straddle property lines.
K. Access and maintenance easements must be provided for the shared
portion of any shared driveway and recorded with the plan.
L. The width of that portion of a lot on which a driveway is located shall be
a minimum of 50 feet.
M. For new or improved driveways accessing a city street or alley, a city
driveway permit is required. All pertinent provisions of this section
shall apply. Said permit will be applied for and issued prior to accepting
an application for a building permit for either new construction or
substantial additions to existing structures. Upon the filing of an
application for a city driveway permit, the landowner or developer shall
pay, to the use of the city, such fee as the City Council shall from time to
time provide by resolution.
A. All parking areas and parking lots shall be in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 224, Zoning, § 197-62 pertaining to disabled
access and the following:
(1) All parking spaces shall have an area of at least 180 square feet
[nine by eighteen (9 x 18) feet] to which there is adequate access
from a street, except those spaces designated for disabled
(handicapped) users, which shall have an area of at least 252
square feet [fourteen by eighteen (14 x 18) feet].
(2) All parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Chapter
224, Zoning, and this Article.
(3) All parking shall be paved in accordance with PennDOT Form 408
Specifications.
(4) Whenever off-street parking is provided, it shall be located in back
of the front building line, with access to a street or alley or to an
approved driveway. Where such access is to a major or minor
collector street, adequate turnaround space should be provided on
the lot.
B. Any parking lot for five or more vehicles conform to the following:
(1) The minimum dimensions of stalls and aisles shall be as follows:
§ 197-43 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-44
197:656
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
Parking
Stall
Width
(feet)
Aisle
Width Stall
Depth
(feet)
One-Way
(feet)
Two-Way
(feet)
90 9 18 22 25
60 9 20 19 -
45 9 20 15 -
30 9 20 12 -
(2) Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to
proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without
requiring the moving of any other motor vehicles.
(3) All parking shall be line-striped so as to provide for orderly and safe
parking, and all line-striping shall be shown on the land
development plan.
(4) All parking lots, parking areas, loading areas and access drives
thereto shall be provided with vertical curbs.
(5) No more than 18 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous
row without being interrupted by a landscaping buffer at least
eight feet in width for interior islands and 15 feet for islands at the
end of parking areas.
(6) No one area for off-street parking of motor vehicles shall exceed 72
stalls in capacity. All seventy-two-stall parking areas shall be
separated from each other by a ten-foot wide minimum landscaped
area.
(7) In those areas within a parking lot where vehicles are parked and
in aisles adjacent to parking a maximum grade of 6% shall not be
exceeded. Parking aisles not directly adjacent to parking and
access driveways within a parking lot shall not exceed a grade of
8%. No grade cut, fill or height difference between terraced
parking areas shall exceed three feet, unless separated by
landscaped areas with slopes no greater than five to one (5:1).
(8) Entrances and exits to and from off-street parking areas shall be
located so as to avoid interference with street traffic.
(9) For the purpose of servicing any nonresidential property held
under single and separate ownership, entrance and exit drives
crossing the street line shall be limited to two along the frontage of
any single street, and their center lines shall be spaced at least 100
feet apart. On all corner properties, there shall be a minimum
spacing of 100 feet, measured at the curbline, between the center
line of any entrance or exit drive and the street line of the street
parallel to said access drive.
§ 197-44 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-44
197:657
§ 197-45. Blocks and lots.
(10) The width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
(a) A minimum of 14 feet for one-way use only.
(b) A minimum of 22 feet for two-way use.
(11) Concrete wheel stops shall be installed in parking areas to prevent
vehicle overhang onto adjoining areas.
(12)No less than a five-foot radius of curvature shall be provided for all
curblines.
(13) All dead-end parking areas shall be designed to provide backup and
turnaround areas for the end stalls of the parking area and shall be
clearly marked "No Parking." The following dimensions shall apply:
(a) Length: twenty-foot minimum.
(b) Width: ten-foot minimum.
(14) Lighting shall be provided for all parking areas. All light standards
shall be located within the landscaped areas and not on the parking
surface.
(15) All lighting used to illuminate any parking space or spaces shall be
designed, constructed and arranged to prevent glare. No lighting
shall be directed to cause a nuisance or disturbance to adjoining
properties or to cause any difficulty with visibility from streets.
(a) No lighting shall be located so as to illuminate areas beyond
the property line on which such lighting is located.
(b) All lighting shall be approved by the city to determine that it is
shielded to ensure that the source of the light will not be visible
beyond the boundaries of the property in order to minimize
disturbance to motorists, pedestrians or adjoining properties
and uses.
(c) All lighting shall be in accordance with the standards of the
Illumination Engineering Society (IES).
(16) All parking ares shall be landscaped in accordance with § 197-50.
(17) All materials used in the construction of parking areas shall comply
with the following minimum standards: one inch of ID-2 bituminous
wearing course on one and one-half (1 1/2) inches of ID-2
bituminous binder course on eight inches of crushed aggregate
base course (AASHTO 1 stone, choked with screenings) placed on
one inch of screenings.
§ 197-44 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-45
197:658
A. Blocks may vary between 500 and 1,320 feet in length, except that
blocks along major collector streets shall not be less than 800 feet in
length.
B. Blocks shall not be less than 200 feet wide between street right-of-way
lines and shall provide generally for two tiers of lots, except where
through lots with service by another street are required along a
highway, in which case, the minimum depth of such through lots shall
be 150 feet.
C. Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from
buildings and to prevent the collection of stormwater in pools. Topsoil
shall be redistributed as cover and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
D. Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to
curved street lines and cul-de-sac turnarounds.
E. Lot lines shall follow municipal boundaries rather than cross them, in
order avoid jurisdictional problems.
F. No lots below the minimum lot area as required in Chapter 224, Zoning,
shall be permitted for any use.
G. Every lot shall have at least 18 feet of access and frontage to a street.
H. In general, the depth of lots shall not be less than one nor more than
five times their width for any lots.
I. Odd-shaped lots shall not be created. The determination of when a lot is
odd-shaped shall be made by the City Council and shall be based in part
on whether or not there is any other practical way to design the lot.
Examples of odd-shaped lots are those which are extremely narrow,
extremely angular or contain an unusual number of abrupt changes in
direction.
J. Lot lines shall not cross any surface water body, such as a lake or pond.
To the extent possible, lot lines shall run parallel to or in the center of
watercourses.
K. Interior lots.
(1) No more than one new interior lot shall be formed within a
proposed subdivision. The creation of such lot shall be permitted in
any planned subdivision only in those circumstances required by
the configuration of the site. Under no circumstances shall the
applicant be permitted to use interior lot design to avoid
constructing or extending streets.
(2) An interior lot that is deed-restricted or cannot be further
subdivided shall have an access strip, with a minimum width of 20
feet for its entire length or depth.196
§ 197-45 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-45
197:659
§ 197-46. Monuments and markers.
L. House numbers shall be assigned to each lot by the City Codes
Administrator.
A. Monument locations must be shown on the final plan to define the exact
location of all street and/or alley rights-of-way and to enable the
reestablishment of all street and/or alley right-of-way lines. Monuments
shall be placed at the following locations:
(1) At each intersection.
(2) At changes in direction of street or alley lines.
(3) At each end of every street line or alley line.
(4) At locations where topographical conditions obstruct sighting
between two otherwise required monuments.
(5) To give full surveying control for each block, areas proposed for
dedication or public easement.
(6) At other locations along the lines of streets as may be determined
to be necessary by the City Engineer.
B. Monument locations defining the perimeter of the property shall be
determined by the City Engineer.
C. Markers shall be set at locations shown on the final plan as follows:
(1) At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or rear.
(2) At all angles in property lines of lots.
(3) At all other lot corners.
D. Markers required under Subsection C shall be placed by an engineer or
surveyor when final grading has been completed. Such markers shall be
clearly visible and placed before the issuance of any occupancy permit.
Prior to the release of escrow funds, lots, streets and alleys must have
markers in place, and the same shall be noted on the as-built plan as
having been set.
E. Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the scored and marked
point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of lines to be marked
and shall be set so that the top of the monument or marker is level with
the surface of the surrounding ground. Monuments and markers shall
consist of the following:
(1) Monuments shall be of concrete or granite with a minimum
dimension of four by four (4 x 4) inches at the top, six by six (6 x 6)
inches at the bottom and 24 inches in length. Concrete monuments
196. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 197-45 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-46
197:660
§ 197-47. Sanitary sewers.
shall be permanently marked on top with an indented cross or
drill hole of one-fourth (1/4) inch in diameter, which shall coincide
exactly with the point of intersection of the lines being
monumented.
(2) Markers shall consist of iron pipes or steel bars a minimum of 24
inches in length and five-eighths (5/8) inch in diameter.
F. Monuments shall be placed for all areas of land, improvements or
public easement to be offered for dedication prior to acceptance thereof
by the city or other entity to which the same are offered. Monuments
shall be placed by an engineer or surveyor. The engineer or surveyor
shall certify in writing that the monuments were placed in accordance
with the as-built plan.
G. Monuments shall be placed for all areas of common open space and
community on-lot sewage disposal owned and maintained by a
homeowners' association or similar organization.
A. The following requirements shall apply to sanitary sewage facilities:
(1) The City of Coatesville Authority Standard Specifications for
Construction of Sanitary Sewers shall apply.
B. In addition to the foregoing requirements, the following shall also apply
to sewage supply:
(1) In accordance with the Official Sewage Facilities Plan, dwellings
and/or lots within a subdivision or land development shall be
connected to the public sanitary sewer system where accessible
and available. Where such sewer system is not yet accessible and
available but is planned for extension to the property, the
landowner or developer shall install sewer lines and other facilities,
including lateral connections, force mains, pumping stations and all
other appurtenances to provide adequate service to each lot when
connection with said sewer system is made. Sewer lines shall be
suitably capped at the limits of the subdivision or land
development, and the laterals shall be capped at the street right-ofway.
When capped sewers are so provided, on-site sewage disposal
facilities shall also be installed, provided that they are so located as
to permit the easiest and least expensive connection to the public
sanitary sewer system when such connection becomes available.
(2) Prior to the approval of any subdivision and/or land development
involving public sanitary sewer (either live or capped), sewage
pumping stations, sewage treatment plants and community sewage
disposal systems, a properly detailed construction plan shall be
submitted to the City of Coatesville for review and approval. The
detail of the plan shall be determined by the City Engineer.
§ 197-46 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-47
197:661
(3) A sewer shall be considered to be planned for extension to a given
area any time after preliminary engineering and related studies
have been initiated preparatory to the construction of facilities
adequate to serve the area containing a subdivision or land
development or when the area is shown to be in a proposed sewer
service area in the Official Sewage Facilities Plan.
(4) All sanitary sewer lines, lateral connections and manholes and
other facilities shall be constructed and installed and shall provide
service to each lot in conformity with standards of the City of
Coatesville at the cost and expense of the landowner or developer.
(5) When such sanitary sewer facilities are installed in accordance
with this section, the same shall be inspected by the City Engineer
during such construction, at the cost and expense of the landowner
or developer, in accordance with the standards and procedures
established for inspection in Article X.
(6) When such sanitary sewer facilities are not to be constructed or
otherwise installed, on-lot sewage disposal systems shall be
constructed in accordance with statutes and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the city
and as approved by the city. The ownership and maintenance of
such system shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
When on-lot sewage disposal systems are to be utilized, the
landowner or developer shall furnish evidence of the feasibility and
satisfactory operation of the system to be utilized in the subdivision
or land development as required in Articles IV, V, VI and VII.197
(7) Where on-lot sanitary sewage facilities are to be utilized, each lot
so served shall be of a size and shape to accommodate the
necessary length of tile fields at a safe distance from and at a lower
elevation than the proposed well and building(s) to facilitate
gravity flow in accordance with city and state regulations and shall
be so plotted.
(8) If on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities are to be utilized, the
developer shall submit a feasibility report. Such report shall
compare the cost of providing on-lot facilities with a sewage
treatment plant. Based on the analysis of this report, the city may
require the installation of a public sanitary sewer system or capped
sewer.
(9) Whenever a developer proposes that individual on-lot sanitary
sewage disposal systems shall be utilized within the subdivision,
the developer shall either install such a facility approved by the city
or shall guarantee (by deed restriction or otherwise), as a condition
of the sale of each lot or parcel within the subdivision, that such
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 197-47 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-47
197:662
facilities can be installed by the purchaser of such lot or parcel. The
on-lot system shall be located on the lot it is intended to serve.
(10) Soil percolation test requirement.
(a) Soil percolation tests shall be performed for all lots within
subdivisions and/or land developments of less than 10 lots,
prior to final plan approval, wherein building(s) at the time of
construction will not be connected to a public sanitary sewage
disposal system in operation. In lieu of soil percolation tests for
individual lots in subdivisions and/or land developments
greater than 10 lots, soil percolation tests shall be performed
on a representative-sample basis related to soil types to
determine their suitability for on-site sewage disposal. Deephole
test pits shall be dug as a further means of guaranteeing
suitability of a site. All of the above shall be coordinated with
the Chester County Health Department.
(b) Soil percolation tests shall be made in accordance with the
procedure required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, by either a registered professional
engineer or registered sanitarian and/or the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act sewage enforcement officer.198
(c) Soil percolation tests shall be performed on each lot within the
site of the proposed on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities
for both the primary and backup disposal area and noted on
the final plan.
(d) The results of the soil percolation tests shall be analyzed in
relation to the physical characteristics of the tract being
subdivided and of the general area surrounding the tract being
subdivided. The final plan lot layout shall be based on this
analysis.
(e) Where applicable, the plan should note that "lot ____ has failed
to obtain acceptable percolation." The lot shall not be
developed without a sewage disposal system approved by the
city and a sewage disposal permit issued. A building permit
shall not be applied for or acted upon until proof of the sewage
disposal permit is provided to the Building Inspector.
(11) Sanitary sewers shall not be used to carry stormwater.
(12) Abandoned wells shall not be used as part of any proposed on-lot
sewage disposal system.
(13) All on-lot sewage disposal systems, including septic tanks, tile
fields or other structures, shall be set back at least 10 feet from
property lines.
198. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 197-47 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-47
197:663
§ 197-48. Water supply.
(14) All on-lot wells shall be at least 100 feet from any on-lot sewage
disposal system.
(15) Sanitary sewers shall have a minimum inside diameter of eight
inches and a minimum grade of one-half percent (1/2%).
(16) Manholes shall be located generally two hundred fifty (25) feet
apart on straight runs, but in no case shall they be located more
than 300 feet apart. Manholes are also required at all points of
change of line or grade and at all points of intersection of sewer
lines. Manhole frames, covers, buckets and steps shall be approved
by the City Engineer.
A. Adequate and potable water supply system(s) shall be installed
consistent with design principles and requirements contained in this
chapter, the City of Coatesville Authority standards, the criteria for
drinking water as administered by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and applicable state standards.
B. All subdivisions which create 10 or more lots shall be provided with a
complete public or water distribution system. Land developments shall
be subject to the same standard unless a water distribution system is
not readily available. The design and installation of such public system
shall be subject to the approval of the city and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, and such system shall be
further subject to satisfactory provision for the maintenance thereof.199
(1) Where a permit is required by the city or the state, it shall be
presented as evidence of such review and approval in the case of
private or public systems before construction commences.
C. Wherever a public water system is provided, fire hydrants shall be
installed for fire protection as approved by the City Fire Marshal.
Where fire hydrants are installed, they shall meet the specifications of
the Insurance Services Office of Pennsylvania. Location of hydrants
shall be approved by the city.
(1) Generally, all fire hydrants will be located on a minimum looped sixinch
line. Where a dead-end line is required to contain a fire
hydrant, the portion of the line between the main loop and the
hydrant shall be an eight-inch minimum diameter.
(2) Fire hydrants shall be spaced so that all existing and/or proposed
building(s) will be no more than 600 feet from the hydrant
measured along the curbline.
(3) The City Fire Marshal may recommend closer spacing of hydrants,
in which case City Council may require closer spacing.
199. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 197-47 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-48
197:664
§ 197-49. Street trees and shade trees.
Shade trees shall be provided along both sides of all streets where there
are no existing shade trees. When planted, shade trees shall be located
within the right-of-way line but shall not be located to interfere with the
installation and maintenance of sidewalks and utilities. No less than one
three- to three-and-one-half-inch caliper tree shall be planted for each
40 feet of street length. Such trees shall be planted in alternating rows.
However, such trees may be grouped in certain cases to achieve a particular
design objective when approved by the City Council.
(4) In commercial, industrial and institutional areas, the City Fire
Marshal shall recommend the location of hydrants.
D. Wherever a public water system is provided, applicants shall present
evidence to the City Council that the subdivision or land development is
to be supplied by a certificated public utility or by a municipal authority
or utility. A copy of a certificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such
certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to
serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be
acceptable evidence.
E. Where the developer proposes individual on-lot water supply systems
within a subdivision or land development, the developer shall either
install such facilities or shall guarantee (by deed restriction or
otherwise), as a condition of the sale of each lot or parcel within a
subdivision or land development, that the facilities can be installed by
the purchaser of such lot or parcel. Individual on-lot wells shall be
subject to the standards provided for by the county and the state.
F. Minimum water supply requirements. In all subdivisions and land
developments served by public water, the water pressure and gallonage
requirements prescribed by the Coatesville Water and Sewer Authority
shall apply.
G. Approvals conditioned upon adequacy of public water supply. No
subdivision or land development application proposing a public water
supply system shall be granted preliminary or final plan approval unless
applicant demonstrates full compliance with the provisions of this
section.
H. Construction standards. All construction standards shall be in
accordance with those of the Coatesville Water and Sewer Authority.
A. A list of recommended street trees for planting in the City of Coatesville
is included in the Appendix according to their botanical and common
names.
B. Naturalistic tree groupings may be proposed in lieu of regularly spaced
street tree plantings, subject to the approval of the City Council. Size
§ 197-48 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-49
197:665
§ 197-50. Landscaping requirements.
and quantity requirements shall be in accordance with Subsection A
above.
C. Where existing trees are retained along street rights-of-way, street
trees may not need to be planted other than to replace dead, diseased
or undesirable or weak-wooded varieties.
D. At intersections, trees shall be located no closer than 50 feet from the
intersection of the street right-of-way.
E. Street trees shall be of nursery-grown stock. They shall be of
symmetrical growth, free of insects, pests and disease.
F. All street trees shall conform to the American Standard for Nursery
Stock of the American Association of Nurserymen.
A. All required landscaping shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with a landscape plan approved by the City Council, which
shall be in compliance with this section and the landscaping and
buffering requirements of Chapter 224, Zoning. The landscaping plan
shall depict all proposed plantings required to complement, screen or
accentuate buildings, streets, alleys, parking areas, sidewalks,
walkways, sitting areas, service or maintenance structures, courtyards
and other site features.
B. The landowner or developer shall protect trees to be retained from
damage during construction. The following procedures shall be
followed in order to so protect such trees:
(1) Trees of six-inch caliper or more shall be preserved; and the City
Council may require the landowner or developer to plant one tree
of not less than two to two and one-half (2 1/2) inches in caliper for
each tree of six inches in caliper or more to be destroyed.
(2) No more than five inches of soil shall be placed around the trunks
of trees which are to remain. For those trees which are to remain,
where more than five inches of soil are to be placed, tree wells shall
be constructed to preserve such trees.
(3) Trees to remain shall be protected by wooden-slat snow fencing,
placed at the dripline of such trees.
(4) No boards or other material shall be nailed to trees during
construction, and no trees shall be sprayed with paint.
(5) Heavy equipment operators shall avoid damaging existing tree
trunks and roots. Feeder roots shall not be cut closer than 25 feet
from tree trunks.
(6) Tree trunks and exposed roots damaged during construction shall
be protected from further damage by being pruned flush; and if
§ 197-49 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-50
197:666
trunks are scarred, they shall be traced out for proper healing. All
soil shall be properly backfilled and tamped around such trucks and
roots.
(7) Tree limbs damaged during construction shall be sawed flush to
tree trunks.
(8) The operation of heavy equipment over root systems of such trees
shall be minimized in order to prevent soil compaction.
(9) Deciduous trees shall be given a heavy application of fertilizer to
aid in their recovery from possible damage caused by construction
operations.
(10) Construction debris shall not be disposed of near or around the
bases of such trees.
C. All landscape plans shall be submitted at the time of preliminary plan
approval for any major subdivision or land development and at the time
of final plan approval for any minor subdivision and/or land
development. Plans shall be based on and reflect the following:
(1) The functional and aesthetic factors which relate to the tract and to
the principal and accessory buildings and other structures.
(2) Enhancing views from and within the property.
(3) Screening and complementing proposed buildings and other
structures.
(4) Creating visual interest for the users and/or residents of the
proposed development.
(5) Using plant materials which are hardy and acclimated to the
conditions at the property and within the city.
D. A landscape plan shall include notes, diagrams, sketches or other
depictions to present the consideration and analysis of the following:
(1) An analysis of the site in terms of the existing views to and from the
areas which are proposed for development, existing topography
and vegetation conditions and other existing conditions which are
relevant to the site.
(2) An analysis of proposed planting and other landscaping needs as
related to screening views of buildings, screening buildings and
sections of buildings, screening parking areas and other areas
where vehicles are parked, screening storage areas, screening site
utilities and other appropriate types of screening.
(3) The consideration of locations where plantings and other
landscaping is needed to provide visual interest, define outdoor
space, complement the proposed architectural style and achieve
other functional and aesthetic requirements for landscaped areas.
§ 197-50 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-50
197:667
E. Preliminary and final landscape plans shall reflect the following
detailed criteria:
(1) Street trees as required by § 197-49A.
(2) The outer perimeter of all parking areas shall be screened.
Effective screens shall be accomplished through the use of plant
materials, fencing or walls and/or mounding through the use of
earthen berms.
(3) All industrial, institutional, commercial and/or multifamily
buildings on properties of one acre or greater shall be landscaped
in accordance with the following criteria:
(a) A combination of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs
shall be used as foundation plantings, i.e., plantings to be
installed in reasonably close proximity to the facades.
(b) One three- to three-and-one-half-inch caliper specimen
deciduous tree shall be planted for every fifty-foot length of
building edge, such tree to be a minimum of 11 to 13 feet in
height at the time of planting; and one eight- to ten-foot
specimen evergreen tree shall be planted for every 50 feet of
length of building facade.
(c) Five evergreen and/or deciduous shrubs shall be planted for
every 20 feet of length of building facade.
(d) Trees and shrubs shall be grouped in accordance with specific
design needs and objectives.
(4) Other landscaping, including trees, shrubs and ground covers,
shall be provided along walkways, in courtyards, around sitting
areas, at the entrance to the site and in other highly visible
locations, especially on the outer side of any internal access roads
which are visible from a public street which may adjoin a property,
at the entrance to buildings and around structures used for service,
storage or maintenance purposes.
(5) Requirements and standards for landscaping, in addition to that
specified above, shall be as determined by the City Council. The
Council may require plantings to reduce glare; to abate other
nuisances; to enhance the planting area in conjunction with streets;
and to fulfill screening, buffering and other functional purposes.
(6) The location, type, size, height and other characteristics of
landscaping shall be subject to the review and approval of the City
Council.
F. The preliminary landscape plan shall be drawn at a scale of at least one
inch equals 50 feet. It shall be totally coordinated with the overall site
plan in terms of its relationship to proposed buildings, roads, parking
§ 197-50 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-50
197:668
areas, walks, fencing, benches, signs, lighting and other like structures.
It shall contain the following:
(1) A delineation of existing and proposed plant materials.
(2) A delineation of other landscaping features, such as berms,
planting beds to be used for herbaceous plants, areas to be devoted
to lawns and other elements of the proposed improvements, such
as fences, walls, berms, retaining walls, lighting, benches, signs,
paving, stone, tree wells and the like.
G. A final landscape plan shall be submitted after the city has reviewed the
preliminary landscaping plan and submitted comments on the plan to
the applicant. The final landscape plan shall be drawn at a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet. It shall be totally coordinated with the overall site
plan and shall contain the following:
(1) A final version of all of the plan requirements stated above for a
preliminary landscape plan.
(2) A plant schedule wherein the botanical and common name of
proposed plants are listed, along with the quantity, caliper, height,
spread and other dimensions and characteristics.
(3) Details for the planting and staking of trees and the planting of
shrubs and any other details which depict other related installation
or protection, such as ground cover spacing, tree fencing, tree
grates and guards, tree wells and the like.
(4) Information regarding the continued maintenance of all plantings
and notes indicating that all plantings will be installed, maintained
and replaced if dead or diseased in locations as shown on the
approved landscape plan.
H. Plant characteristics and maintenance. All landscape plans shall
contain the following notes:
(1) All plants shall conform with the most recent edition of the
American Standard for Nursery Stock of the American Association
of Nurserymen.
(2) Trees and shrubs shall be typical of their species and variety; have
normal growth habits, well-developed, densely foliated branches
and vigorous, fibrous root systems.
(3) Trees and shrubs shall be free from defects and injuries and
certified by appropriate federal and state authorities to be free
from diseases and insect infestations.
(4) Trees and shrubs shall be freshly dug and nursery grown. They
shall have been grown under climatic conditions similar to those in
the city or properly acclimated to conditions of the city.
§ 197-50 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-50
197:669
§ 197-51. Natural resource protection standards.
All uses, activities and land development shall comply the natural resource
protection standards of Chapter 224, Zoning, and the following:
(5) Any tree or shrub which dies within the term of a maintenance
agreement shall be replaced by the landowner or developer. Any
tree or shrub which is deemed, in the opinion of the city, not to have
survived or grown in a manner characteristic of its type shall be
replaced. Substitutions for certain species of plants may only be
made when approved by the City Council.
(6) It shall be the responsibility of the landowners, tenants and/or
other occupants of the premises to adequately and properly
maintain the landscaped areas, which responsibility shall include
watering, cleaning of weeds and debris, pruning and trimming,
replacement of dead or diseased plantings and fertilizing to
maintain healthy growth.
(7) All trees along the right-of-way of any property shall be kept
trimmed nine feet above any sidewalk and 11 feet above all streets.
(8) All shrubs and other growth abutting any sidewalks shall be kept
cut back six inches from the edge of the sidewalks.
(9) Existing trees and shrubs at the corner of an intersection of streets
and/or driveways shall be cut to the height of 24 inches from point
of intersection of corner property lines back 50 feet to avoid
blocking sight distance to oncoming traffic; and shrubs or ground
covers to be planted shall be of the dwarf variety and shall not
exceed 24 inches in height at maturity.
I. All final landscape plans shall be accompanied by a cost estimate
prepared by the landowner or developer. The cost estimate shall be
evaluated by the city and revised by the city if necessary. The cost
estimate shall serve as a basis of establishing an escrow account
related to landscaping.
A. Consideration shall be shown for all natural features, such as notable
trees, watercourses, wetlands, wetlands margins, rock outcroppings
and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and value to the subdivision or land development.
B. Tree masses and notable trees shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible. All structures should be located within the building
area in such a manner as to minimize damage to vegetation. Areas in
which trees are retained should remain undisturbed out to the canopy
dripline and at the original grade level to the maximum extent possible.
C. The City Council may require the landowner or developer to plant one
tree of not less than two to two and one-half (2 1/2) inches in caliper for
each tree of twelve-inch caliper or more to be destroyed.
§ 197-50 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-51
197:670
D. Landowners or developers shall exercise care to protect trees from
damage during construction in accordance with § 197-50. Tree removal
shall be limited to the actual construction site necessary to build and to
move construction equipment.
E. Streams, watercourses, wetlands and wetlands margins.
(1) Such areas and any other surface water resources shall not be
altered, regraded, developed, filled, piped, diverted or built upon
except in compliance with Chapter 224, Zoning, and prevailing
state and federal programs and policies.
(2) Land subject to flooding.
(a) All regulations of the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District
in Chapter 224, Zoning, shall apply.
F. Steep slopes.
(1) The intent of these regulations is as follows:
(a) To conserve and protect steep and very steep slopes from
inappropriate development, such as excessive grading,
landform alteration and extensive vegetation removal.
(b) To avoid potential hazards to property and the disruption of
ecological balance which may be caused by increased runoff,
flooding, soil erosion and sedimentation, blasting and ripping
of rock and landslide and soil failure.
(c) To encourage the use of steep and very steep slopes for
conservation and other uses which are compatible with the
preservation of natural resources and protection of areas of
environmental concern.
(2) Interpretation of steep slope areas.
(a) In any application for subdivision and/or land development
where the lot includes areas of steep and very steep slopes, the
applicant shall, using two-foot contours, delineate slopes from
15% to 25% and greater than or equal to 25%. Further, the
applicant shall use an actual field topographic survey or aerial
survey as the source of contour information and the basis for
depicting such slope categories.
(b) This section shall apply only to those steep slopes which exist
for three consecutive two-foot contour intervals (six
cumulative vertical feet of slope). All steep slope areas shall be
shown for the purpose of city review and verification, but only
those occurring over three consecutive two-foot contour
intervals will invoke the standards of § 197-51F(4).
§ 197-51 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-51
197:671
(c) Once delineated, the mapping provided by the applicant will be
reviewed by the City Engineer. The applicant will be required
to follow all regulations of this section for those areas which
reflect steep slope conditions as determined in accordance
with this section through the City Engineer's review.
(3) Application procedures. Before a permit is issued for any
construction or land disturbance activity on land within or affecting
steep and very steep slope areas, the following material shall be
submitted for review by the City Engineer:
(a) Plans drawn to a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet,
sealed by a registered professional engineer, depicting the
following:
[1] The location, dimensions and elevation of the property.
[2] Existing and proposed uses and development.
[3] An earthmoving plan of the property which indicates
existing and proposed grades with contour lines at twofoot
intervals within the area of any proposed activity,
disturbance or construction. All areas of steep and very
steep slope shall be graphically highlighted.
[4] A site plan indicating existing and proposed structures,
other impervious surfaces, storm drainage facilities and
retaining walls. The site plan also shall locate and identify
existing vegetation, including woodlands, open areas and
their ground-cover type within areas of steep and very
steep slopes, as well as proposed landscaping material to
be installed.
[5] Typical cross-sections and elevations of the property and
proposed structures at intervals prescribed by the City
Engineer, as well as architectural plans, elevations and
sections.
[6] Photographs showing existing uses, vegetation and
topography within the steep and very steep slope areas.
[7] A statement, signed and sealed by a registered architect or
professional engineer, explaining the building methods to
be used in overcoming foundation and other structural
problems created by slope conditions, preserving the
natural drainage and preventing soil erosion and excessive
surface water runoff to neighboring properties and/or
streets, and the type of sewage disposal and water supply.
[8] Plan, profile and typical cross-sections of any proposed
street, emergency access or driveway within areas of steep
§ 197-51 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-51
197:672
and very steep slopes, with the seal of a registered
professional engineer thereon.
[9] A statement, signed by the owner or future occupant at the
time of subdivision, land development or building permit
application, that there is a full understanding of any
difficulties associated with access stemming from such
slopes. No plan shall be approved by the City Council
without the City Engineer's review of this material and his
or her recommendation thereon.
(4) Standards and criteria for applications. In evaluating any
application for subdivision or land development within steep and
very steep slope areas, the City Council shall determine
consistency of the proposal with the following:
(a) In areas with fifteen-percent to twenty-five-percent slope, no
more than 30% of such areas shall be regraded, cleared, built
upon or otherwise altered.
(b) In areas of twenty-five-percent slope and greater, no more than
15% of such areas shall be altered, regraded, cleared, built
upon or otherwise altered.
(c) Disturbances shall be minimized where the length or area of
steep and very steep slope is extensive both on the site and on
adjacent lands within 50 feet of the site.
(d) The proposed development, any impervious cover and their
resultant disturbance to the land and existing vegetative cover
will not cause stormwater runoff and/or related environmental
problems off the site.
(e) Removal of or disturbance to existing vegetation in steep slope
areas shall be minimized. The proposed impacts on existing
vegetation shall be evaluated in terms of the potentially
detrimental effects on slope stability, conveyance and recharge
of stormwater, aesthetic characteristics of the landscape and
existing drainage patterns. Further, it shall be demonstrated
that any and all reasonable mitigation techniques and
procedures will be utilized or have been considered in the
preparation of the subdivision and/or land development plan,
such as revegetation measures, control of soil erosion and
sedimentation, stormwater management and the like.
(f) Important visual qualities of the site shall be retained to the
maximum extent possible. In addition to vegetation, these may
include hilltops/ridgelines, rock outcroppings and the natural
terrain and contours of the site.
§ 197-51 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-51
197:673
(g) Road construction shall follow the natural topography to the
maximum extent possible, with cuts, fills and grading
minimized.
(h) Innovative, imaginative building techniques that are wellsuited
to slope conditions shall be encouraged, consistent with
other applicable codes and regulations.
(i) The stability of the slope, as characterized by the existing
interrelationships among the soil, vegetation, and rock, shall
be disturbed as little as possible.
(j) Proposed buildings and structures shall be of sound
engineering design; and footings shall be designed in response
to the site's slope, soil and bedrock characteristics; and
footings shall extend to stable soil and/or bedrock.
(k) All disturbed areas shall be stabilized and seeded or planted,
and notes to this effect shall appear on all plans.
(l) Finished slopes of all permitted cut and fill shall not exceed
three to one (3:1) or 33% unless the applicant can demonstrate
the method by which steeper slopes can be stabilized and
maintained adequately.
G. Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory (PNDI) sites.
(1) The Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory (PNDI) is a
comprehensive inventory of Pennsylvania's most significant natural
areas. The database, which is maintained by the Department of
Environmental Resources, contains the status and location of
plants, animals, geologic landmarks, natural communities and
other natural features which are considered exemplary, unique,
rare or endangered within the state.
(2) Areas containing endangered species and species believed to be in
danger of population decline have been located within the City of
Coatesville and documented in the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity
Inventory and the Chester County Natural Areas Inventory. The
applicant shall consult these inventories to determine whether
these species or any other elements of special concern are located
on the site. If a PNDI site is located, the applicant shall contact the
Nature Conservancy Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory -
East for assistance in determining whether or not the proposed
development will conflict with species on the site, as well as
measures which shall be taken to mitigate potential damage to the
identified species.
H. Woodlands.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
§ 197-51 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-51
197:674
TREE PROTECTION ZONE — An area that is radial to the trunk
of a tree in which no construction activity shall occur. The "tree
protection zone" shall be 15 feet from the trunk of the tree to be
retained or the distance from the trunk to the dripline, whichever
is greater. Where there is a group of trees or woodlands, the "tree
protection zone" shall be the aggregate of the protection zones for
the individual trees.
WOODLANDS — Consist of one-fourth (1/4) acre or more of
continuous wooded land where the largest trees measure at least
six inches DBH. The "woodland" shall be measured from the
dripline of the outer trees. "Woodlands" are also a grove of trees
forming one canopy where 10 or more trees measure at least six
inches DBH.
(2) Resource protection standards.
(a) Disturbance allowance.
[1] No more than 20% of woodlands which overlap other
natural resource areas, including floodplains, PNDI sites,
steep or very steep slopes, watercourses, wetlands,
wetland margins and other water resources shall be
regraded, cleared, built upon or otherwise altered.
[2] No more than 50% of woodlands which do not overlap
other natural resource areas shall be regraded, cleared,
built upon or otherwise altered.
(b) Areas of disturbance.
[1] Each building or structure shall be constructed in such a
manner as to provide the least alteration necessary of the
existing woodland. Where possible, the amount of clearcutting
shall be minimized and trees shall be selectively
removed.
[2] Trees which are retained shall be identified and protected
in accordance with the provisions of Subsection H(3), Tree
protection zone, below.
[3] Woodland alterations that would threaten the growth of
remaining trees shall be avoided.
(c) Remaining woodlands. Where possible, woodlands which
remain undisturbed shall interconnect with woodlands or
wooded areas of adjacent properties to preserve continuous
woodland corridors and allow for the normal movement,
dispersion and migration of wildlife.
(3) Tree protection zone. A tree protection zone shall be established
where trees or woodlands on the site are to be retained. In this
zone, the following standards shall apply:
§ 197-51 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-51
197:675
§ 197-52. Soil erosion and sedimentation control.
All soil erosion and sedimentation control practices shall be in accordance
with the standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources and the Chester County (Soil and Water) Conservation District.
§ 197-53. Stormwater management.
(a) Prior to construction, a wooden snow fence shall be installed
around the boundaries of the tree protection zone. The fencing
along the zone shall be maintained until all construction and
other work has been completed.
(b) Grade changes and excavations shall not encroach upon the
tree protection zone.
(c) Trees being removed shall not be felled, pushed or pulled into a
tree protection zone or into trees to be retained.
(d) No toxic materials shall be stored within 100 feet of a tree
protection zone, including petroleum-based and -derived
products.
(e) The area within the tree protection zone shall not be built
upon, nor shall any materials be stored there either
temporarily or permanently. Vehicles and equipment shall not
be parked in the tree protection zone.
(f) Sediment, retention and detention basins shall not discharge
into the tree protection zone.
(g) Sediment, retention and detention basins shall not be located
within the tree protection zone.
(4) Delineation. The applicant shall delineate woodlands which are on
the site. In addition, where trees or woodlands on the site are to be
preserved, they shall be clearly delineated on the plan as a tree
protection zone.
A. All stormwater management practices shall be in accordance with the
standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources
and the Chester County (Soil and Water) Conservation District.
B. Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall be provided to
drain all low points and to intercept stormwater runoff and shall be
subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
C. In the design of storm sewerage installations, special consideration
shall be given to avoidance of problems which may arise from
concentration of stormwater runoff over adjacent properties.
D. Storm sewers shall be placed in front of the curb when located in a
street right-of-way. When located in undedicated land, they shall be
§ 197-51 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-53
197:676
§ 197-54. Utility easements and rights-of-way.
§ 197-55. Other utilities.
placed within an easement not less than 20 feet wide, as approved by
the City Engineer.
E. Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches and a
minimum grade of one-half percent (1/2%). Changes in alignment shall
be by straight section connected by inlets or manholes.
F. Manholes shall be not more than 300 feet apart on sizes up to 24 inches
and not more than 450 feet apart on greater sizes. Inlets may be
substituted for manholes on approval by the City Engineer.
G. Inlets and manhole covers and frames shall conform to city standards.
At street intersections, inlets shall be placed in the tangent and not in
the curved portion of the curbing.
H. Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge water directly over a
sidewalk but shall connect with the gutter or storm sewer.
A. Utility easements shall be required to facilitate the maintenance and
repair of utility lines, sewers, wells and drainage structures. Facilities
shall be located within a street right-of-way or in the center of an
easement.
B. Easements with a minimum width of 15 feet shall be provided for
utilities and storm drainage. Wider easements shall be provided when
required by the utility company.
C. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream within a stabilized structure (such as
concrete culverts, concrete gutters, gabions, pipes and the like), there
shall be a drainage easement conforming substantially with the line of
the watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve
natural drainage but not less than 30 feet in width or as may be
required by the City Engineer. The landowner or developer shall
properly grade and seed slopes and fence any open ditches when it is
deemed necessary by the City Engineer.
D. To the maximum extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
E. Nothing shall be permitted to be placed or planted within the area of a
utility easement. The area shall be maintained as lawn.
F. Utility easements shall be described in a deed as shown on the
approved plan.
G. There shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet, measured at the shortest
distance, between any proposed dwelling and any existing natural gas
or petroleum product transmission right-of-way line.
§ 197-53 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-55
197:677
§ 197-56. Walls, fences and hedges.
§ 197-57. Retaining walls and grading.
A. All other utility lines, including but not limited to electric, gas,
streetlight supply, cable television and telephone, shall be placed
underground. Installation of all utilities shall be in strict accordance
with the engineering standards and specifications of the city and the
public utility concerned.
B. In accordance with the provisions of Pennsylvania Act 287,200 all
developers, contractors, etc., shall contact all applicable utilities and
accurately determine the locations and depth of all underground
utilities within the boundaries of the property proposed for
development, prior to excavation. A list of the applicable utilities and
their phone numbers shall appear on the plans submitted for review,
and proof shall be presented to the city prior to final plan approval.
A. All walls, fences and hedges shall be designed and constructed outside
of the right-of-way of any street or alley.
B. Except for retaining walls, which may be up to five feet in height above
grade, no freestanding wall shall be more than four feet in height above
grade.
C. Fences and/or hedges used in the front yard between the sidewalk and
building shall not exceed four feet in height.
A. All retaining walls shall be designed and approved in accordance with
the following:
(1) Such walls shall be designed by a structural engineer, whose seal
and signature shall appear on the plans.
(2) Such walls shall be constructed to have a batter, depth of footing,
anchoring, drainage and materials to provide for maximum safety.
Special safety precautions shall be taken whenever such walls are
constructed in or near areas of steep slope or existing buildings
and sidewalks.
(3) All grading above and below such walls shall comply with this
Article.
(4) Pressure-treated-timber retaining walls shall not exceed a height of
five feet above grade.
(5) All construction details for such walls shall be shown in accordance
with Articles V, VI and VII.
(6) Safety rails shall be provided for retaining walls when determined
by the City Engineer.
200. Editor's Note: See 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
§ 197-55 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-57
197:678
§ 197-58. Parks and recreational areas.
B. Blocks and lots shall be graded to ensure proper drainage away from
buildings and to prevent the collection of stormwater. All grading shall
be performed to create positive drainage for all surfaces.
C. Any four-to-one or greater slope and any disturbed areas shall be
properly vegetated with a year-round ground cover to minimize soil
erosion.
D. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum of 10 feet from
existing property or right-of-way lines of streets in order to permit the
normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting
property.
E. Permanent on-lot berms shall be deed-restricted to prevent regrading
or fill.
A. Each residential subdivision or land development with five or more
residential lots shall set aside 300 square feet of land for each
residential dwelling unit in the proposed subdivision or development,
for park and recreational use. Each commercial or industrial
subdivision or land development shall set aside 5% of the land in the
tract proposed to be developed for park and recreational use.
B. In lieu of setting aside land for park and recreational use, the applicant
for subdivision and/or land development shall pay to the city an amount
calculated as follows: an amount equal to the average fair market value
per acre of the undeveloped land as part of an approved subdivision
and/or land development multiplied by the amount of land required to
be reserved for park and recreational use as set forth in § 197-58A.
Payment shall be due and payable upon approval of the application for
subdivision and/or land development and/or execution by the applicant
of the required development agreement. The average fair market value
shall be as determined between the city and the applicant through
appraisals, which shall be paid for by the applicant; and absent such an
agreement, the average fair market value shall be determined by
common law arbitration, with the parties agreeing on a single
arbitrator. If the parties are unable to agree upon a single arbitrator,
the parties shall petition the President Judge of the Court of Common
Pleas of Chester County for designation of single arbitrator. The cost of
the arbitration and the cost of petitioning the President Judge of the
Court of Common Please of Chester County shall be paid by the
applicant. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding upon
the parties. Upon the selection of the arbitrator, the applicant shall
deposit with the city financial security equal to the payment due as
determined by the city.
C. The amount, location and design of recreational facilities on land to be
dedicated or the fees to be paid are to be used for the purpose of
providing park or recreational facilities accessible to the subdivision
§ 197-57 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-58
197:679
and/or land development and shall bear a reasonable relationship to
the use of the park and recreational facilities by future inhabitants of
the subdivision and/or land development. The City of Coatesville Open
Space, Recreation and Environmental Resources Plan, dated December
13, 1993, shall be used as a guide.
D. All moneys paid to the city pursuant to this section shall be placed in a
Park and Recreation Development Fund to be established by the City
Council clearly identifying the specific recreation facilities for which
the fee was received. Said fund shall be used by the city for the
acquisition and improvement of park and recreation sites and land in
accordance with the Coatesville Open Space, Recreation and
Environmental Resources Plan, 1993, or any amendments thereto,
recognizing that funds shall be expended only on properly allocated
portions of the cost incurred to construct the specific recreation
facilities for which the funds were collected.
E. The City Council, upon its own initiative or at the request of the
applicant, giving consideration to the size, shape and location of the
land in the proposed subdivision and/or land development proposal for
park and recreation use and giving consideration to the availability of
other park and recreation sites in the general area, shall determine
whether land in the proposed development shall be set aside for park
and recreation use or whether the applicant shall be required to make
payment of a sum of money in lieu thereof to be used for the acquisition
and development of other such sites and land accessible to the
proposed development.
F. In the event that the City Council approves the reservation and
subsequent improvement of land for park and recreational purposes as
provided in § 197-58A, the following provisions must be observed:
(1) The areas to be reserved as recreational land shall be conveyed to
the city upon approval of the application for subdivision and/or land
development and/or the execution by the applicant of any required
development agreement, unless the City Council determines that
the land is of such location and nature that its use is limited to local
residents or it could not reasonably be maintained by the city.
(2) If public dedication of the land is not accepted by the city, the land
may alternatively be conveyed to a legally constituted homeowners'
association or retained by and managed by such private ownership
as the City Council may approve so long as its use remains open to
the residents of the proposed development. In the event that the
recreational land is to be privately owned, adequate provision must
be made for its maintenance.
G. The City Council shall determine if the land is acceptable for dedication
or use for park and recreational purposes based on the following
criteria:
§ 197-58 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-58
197:680
§ 197-59. Historic site protection.
(1) The dedicated land must be readily accessible to all residents or
expected users of the development. At least one side of each park
or recreational site shall abut a public street for a minimum
distance of 100 feet. If public easements are the sole access, they
shall be at least 20 feet wide.
(2) The park and recreational land shall be located, to the maximum
extent possible, so that it equally serves all residents or expected
users of the subdivision and/or land development.
(3) The shape of all park and recreational land shall be suitable to
accommodate those park and recreational activities appropriate to
the location and needs of the residents or expected users of the
development.
(4) The soil shall be suitable for the intended park and recreational
uses and shall be well-drained or tile- drained if necessary.
(5) The park and recreational land shall be placed and sized to
accommodate the proposed uses and shall not consist of useless
small pieces.
(6) Such land shall not have an average slope exceeding 5%.
(7) No more than 30% of the land shall be contained within the
boundaries of a floodplain.
(8) All playgrounds, playfields, paths, tennis courts, basketball courts,
picnic areas and the like shall be designed to meet the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
H. The developer shall receive a credit for any land reserved and
subsequently improved for park and recreational purposes and
accepted by the city under this section towards the requirements of any
provisions within the Chapter 224, Zoning, which may require
recreational facilities.
I. If the City Council determines that usable park and recreation land is
available in a particular subdivision and/or land development but is
inadequate in size, the City Council may require a combination of
money and the reservation and subsequent improvement of land. In
such cases, the money shall be applied only to the number of lots or
units which are not covered by the land reservation under the
provisions above.
J. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor subdivision or
land development as described in § 197-10. In addition, the provisions
of this section shall not apply to any plan application, whether
preliminary or final, pending at the time of enactment of this chapter.
§ 197-58 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-59
197:681
§ 197-60. Porches, bay windows, decks and other building
projections.
§ 197-61. Lincoln Highway design standards.
A. All properties shown on the Coatesville Historic District map in
Appendix C shall be preserved and conserved to the maximum extent
possible.
B. Any architectural alteration proposed through subdivision or land
development to any existing building or structure which is visible from
a public street or alley shall be subject to approval of City Council. The
foregoing shall also apply to any proposed demolition.
C. In order to maintain the character and charm of buildings within the
Coatesville Historic District, the build-to versus the setback line along
streets shall be maintained. No subdivision or land development plan
shall be approved if the location of any new building or converted
building is set back more than three feet from the line formed by
existing buildings on any block in the Coatesville Historic District.
D. All subdivisions and/or land developments shall also be consistent with
the Historic Overlay District in Chapter 224, Zoning.
A. The beauty of the city as a series of traditional neighborhoods is derived
in large part from its rich pre-1960 architectural character. Buildings
placed at a build-to line, unenclosed porches with milled railings and
balustrades, bay windows and other building projections have provided
a graceful frontage appearance. No subdivision or land development
will be approved which erodes or destroys the existing traditional
neighborhood character of a block due to the following:
(1) The enclosure of porches in the front of buildings and on the front
and side of corner lots.
(2) The conversion of existing porches to uncovered spaces by the
removal of roofs and the conversion of existing porches to decks.
B. All new porches, bay windows, decks and other projections proposed
through subdivision or land development shall be approved by the City
Council.
A. The gateway and main street character of the city shall be reinforced
through the use of the following elements:
(1) Street trees as required under § 197-49 shall be placed at forty-foot
intervals along both sides of the street.
(2) No benches, planters, signs, portable signs, banners, stands,
canopies, building projections, vendor stations or other like
structures or activities may be located on, in, above or around the
sidewalk unless approved by City Council.
§ 197-59 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-61
197:682
§ 197-62. Disabled (handicapped) access.
(3) Off-street parking shall be accommodated on the side and to the
rear of buildings in order to maintain the streetscape character of
the city and to discourage the commercial-strip appearance typical
in suburban municipalities.
(4) Access to buildings for services and deliveries shall occur in the
rear or to the side to the maximum extent possible.
B. Parallel parking at the curbline shall be accommodated to the maximum
extent possible.
C. Crosswalks and sidewalks as provided under § 197-42 shall be placed to
maximize pedestrian circulation and safety.
D. The foregoing shall apply to all properties fronting on the north and
south side of United States Route 30 - the Lincoln Highway, as well as
corner properties extending onto streets which run perpendicular or
are at angles to the same.
A. All parking lots which provide parking for five or more vehicles shall
provide for disabled (handicapped) motorists according to the following
table:
Total
Parking
Spaces in
Lot
Commercial
Retail and
Assembly
Office
(Except
Medical)
Institutional
and Medical
Office
Religious
and
Educational Manufacturing
5 to 25 1 1 1 1 0
26 to 50 1 1 2 1 1
50 to 75 2 1 3 1 1
76 to 100 2 1 4 2 1
101 to 150 3 2 5 2 2
151 to 200 4 2 6 3 2
201 to 300 5 3 7 4 3
301 to 400 6 3 8 5 3
401 to 500 7 4 9 6 4
Over 500 1.3% 0.8% 1.7% 1% 0.7%
B. All conventional parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine by eighteen
(9 x 18) feet, and disabled parking spaces shall be fourteen by eighteen
(14 x 18) feet; the five-foot difference shall be line-striped and marked
with a disabled symbol on the pavement.
C. All curbs shall be depressed at sidewalk/street intersections to allow for
disabled access. All pavements shall be flush to accommodate a safe
transition from sidewalk to flush curb to street or alley pavement. No
§ 197-61 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-62
197:683
§ 197-63. Lighting.
§ 197-64. Impact assessment and mitigation.
The design and construction of subdivisions and/or land developments shall
be in accordance with § 197-77, whereby adverse impacts of development
shall be mitigated.
pavement surface or flush curb shall be higher or lower than one and
one-fourth (1 1/4) inch.
D. No ramped surface providing ingress to or egress from a building or in
and around a parking area shall exceed one to twelve (1:12) [8.33%]. If
possible, the ramped surface should be less than 5%.
E. The width of all paved ramps shall be at least six feet. The width of any
wooden ramps shall be at least four feet.
F. All requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) shall
apply. If there is a conflict between ADA standards and this section,
then the more stringent standards shall apply.
A. All lighting shall be shielded from adjoining properties and shall be
positioned in a downward direction toward the ground.
B. All streets shall have streetlights, and the height, footcandle
illumination, type and location shall be approved by the city and PECO
Energy. All wiring and transmission lines shall be placed underground.
C. All streetlighting and lighting in parking lots shall be high-pressure
sodium.
D. All lighting shall be approved by the City Council, subject to the
recommendations of the City Engineer.
E. All lighting standards of § 197-44 shall apply.
§ 197-62 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-64
197:684
ARTICLE IX
Improvements
§ 197-65. Completion.
§ 197-66. Completion guaranty.
A. No subdivision and/or land development application shall be finally
approved unless the streets shown on such plan have been improved to
a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition, or improved
as required by this chapter and any streets, alleys, walkways, curbs,
gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, street trees, water mains, sanitary
sewers, storm sewers and other improvements as required by this
chapter have been installed in accordance with this chapter. In lieu of
the completion of any improvements required as a condition for final
plan approval, including improvement or fees, the landowner or
developer shall deposit financial security with the city in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements or common
amenities, including, but not limited to, roads, stormwater detention
and/or retention basins and other related drainage facilities,
recreational facilities, open space improvements or landscaping which
are or may be required.
B. When requested by the landowner or developer, in order to facilitate
financing, the City Council shall furnish the developer with a signed
copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plan contingent
upon the developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final
plan (record plan) shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial
improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the
financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days, unless a
written extension is granted by the City Council. Such extension shall
not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the
request of the landowner or developer.
A. In lieu of the completion of the streets, alleys and other improvements
required as a condition for the final approval of the subdivision and/or
land development plan as set forth in §§ 197-13 and 197-65, the
landowner or developer may deposit financial security acceptable to the
City Council (except as set forth in this section) in an amount sufficient
to cover the costs of such improvements, estimated, calculated and
determined as set forth below.
B. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the city
may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld,
federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution irrevocable
letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending
institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security.
C. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution chosen by the
§ 197-65 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-66
197:685
party posting the financial security, provided that said bonding
company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such business
within the commonwealth.
D. Such bond or other security shall provide for and secure to the public
the completion of any improvements which may be required on or
before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.
E. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the landowner or developer. The city may adjust the amount of the
financial security annually by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for
the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of
the 90th day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a
rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the
city may require the landowner or developer to post additional security
in order to assure that the financial security equals said 110%. Any
additional security shall be posted by the landowner or developer in
accordance with this subsection.
F. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements
submitted by a landowner or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The city,
upon the recommendation of the City Engineer, may refuse to accept
such estimate for good cause shown. If the landowner or developer and
the city are unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall
be recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer
licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the city
and the landowner or developer. The estimate certified by the third
engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final
estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the
services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the city and the
landowner or developer.
G. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
H. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
City Council may authorize submission of final plans by section or
stages of development, subject to such requirements or guaranties as to
§ 197-66 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-66
197:686
improvements in future sections or stages of development as it finds
essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the
development.
I. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the City Council to
release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such portions of
the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing
addressed to the City Council, who shall have 45 days from receipt of
such request within which to allow the City Engineer to certify, in
writing, to the City Council that such portion of the work upon the
improvements has been completed in accordance with the approved
plan. Upon such certification, the City Council shall authorize release
by the bonding company or lending institution of an amount as
estimated by the City Engineer fairly representing the value of the
improvements completed; or, if the City Council fails to act within said
forty-five-day period, the City Council shall be deemed to have
approved the release of funds as requested. The City Council may, prior
to final release at the time of completion and certification by its
Engineer, require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the
aforesaid improvements.
J. Where the City Council accepts dedication of all or some of the required
improvements following completion, the Board may require the posting
of financial security to secure structural integrity of said improvements
as well as the functioning of said improvements in accordance with the
design and specifications as depicted on the final plan for a term not to
exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. Said
financial security shall be of the same type as otherwise required in this
section with regard to installation of such improvements, and the
amount of the financial security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost
of installation of said improvements.
K. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the city, financial security to assure
proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
L. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final plan approval, the
city shall not condition the issuance of building, grading or other
permits relating to the erection or placement of improvements,
including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted upon the final
plan upon actual completion of the improvements depicted upon the
approved final plan. Moreover, if said financial security has been
provided, occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected
§ 197-66 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-66
197:687
§ 197-67. Release from improvement bond.
§ 197-68. As-built plan.
shall not be withheld following the improvement of the streets and
alleys providing access to and from existing public streets or alleys
to such building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
passable condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements
as depicted upon the approved final plan, either upon the lot or lots or
beyond the lot or lots in question if such improvements are necessary
for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
A. When the landowner or developer has completed all of the necessary
and appropriate improvements, the landowner or developer shall notify
the City Council, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the
completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof
to the City Engineer. The City Council shall, within 10 days after receipt
of such notice, direct and authorize the City Engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The City Engineer shall, thereupon, file a
report, in writing, with the City Council and shall promptly mail a copy
of the same to the landowner or developer by certified or registered
mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt
by the City Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the City
Council. Said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or
rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part; and, if said
improvements or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the City Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of
reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The City Council shall notify the landowner or developer, within 15 days
of receipt of the City Engineer's report, in writing by certified or
registered mail of the action of the City Council with relation thereto.
C. If the City Council or the City Engineer fails to comply with the timelimitation
provisions contained herein, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved and the landowner or developer shall be
released from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or
other security agreement.
D. If any portion of said improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the City Council, the landowner or developer shall proceed
to complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
landowner's or developer's right to contest or question by legal
proceedings or otherwise any determination of the City Council or the
City Engineer.
A. Within 30 days after completion of improvements and approval of the
same by the city and before acceptance of such improvements, the
§ 197-66 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-68
197:688
§ 197-69. Remedies to effect completion.
In the event that any improvements which may be required under this
chapter have not been installed as provided in this chapter or in accordance
with the approved final plan, the City Council may enforce the bond or
other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If the proceeds
of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing
or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by such
bond or security, the City Council may, at its option, install or repair part
of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development
and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover from the
land developer the moneys necessary to complete said improvements. All of
the proceeds whether resulting from the security or from legal or equitable
action brought against the landowner or developer, or both, shall be used
solely for the installation of improvements covered by such security.
§ 197-70. Dedication and acceptance.
Upon completion of the construction of improvements in accordance with
the approved subdivision and/or land development plan, the following
conditions shall apply to the offer of dedication of the same and the
acceptance thereof:
landowner or developer shall submit to the City Council a corrected
set of as-built plans and profiles in accordance with §§ 197-18 and
197-33. In the event that the as-built plan is not submitted in complete
and accurate form, all funds being withheld by means of a completion
guaranty shall not be released until such plan has been satisfactorily
completed.
B. The as-built plan shall be reproducible and drawn to the same scale as
the final plan, conservation plan and construction improvements plan
and shall be certified to by an engineer or surveyor and approved by the
City Engineer.
C. Said plan shall indicate the actual location, dimensions and/or
elevations of all completed improvements, including but not limited to
those set forth in § 197-33.
A. The City Council shall have no obligation to take over and make public
any street or alley,or other improvement in or abutting a subdivision or
land development. If the City Council elects to accept an offer of
dedication, such acceptance shall not occur unless and until:
(1) The required improvements and monuments as shown on the
approved subdivision and/or land development plan, conservation
plan and construction improvements plan shall have been certified
by the City Engineer as having been constructed and installed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and all other
ordinances, codes, regulations, plans and maps of the city and
accurately delineated on an as-built plan.
§ 197-68 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-70
197:689
(2) A maintenance guaranty is provided through the posting of
financial security, such as that deemed to be acceptable to the city
as set forth in § 197-66A. Such guaranty shall assure the structural
integrity of required improvements as well as the functioning of
said improvements, in accordance with the design and
specifications as depicted on the approved final plans for a term not
to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of dedication.
Said financial security shall be in an amount equivalent to 15% of
the actual cost of installation of the required improvements.
(3) A deed or deeds of dedication for all such improvements, prepared
and executed by the landowner or developer in accordance with
forms prescribed by the City Council, shall have been presented to
the City Council, together with a certificate from the contractor or
contractors evidencing the payment of all labor and material costs
and a policy of title insurance, insuring the fee title to said
improvements as free and clear of all liens and encumbrances and
other objections to the title.
(4) At least 50% of all lots having access to the street has been
encompassed by completed dwellings, and the City Council shall
determine that the public interest requires that such improvements
be accepted.
(5) Any offer of a deed of dedication must be accompanied by a
maintenance bond and the as-built plan(s) at least 90 days prior to
the anticipated date for the acceptance of the deed of dedication.
B. The City Council shall have no responsibility with respect to any
improvements, notwithstanding any public use thereof, unless and until
such improvements are accepted for dedication by duly enacting or
adopting an ordinance or resolution therefor.
§ 197-70 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-70
197:690
ARTICLE X
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 197-71. Coordination with adjoining or nearby areas.
All proposed subdivisions or land developments shall be coordinated and
planned so as to be compatible with adjoining or nearby neighborhoods or
approved subdivisions or land developments to the end that harmonious
development will result. Such coordination shall also pertain to subdivisions
or land developments located adjacent to neighboring municipalities.
§ 197-72. Inspections.
All work and materials shall be subject to inspection for conformity with
the terms of this chapter by the Code Administrator, Assistant Code
Administrator, City Engineer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or
designated representatives.
§ 197-73. Lot purchasers and mortgagees.
When a subdivision and/or land development plan has been approved and
recorded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
improvements thereon completed and approved by the City Council or, in
lieu thereof, an improvement bond or other security has been furnished
the city, the purchasers and mortgagees of lots in the subdivision or land
development shall be relieved of any and all liability for any deficiency
in, lack of or failure to complete said improvements by the landowner
or developer; and any failure to complete or properly complete said
A. When any work or materials are determined by the city's representative
not to be in compliance with the terms of this chapter or any other city
ordinance, code, regulation, plan or map or at variance with any permit
issued therefor, the city's representatives may, by notice in writing or
verbal order followed by notice in writing, direct that all work upon
improvements in the subdivision or land development shall forthwith
stop until such noncompliance or variance is corrected. Except as the
city's representative may deem necessary to prevent injury or damage
to persons or property, no work shall thereafter be performed upon the
same except in accordance with the order of the city's Engineer,
Building Inspector or designated representative.
B. No underground pipes, works, lines, structures, subgrades or base
courses shall be covered until the same shall be inspected and approved
by the City Engineer; and if the same have been covered contrary to the
provisions hereof, upon the order of the City Engineer, the landowner or
developer shall cause the same to be forthwith uncovered, at his or her
expense, so as to permit the inspection thereof.
C. When an inspection of any improvements shall be required or desired
by the landowner or developer, the landowner or developer shall give
the City Engineer 48 hours' notice in advance.
§ 197-71 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-73
197:691
improvements shall not encumber any lot or lots in said subdivision or land
development.
§ 197-74. Public hearing.
Before acting upon any subdivision and/or land development plan, the City
Council may conduct a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice.
§ 197-75. Notice to contractors.
The landowner and/or developer shall notify in writing all builders and/
or contractors that they shall perform all work in accordance with the
regulations and requirements of this chapter and such other city
ordinances, codes, regulations, plans and maps as shall be applicable
thereto. Such notification shall be submitted to the city prior to construction
and placed on file.
§ 197-76. Modification of site and plan requirements.
The Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council that the
site requirements of this chapter for a subdivision and/or land development
be modified or altered in order to encourage or promote economy and
ingenuity in the layout and design of subdivisions and land development, to
more effectively protect unique and/or sensitive natural areas or to more
effectively conform to the purposes of this chapter, as follows:
A. With respect to encouraging or promoting economy and ingenuity in
the layout and design of subdivisions and land developments, the
Planning Commission may recommend modifications to site
requirements for, but not limited to, the following types of proposals:
(1) Those which may involve special forms of solar energy
conservation.
(2) Those which may involve the conversion, reuse and/or adaptation
of an existing structure or building.
(3) Utilization and layout of open space.
B. With respect to more effectively protecting various sensitive natural
areas, the Planning Commission may recommend modifications to site
requirements for, but not limited to, the following types of proposals:
(1) Those which would more effectively protect existing trees and
woodlands.
(2) Those which would minimize extensive grading and the
displacement of soil.
(3) Those which would minimize surface water runoff and improve the
management of stormwater.
(4) Those which would preserve historic or cultural sites or structures.
§ 197-73 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-76
197:692
§ 197-77. Impact assessment and mitigation.
(5) Those which would minimize visibility of development and protect
existing visual quality.
C. In granting modifications to the landowner or developer, the City
Council may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied
or modified.
D. In addition to the foregoing, one or more provisions of this chapter may
be modified by the City Council, upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission, if the literal enforcement of the provisions will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
questions, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the
public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter are
observed.
(1) All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall
accompany and be a part of the preliminary or final plan
application for subdivision and/or land development. The request
shall state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions
of this chapter involved and the minimum modification necessary.
(2) The Planning Commission shall keep a written record of all action
on all requests for modifications.
(3) The City Council may authorize a waiver of these regulations. In
granting any modification, the City Council shall prescribe any
conditions that they deem necessary to or desirable for the public
interest. In making their findings, the City Council shall take into
account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use
of land in the vicinity, the probable effect of the proposed
subdivision and/or upon traffic conditions, fire, police protection
and other utilities and services in the vicinity. No modification shall
be granted unless the City Council finds that:
(a) There are special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property such that the strict application of the provisions of
this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use
of this land.
(b) The modification is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant.
(c) The granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in
which said property is situated.
A. An impact assessment and mitigation report shall be submitted for the
following:
§ 197-76 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-77
197:693
(1) Any proposed subdivision or land development which involves a
conditional use, special exception or variance.
(2) Any subdivision or land development which involves five or more
residential lots or dwelling units.
(3) Any industrial use.
(4) Any commercial use of 5,000 square feet or greater (gross floor
area).
(5) Any petition for a Zoning Map amendment or any petition for a
zoning text change which would involve any of the above proposals.
(6) Any widening or extension of an existing street or alley.
(7) Institutional use of 10,000 square feet or greater (gross floor area).
B. The impact assessment and mitigation report shall be prepared by a
design professional and shall address the following:
(1) A site development plan, including notes pertaining to the number
and type of lots or units, the square footage and/or acreage of the
lot(s) and a depiction of the features which are proposed, such as
streets, alleys, driveways, parking areas, buildings and other
structures and all impervious surfaces. The plans shall be drawn at
a scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch and may be submitted
as an attachment to the report.
(2) Floor plans and elevations depicting the proposed size, square
footage and height of buildings and/or other proposed structures.
(3) A statement indicating the existing and proposed ownership of the
lot(s) and, where applicable, the type of ownership, operation and
maintenance proposed for areas which may be devoted to open
space or otherwise not under the control of a single lot owner.
(4) A statement indicating the proposed staging or phasing of the
proposed development and a map depicting the boundaries of each
stage or phase of the same. Such boundaries shall be superimposed
on a version of the site development plan.
(5) An identification of the land use conditions and characteristics
associated with the lot(s), such as current and past use, land cover
and encumbrances, and the relationship of these to adjacent lot(s).
The identification of land use conditions and characteristics shall
include a narrative description of the above. In addition, the
following maps, drawn at a scale of not more than 50 feet to the
inch, shall be incorporated into the report or submitted as
attachments to it:
(a) A map depicting the land cover characteristics of the property.
Such map shall define existing features, including paved or
§ 197-77 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-77
197:694
other impervious surfaces, wooded areas, lawns and
landscaped areas, streams, wetlands, other water resources
and any other existing condition.
(b) A map depicting any encumbrances to the tract. Such map
shall define easements, rights-of-way and other areas where
certain use privileges exist.
(c) A map depicting the land uses adjacent to the proposed. Such
map may be at the same scale as the location map.
(6) An identification of the historic resources associated with the lot(s),
such as buildings, structures, properties and/or districts which are
significant. Historic resources registered with the National
Register of Historic Places and the Pennsylvania Inventory of
Historic Places and any which may be otherwise identified by the
city shall be depicted. The identification of historic resources shall
include a narrative description of the above. In addition, a map,
drawn at a scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch, depicting
historic resources shall be incorporated into the report or
submitted as an attachment to the report.
(7) An identification of the community facility needs associated with
the users and/or residents of the proposed development. The
community facility needs assessment shall indicate in narrative
form the type of services which will be in demand. Where
applicable, community facilities (such as schools, park and
recreation areas, libraries, hospitals, other health-care facilities,
fire protection, police protection and ambulance and rescue
service) shall be discussed in terms of the ability of existing
facilities and services to accommodate the demands of future users
and/or residents of the lot(s) and the need for additional or
expanded community facilities.
(8) An identification of the utility needs associated with the users and/
or residents of the proposed development. The utility needs
assessment shall indicate in narrative form the type of installations
which will be in demand. Utilities, such as those used for water
supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, communications and
electrical transmission, shall be discussed in terms of the ability of
existing utility installations to accommodate the demands of the
future users and/or residents of the lot(s), the need for additional or
expanded utility installations and the ability to achieve an adequate
system for storm drainage and stormwater management.
(9) An identification of the relationship of the transportation and
circulation system needs of the proposed project to the existing
street, alley or highway network. A discussion of this relationship
shall be in narrative form and shall indicate factors, such as
methods to be used for traffic control within the tract and at points
of ingress and egress and expected traffic volumes generated from
§ 197-77 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-77
197:695
the development, including their relationship to existing traffic
volumes on existing streets and alleys for both peak-hour and
nonpeak-hour traffic conditions. In addition, there shall be a
discussion of the physical condition of existing streets and alleys
which will service the proposed project and what parking
improvements are proposed to remedy any physical deficiencies.
(10) An identification of the demographic characteristics related to the
proposed development. The characteristics, which shall be
presented in narrative form, shall include a profile of the future
users and/or residents of the lot(s), including information, such as
the number of people or laborers expected. Such information shall
be related to initial and completed conditions.
(11) An identification of the economic and fiscal characteristics related
to the proposed development. The characteristics, which shall be
presented in narrative form, shall include a profile of the city,
county and school district revenues which the proposal may
generate and the city, county and school district costs it may
create. Relative to costs, the report shall include an objective
disclosure of the negative cost impacts that may occur to the city
services for the operation and maintenance of: [Amended
9-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1086-98]
(a) Streets and alleys.
(b) Recreational facilities.
(c) Sewer and water.
(d) Storm drainage.
(e) Fire protection.
(f) Police protection.
(g) Other emergency services.
(h) Solid waste and recycling collection.
(i) Any other costs related to any other city services.
(12) An identification of characteristics and conditions associated with
existing, construction-related and future air and water quality,
noise levels, vibration, toxic materials, electrical interference, odor,
glare and heat, fire and explosion, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors and
gases, radioactive materials and/or other noxious conditions.
(13) The implications of the proposed development in terms of the type
of beneficial or adverse effects which may result from it and the
duration of these effects in terms of their short-term and long-term
nature. To indicate such effects, there shall be a discussion of the
implications of the proposed development to the resources,
§ 197-77 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-77
197:696
conditions and characteristics described in Subsection B(1)
through B(12) above. In addition to a narrative presentation of
implications, the applicant shall display where the development
adversely affects the lot(s), resources, conditions or characteristics
through the use of a map, drawn at a scale of not more than
50 feet to the inch, wherein the areas adversely affected from
proposed development are highlighted. Such map may be either
incorporated into the report or submitted as an attachment to
the report. Further, the applicant must demonstrate and specify
in the report how and where the findings in the report and its
attachments are reflected in the subdivision, land development
or other plan. The applicant shall indicate how the proposal
represents the minimum impact to the property and the
neighborhood.
(14) Measures to mitigate adverse effects. To indicate such measures,
the applicant shall submit exhibits or diagrams which will depict
the type of remedial, protective and mitigative measures described
in narrative form. These measures shall include those required
through existing procedures and standards and those unique to a
specific project, as follows:
(a) Mitigation measures which pertain to existing procedures and
standards are those related to current requirements of the
state, county and/or city for remedial or protective action, such
as soil erosion and sedimentation control, stormwater runoff
control, water quality control, air quality control, noise control,
illumination control and the like.
(b) Mitigation measures related to adverse impacts of a specific
project are those related to efforts, such as regrading,
revegetation, screening, the creation of landscaped areas,
fencing, emission control, traffic control, relocation of people
and/or businesses, land acquisition and the like.
C. In making its evaluation, the City Council and/or the Planning
Commission may request any additional information it deems necessary
to adequately assess potentially adverse impacts.
D. The impact assessment and mitigation report shall be prepared by a
certified/registered design professional and shall be paid for by the
applicant. The applicant shall request approval from the city for the
author(s) of the impact assessment and mitigation report, and the city
shall determine if the author(s) proposed by the applicant is (are)
qualified to prepare said report. If the city determines that the author(s)
proposed by the applicant is (are) not qualified to address the report
requirements, in whole or in part, then the city may hire qualified
design professionals to prepare all or parts of the report, and the
applicant shall reimburse the city for all reasonable fees and expenses
for such design professionals. [Amended 9-28-1998 by Ord. No.
1086-98]
§ 197-77 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-77
197:697

ARTICLE XI
Administration
§ 197-78. Records.
The City Manager shall assign an application number to all applications
for preliminary plan and final plan approval. All matters pertaining to such
applications shall be filed in accordance with the subdivision and/or land
development application number. In addition, the city shall keep a record
of its findings, decisions and recommendations relative to all subdivision
and/or land development plans filed with the application for review. All such
records shall be public records.
§ 197-79. Schedule of application fees.
Upon the filing of an application for preliminary and final approval of a
subdivision and/or land development plan, the landowner or developer shall
pay to the City Manager to the use of the city such fees as the City Council
shall from time to time provide by ordinance or resolution in Chapter 108,
Fees.
§ 197-80. Fees for review of plans.
The landowner or developer shall pay to the use of the city and upon
invoice rendered by the city the actual cost of all fees incurred by the
city in the review of all subdivision and/or land development plans by
the City Engineer, consultants, City Solicitor and such other professionals
as are engaged by the city to review and evaluate subdivision and land
development plans. The need for such professionals and the selection
thereof shall be determined solely by the City Council.
§ 197-81. Inspection fees.
A. In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such review
fees, the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify the
city that such fees are disputed; in which case the city shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application due to the
applicant's request over disputed fees.
B. In the event that the city and the applicant cannot agree on the amount
of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant
and city shall follow the procedure for dispute resolution set forth in
§ 197-81E.
A. The landowner or developer shall pay to the use of the city and upon
invoice rendered by the city such charges as shall be made by the City
Engineer, other city inspector or consultants for the field inspection of
improvements in the subdivision or land development; but in the event
that, owing to special or unusual conditions, specialized or expert
inspections, analyses or tests of improvements shall be required, such
inspections, analyses or tests shall be performed by persons or firms
§ 197-78 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-81
197:699
selected by the City Council, and the fees and costs of such inspections,
analyses or tests shall be paid by the landowner or developer to the use
of the city upon invoice rendered by the city, in an amount equivalent to
the actual cost thereof to the city.
B. All invoices shall be due upon presentation.
C. Any landowner or developer who is delinquent in the payment of
invoices shall be denied issuance of any further approvals or permits by
the city, whether such approvals or permits pertain to the development
for which said invoice was rendered or any other land or development
within the city.
D. A landowner or developer who disputes an invoice as billed within 10
days shall state such objection to the City Manager in writing upon
receipt, via certified mail return receipt requested.
E. Reimbursement by the applicant to the city shall be based upon a
schedule established by ordinance or resolution. Such expense shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees
charged by the City Engineer or consultant for work performed for
similar service in the community, but in no event shall the fees exceed
the rate or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant to the city when
fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
(1) In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such
expense in connection with the inspection of improvements, the
applicant shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify
the city that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary; in which case the city shall not delay or disapprove a
subdivision and/or land development application or any approval or
permit related to development due to the applicant's request over
disputed Engineer expenses.
(2) If within 20 days from the date of billing, the city and the applicant
cannot agree on the amount of the expenses which are reasonable
and necessary, then the applicant and city shall jointly, by mutual
agreement, appoint another professional engineer licensed as such
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to review said expenses and
make a determination as to the amount thereof which is reasonable
and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer, in his
or her sole opinion, deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the city and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas (or if at the time there be no President
§ 197-81 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-81
197:700
§ 197-82. Material tests.
The landowner or developer shall pay to the use of the city and upon invoice
rendered by the city the cost of performing all material tests determined
by the City Council to be necessary or desirable in connection with the
inspection or approval of all subdivision and/or land development plans or
improvements.
§ 197-83. Other fees.
The landowner or developer shall pay to the use of the city and upon
invoice rendered by the city all fees incurred by the city in the preparation
of the subdivision and land development agreements, improvement and
maintenance bonds, escrow agreements and other instruments deemed
necessary or desirable by the City Council in connection with subdivisions
or land developments.
§ 197-84. Additional remedies.
Judge, then the senior active Judge then sitting) shall appoint such
engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the City Engineer nor
any professional engineer who has been retained by or performed
service for the city or the applicant within the preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less then the original bill by $1,000 or more, the city
shall pay the fee of the professional engineer; but otherwise, the
city and the applicant shall each pay one-half (1/2) of the fee of the
appointed professional engineer.
A. Preventive remedies.
(1) In addition to other remedies, the city may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages
and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or
premises. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument
of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the seller or transformer from such
penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
(2) The city may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which
has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of any ordinance provisions. This authority to
deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following
applicants:
§ 197-81 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-84
197:701
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting
of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee
for the development of any such real property, the city may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to
the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such
real property.
B. Jurisdiction. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under Subsection C below.
C. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the city,
pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the city may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District
Justice determining that there has been a violation further
determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to have believed
that there was no such violation; in which event, there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice; and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
(2) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
§ 197-84 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-84
197:702
§ 197-85. Collection of fines.
All fines collected for violations of this chapter, as provided in § 197-84C,
shall be paid over to the city.
§ 197-86. Amendments.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the city the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. The regulations set forth in this chapter may, from time to time, be
amended by the City Council.
B. The following requirements shall be observed prior to making any
amendment to this chapter:
(1) Proposed amendments shall be submitted to the City Planning
Commission for their findings and recommendations at least 30
days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing on such proposed
amendment, if the amendment has been prepared by an agency
other than the City Planning Commission. In addition, the proposed
amendment shall be submitted to the Chester County Planning
Commission for their recommendations at least 30 days prior to the
date fixed for the public hearing on the amendment.
(2) The findings of the Planning Commission shall be submitted to the
City Council in a written report.
(3) Before voting on the enactment of a proposed amendment, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to public
notice as defined by this chapter; at which time, the parties in
interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. A brief
summary, setting forth the principal provisions of the proposed
amendment and a reference to the place within the city where
copies of the proposed amendment may be secured or examined,
shall be incorporated into the public notice.
(4) Prior to the enactment of proposed amendments, the city shall
publish the proposed amendment once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city not more than 60 days and not less than
seven days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed
amendment shall include the time and place of the meeting, the
place within the city where copies of the proposed amendment can
be obtained and either the full text thereof or the title and a brief
summary prepared by the City Solicitor, setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(a) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the city at the time the public notice is published.
§ 197-84 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-86
197:703
(b) An attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in
the County Law Library.
(c) In the event that substantial charges are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the City Council
shall, at least 10 days prior to the enactment, readvertise in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city a brief summary
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail, together
with a summary of the changes.
(5) Within 30 days after enactment, the City Council shall forward a
certified copy of the amendment to the Chester County Planning
Commission.
§ 197-86 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-86
197:704
ARTICLE XII
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District
§ 197-87. Applicability of zoning provisions.
All Floodplain Conservation Overlay District regulations set forth in Chapter
224, Zoning, shall apply.
§ 197-87 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-87
197:705

ARTICLE XIII
Mobile Home Park Regulations
§ 197-88. Applicability of zoning provisions; additional regulations.
In addition to the mobile home park regulations set forth in Chapter 224,
Zoning, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 197-89. Use regulations.
The uses allowed within a mobile home park shall be as specified in Chapter
224, Zoning.
§ 197-90. Application procedures.
All applications for mobile home parks shall follow the procedures
established in Chapter 224, Zoning. No application for subdivision or land
development approval for the construction of a mobile home park will
be accepted until the City Council has given approval pursuant to the
requirements of Chapter 224, Zoning.
§ 197-91. Site design.
All regulations of Chapter 224, Zoning, shall be adhered to in mobile home
parks. In addition thereto, the following regulations shall apply:
A. Individual mobile homes. Individual mobile homes may be erected on
any lot where the use is permitted, provided that compliance is
achieved with zoning requirements and all other applicable regulations.
Tracts of land may be developed and improved for the purpose of
erecting two or more mobile homes as part of a mobile home park,
provided that zoning requirements, all requirements of this chapter and
other applicable regulations are met.
A. Arrangement of structures and facilities. The tract, including mobile
home stands, patios, other dwellings and structures and all tract
improvements, shall be organized in relation to topography, the shape
of the plot and the shape, size and position of structures and common
facilities. Special attention shall be given to new mobile home designs
and to common appurtenances that are available.
B. Adaptation to tract assets. Each mobile home unit or other dwelling or
structure shall be fitted to the terrain with a minimum disturbance of
the land and a minimum elevation difference between the floor level of
the unit and the ground elevation under it. Existing trees and shrubs,
rock formations, streams, floodplains, steep slopes and other natural
features of the tract shall be preserved in accordance with the
standards of Article XI. Favorable views shall be emphasized by the
plan.
§ 197-88 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-91
197:707
C. Courts and spaces. Groups or clusters of units, so placed as to create
interior spaces and courtyards, shall be incorporated whenever
feasible.
D. Orientation. Mobile homes are encouraged to be arranged in a variety
of orientations and are strongly encouraged to have many units with
their long sides facing the street rather than their ends, in order to
provide variety and interest. Site layout shall be designed to ensure that
mobile home units are offset to block long uninterrupted vistas between
the units.
E. Streets.
(1) The street system of the mobile home park shall be designed so as
to:
(a) Create a separation of automobile and pedestrian circulation
by means of a system of roads and pedestrian walkways.
(b) Relate harmoniously with land uses within and adjacent to it.
(c) Create efficient and safe connections with the existing road
systems of the township in order to ensure proper ingress and
egress to and from the mobile home park.
(2) Location and arrangement of streets.
(a) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location
of all streets shall be designed relative to existing and planned
streets, topographical conditions, public convenience and
safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of
the land to be served by such streets.
(b) To facilitate snow removal and to permit easy access for firefighting
equipment and delivery trucks, any cul-de-sac street
shall be designed in conformance with Article VIII.
(3) Street intersections. Street intersections shall be designed to
comply with the design standards of Article VIII.
(4) Street widths, alignment and grades. Street right-of-way and
cartway widths shall be as required in Article VIII.
(5) Street signs and streetlighting.
(a) Street name signs conforming to city specifications shall be
erected and painted in accordance with said specifications at
all street intersections or junctions in all developments at the
expense of the developer.
(b) The developer shall install or cause to be installed at the
developer's expense such streetlighting facilities as may be
deemed adequate and as may be prescribed at the time the
development plan is approved, and the developer shall pay the
§ 197-91 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-91
197:708
cost of operating said streetlights until such time as the street
or street upon which said lights are installed shall be accepted
by resolution of the City Council as part of the public road
system of the city.
(6) Access limitations. Mobile home lots may have direct access only
onto internal streets. Direct access from a mobile home lot shall not
be permitted onto the street(s) from which the mobile home park
gains primary access.
(7) Conversions. Any road built as a private street and later proposed
for conversion to a public street shall be brought up to the
applicable standards for public streets prior to being ordained as a
public way, unless this requirement is waived by the City Council
subsequent to determining that compliance with the requirement
would have a negative effect on the mobile home park.
F. Fire lanes and hydrants.
(1) No dwelling unit or part of a unit shall be located more than 150
feet from a duly improved and accessible fire lane, as defined
below, nor more than 600 feet from a private or public street or a
fire hydrant. All fire hydrants and fire lanes shall be subject to the
approval of the City Fire Marshal.
(2) Fire lanes shall have a minimum unobstructed right-of-way width of
20 feet.
(3) Dead-end fire lanes shall be terminated with an unobstructed
vehicular turnaround or cul-de-sac with a minimum right-a-way
radius of 50 feet. Dead-end fire lanes shall have a maximum length
of 400 feet.
(4) The location of fire lanes shall conform to plans for the extension of
streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewer and other
drainage facilities and public utilities as contained in this chapter
and other ordinances of the city and shall provide adequate access
to buildings by firefighters and other emergency services.
(5) Fire hydrants must be provided by the developer. The number, type
and location of fire hydrants and the size and rate of flow of feeder
lines shall be subject to the approval of the City Fire Marshal.
(6) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until fire lanes are
constructed and hydrants tested and approved by the City Fire
Marshal.
G. Pedestrian circulation.
(1) General requirements. All mobile home parks shall provide safe,
convenient, all-season pedestrian walkways of adequate width for
intended use, durable and convenient to maintain, between
individual mobile homes, mobile home park streets, community
§ 197-91 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-91
197:709
facilities provided for the residents and off-site pedestrian traffic
generators, such as schools, bus stops, commercial centers, etc.
These pedestrian walkways may parallel vehicular streets, where
they shall only be required on one side, or they may form a separate
but coordinated system away from streets. Walkways must be
provided wherever pedestrian traffic is concentrated and where
schoolchildren congregate.
(2) Common walk system. Where a common walk system is provided
and maintained between locations, such common walks shall have
a minimum width of four feet. Where these walks parallel streets,
they shall be separated from the street pavement by a distance of at
least four feet.
(3) Individual walks. All dwellings shall be connected to common walks
or to streets or to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a
paved street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of
two feet.
H. Parking.
(1) Spaces required. Two paved off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling either on the same lot therewith or in
common parking facilities, provided that parking areas contained
therein are within 150 feet of the mobile home lots for which they
are intended.
(2) Common parking areas.
(a) Aisle width. Where common parking facilities are to be used,
no parking aisle will be less than 22 feet in width.
(b) Required green areas. Ten percent of all common parking
areas on each lot shall be devoted to green areas consisting
mostly of grass and plantings, including trees, which must be
interspersed within the paved parking areas to channel traffic
or divide parking areas. The green areas required by this
subsection shall not constitute a portion of any green area or
common open spaces otherwise required by this chapter or
Chapter 224, Zoning. The exact design and location of the
green areas required by this subsection shall be indicated on a
development or subdivision or other similar plan and be
permanently maintained as such.
I. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 224, Zoning, the following
regulations shall also apply:
(1) Arrangement. The common space shall be designed as a contiguous
area unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
City Council that two or more separate areas would be preferable.
The open space shall also have easily identifiable pedestrian and
visual accessibility to all residents of the mobile home park.
§ 197-91 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-91
197:710
§ 197-92. Common elements.
(2) Recreation. Recreation areas and facilities acceptable to the City
Council shall be provided to meet the anticipated needs of the
residents of the development. Not less than 25% of the required
open space area, exclusive of lands within the required buffers,
shall be devoted to recreation. Recreation areas should be of a size,
shape and grade that is conducive to active recreation.
J. Buffers.
(1) All perimeter buffers shall be in accordance with Chapter 224,
Zoning, and the regulations below.
(2) Existing buffers. In cases where an edge(s) of a mobile home park
occurs along natural features, which function as buffers, including
but not limited to mature vegetation, significant grade changes or
stream valleys, which are likely to be permanently preserved,
buffering may be waived along that edge(s) upon approval of the
City Council.
(3) All existing vegetation which is intended to satisfy the buffer
requirement shall be permanently maintained.
(4) Buffer landscape plan. A buffer landscaping plan acceptable to the
City Council shall be submitted in accordance with Article VIII.
K. Drainage design, including stormwater management and soil erosion
and sedimentation control, shall be in accordance with Article VIII and
the regulations below.
(1) Wastewater. Wastewater from any plumbing fixture or sanitary
sewer line shall not be deposited upon the ground surface in any
part of a mobile home park or the surrounding properties.
(2) All storm sewers shall be placed in back of the curb when located in
a street or right-of-way. When located in undedicated land, they
shall be placed within an easement not less than 15 feet wide, as
approved by the city.
L. Ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every mobile
home park shall be paved or covered with stone or other solid material
or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil
erosion and the emanation of dust during dry weather. Impervious
pavement shall be kept to a minimum. All ground surfaces shall be
appropriately maintained.
M. The landscaping requirements of Article VIII shall apply to every mobile
home park.
A. Ownership. Common open space and roadways shall be offered for
dedication to the city or public use assured through easements or other
appropriate means in any mobile home park where all lots will be sold
§ 197-91 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-92
197:711
§ 197-93. Utilities.
or where the City Council determines those facilities to be key elements
in the open space and/or circulation systems of the city. In all other
cases, these and other common elements may be retained in private
ownership or may be owned by a homeowners' association.
B. Maintenance. Prior to land development plan approval, provision
acceptable to the City Council and Solicitor for the maintenance of all
common elements shall be established by any private or homeowners'
association ownership.
C. Service building. The structure or structures containing the
management office and other common facilities shall be conveniently
located for the use intended. Consolidation of laundry, recreation,
management and other common facilities in a single building and
location is encouraged if the single location will adequately serve all
mobile home lots.
A. General.
(1) All streets, off-street parking areas and areas of high pedestrian
use shall be adequately illuminated. All such lighting shall be
designed and located so as to direct light away from adjacent
residents. Lighting shall be provided for walkways and to identify
steps, ramps and signs. Such lighting shall be designed and located
so as to direct light away from adjacent residences.
(2) Electric, telephone and all other utility facilities shall be installed
underground by the developer.
(3) Where telephone and electric service lines are placed
underground, conduits or cables shall be placed within an
easement or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not
conflict with other underground services. Further, all transformer
boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the
public.
(4) Easements shall be provided to account for the distribution of unit
substations to service the area. The design of the utility structures
should be architecturally compatible with the surrounding
structures.
B. Water supply.
(1) General requirements. An adequate supply for domestic, auxiliary
and fire-fighting uses shall be provided for all uses included in the
mobile home park, including service buildings and accessory
facilities, in accordance with Chapter 224, Zoning.
§ 197-92 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-93
197:712
(2) Water distribution system. All water piping, fixtures and other
equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
state and local regulations as well as those of the servicing utility.
(3) Individual water riser pipes and connections for mobile homes.
(a) Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the
confined areas of the mobile home stand at a point where the
water connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby
ensuring the shortest water connection possible and
decreasing susceptibility to the water pipe freezing.
(b) The water riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter
consistent with the standards of the servicing public utility or,
in lack thereof, of the City Plumbing Inspector and terminate at
least four inches above the ground surface. The water outlet
shall be provided with a cap when a mobile home does not
occupy the lot.
(c) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of
service lines, valves and riser pipe and to protect risers from
heaving and thawing actions of ground during freezing
weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location
of the riser pipe.
(4) Fire protection. All mobile home parks shall be provided with fire
hydrants to meet the specifications of the Middlestates Department
Association of Fire Underwriters.
C. Sewage disposal.
(1) General requirements. An adequate and safe sewerage system
shall be provided in all mobile home parks for conveying and
disposing of sewage from dwellings, service buildings and
accessory facilities in accordance with Chapter 224, Zoning.
(2) Sewer system. All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of
sufficient depth to be free of breakage from traffic or other
movements and shall be separated from the water supply system.
The system shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
all state and city regulations, as well as those of the servicing
utility.
(3) Individual sewer connections for mobile homes.
(a) Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a sewer riser
pipe consistent with the standards of the servicing utility or
lack thereof of the City Plumbing Inspector. The sewer riser
pipe shall be located on each stand so that the sewer
connection to the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a
vertical position.
§ 197-93 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-93
197:713
§ 197-94. Gas distribution systems.
(b) The sewer connection shall have an inside diameter and slope
as required by the servicing utility or, in lack thereof, by the
City Plumbing Inspector. All joints shall be watertight.
(c) All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid,
corrosive-resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner
surface shall be smooth.
(d) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when
a mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall
be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall
extend at least one-half (1/2) inch above ground elevation.
A. General. Gas equipment and installations within a mobile home park
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable
codes adopted by the enforcing agency. Where the commonwealth or
other political subdivision does not assume jurisdiction, such
installations shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
appropriate provisions of ANSI-Z21.30 and Z106.1.
B. Required gas supply. The minimum hourly volume of gas required at
each mobile home lot outlet or any section of the mobile home park gas
piping system shall be calculated as follows:
Type of Outlet
Natural
(cubic feet per
hour) LP Gas
For the most remote mobile
home lot outlet on any
branch or main
125 50
For the second-most remote
outlet on any branch or main
100 40
For the third-most remote
outlet on any branch or main
75 30
NOTE: After the third-most remote outlet, subsequent branch or main
line loadings may be computed using a value of 50 cubic feet per hour
for natural gas and 20 cubic feet per hour for liquefied petroleum gas.
C. Installation. All gas piping installed below ground shall have a minimum
earth cover of 18 inches. Gas piping shall not be installed under any
mobile home.
D. System shutoff valve. A readily accessible and identified shutoff valve
controlling the flow of gas to the entire gas piping system shall be
installed near to the point of connection to the service piping or supply
connection of the liquefied petroleum gas tank.
§ 197-93 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-94
197:714
§ 197-95. Fuel-oil distribution systems.
E. Each mobile home lot shall have an approved gas shutoff valve installed
upstream of the mobile home lot gas outlet and located on the outlet
riser at a height of not less than four inches above grade. Such valve
shall not be located under any mobile home. Whenever the mobile home
lot outlet is not in use, the outlet shall be equipped with an approved
cap or plug to prevent accidental discharge of gas.
F. Mobile home connector. Each mobile home shall be connected to the
mobile home lot outlet by an approved three-fourth-inch mobile home
connector not more than (6) six feet in length. Approved pipe and
fittings may be used between the flexible connector and the mobile
home lot gas outlet when the distance between the mobile home lot gas
outlet and the mobile home gas service connection exceeds that
required to make a safe installation with only a mobile home connector.
G. Mechanical protection. All gas outlet risers, regulators, meters, valves
or other exposed equipment shall be protected from mechanical
damage by vehicles or other causes.
H. The mobile home gas connection shall be installed at the edge of the
mobile home stand, approximately 30 feet from the front of such stand,
and located as not to terminate beneath the mobile home.
A. General. Distribution systems shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such
systems. Piping installed below ground shall have a minimum earth
cover of 18 inches.
B. All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders towards mobile
homes shall be permanently installed and securely fastened in place.
C. All fuel-oil storage tanks of cylinders should be installed underground
and shall not be located inside or beneath any mobile home or
accessory structure or less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
D. Every tank shall be vented by a vent no less than one-and-one-fourthinch
iron pipe size, so designed and installed to prevent entrance of rain
of debris.
E. A shutoff valve located immediately adjacent to the gravity-feed
connection of a tank shall be installed in the supply line to the mobile
home.
F. Fuel-oil connectors from the tank to the mobile home shall be brass or
copper tubing or approved flexible metal hose, not smaller than threeeighths-
inch iron pipe size or tubing, and shall be protected from
physical damage. Aluminum tubing shall not be used.
G. Valves and connectors shall be listed standard fittings, maintained
liquidtight to prevent spillage of fuel oil on the ground.
§ 197-94 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-96
197:715
§ 197-96. Fuel supply and storage.
§ 197-97. Permits, licenses, fees and inspections.
A. Liquefied petroleum gas containers installed on a mobile home lot shall
be securely but not permanently fastened to prevent accidental
overturning. Such containers shall not be less than 25 or more than 100
pounds LP gas capacity.
B. No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside or
beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other
structure.
C. All fuel-oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place
and shall not be located inside or beneath any mobile home or less than
five feet from any mobile home exit.
D. All fuel-oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be screened from adjacent
structures, access roads and traffic arteries by hedges, dense plantings,
earth berms, changes in grades or walls.
A. Permits required.
(1) Lots for sale. In those mobile home parks wherein some or all of the
mobile home lots will be sold individually (whether totally fee
simple, fee simple with a homeowners' association, condominium
or cooperative), no lot to be conveyed shall be developed nor a
mobile home or other structure placed or constructed thereon until
the subdivision and/or land development plan has been properly
approved and the proper building and construction permits have
been issued for that lot in accordance with the standard procedures
for any building activity in the city. No mobile home or other
structure shall be occupied until a valid occupancy permit has been
issued by the city.
(2) Lots for lease. In those mobile home parks wherein some or all of
the mobile home lots will be leased, the following regulation shall
apply to the entire development exclusive of the lots being sold
individually:
(a) Initial permits. It shall be unlawful for any person or group to
construct, alter, extend or operate a mobile home park unless
and until that person or group obtain:
[1] 201A valid permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, in the name of the operator, for
a specified construction, alteration or extension proposed;
and
201. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 197-96 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-97
197:716
[2] Valid permit(s) authorizing construction and initial
occupancy, issued by the City Zoning Officer in the name of
the operator, which shall not be issued until a copy of the
DEP permit has been furnished, all permits for water
supply and sewage systems shall have been obtained and
all other requirements contained herein have been
complied with and final approval of the application has
been granted by the City Council.
(b) Annual licenses. In addition to the initial permits, the operator
of a mobile home park with lots for lease shall apply to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and to
the City Zoning Officer on or before the first day of each year
for an annual license to continue operation of the mobile home
park. The Zoning Officer shall issue the annual license upon
satisfactory proof that the development continues to meet the
standards prescribed by state agencies having jurisdiction and
the standards of this section and other applicable city
ordinances. The license so issued shall be valid for one year
from the date of issuance or until January 1 of the next year,
whichever comes first.202
(c) Transfer of ownership. Every person holding a permit shall file
notice with the City Manager within 10 days after having sold,
transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of interest in or
control of any mobile home park.
(d) Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, it is
determined that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of any provisions of this chapter or any regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, the City Zoning Officer shall give
notice in writing to the person holding the certificate, advising
him or her that unless such conditions or practices are
corrected within such time as shall be specified in said notice,
the license to operate the mobile home park shall be
suspended.
B. Fees.
(1) Fees for the initial application and preliminary and final approvals
of any mobile home park shall be prescribed by resolution of City
Council.
(2) The fee for the annual license required for mobile home parks
having lots for lease shall be prescribed by resolution of the City
Council and shall be submitted to the City Zoning Officer with the
application for the annual license.
C. Inspection.
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 197-97 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-97
197:717
§ 197-98. Additional requirements.
(1) Upon notification to the licensee, manager or person in charge of a
mobile home park with lots for lease, the Building Inspector or
Zoning Officer may inspect a mobile home park after due notice to
determine compliance with this section.
(2) Upon receipt of the application for annual license and before
issuing such annual license, the Zoning Officer or other designated
representative of the city shall make an inspection of the mobile
home park to determine compliance with this section and other
applicable ordinances. The Zoning Officer or other representative
shall thereafter notify the licensee of any instances of
noncompliance and shall not issue the annual license until the
licensee has corrected all such violations.
A. Mobile home stands. A concrete pad, properly graded, placed and
compacted so as to be durable and adequate for the support of the
maximum anticipated loads during all seasons shall be used for all
mobile homes.
B. Anchoring. Every mobile home placed within a mobile home park shall
be anchored to the mobile home stand where it is located prior to the
unit being occupied or used in any other way or the expiration of seven
days, whichever occurs first. The anchoring system shall be designed to
resist a minimum wind velocity of 90 miles per hour.
C. Stability. All mobile homes placed within a mobile home park shall,
prior to occupancy or other use, be affixed to their mobile home stands
in such a way so as to prevent tilting of the unit.
D. Site standards. The following site standards are encouraged for all
mobile homes in a mobile home park:
(1) The exterior colors shall be in earth tones (brown, beiges, dark
greens). Trim and accent colors may be in other tones but must
blend harmoniously with the earth-tone scheme.
(2) All roofs shall be covered with composition roofing material or
wood shingles so that no metal is visible.
(3) No exterior antennas of any kind shall be permitted.
(4) If aluminum patios and carports are used, all visible exterior
structural members shall be covered with wood (fasciae and posts)
and the roofs shall be covered with composition material or wood
shingles.
E. Skirts. All mobile homes placed within a mobile home park shall, prior
to occupancy or other use, have skirts installed, which are designed to
complement the appearance of the mobile home and are coordinated
throughout the park
§ 197-97 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-98
197:718
§ 197-99. General requirements prerequisite to approval of final
plans.
F. Hitch. The hitch or tow bar attached to a mobile home for transport
purposes shall be removed and remain removed from the mobile home
when it is placed on its mobile home stand.
G. Litter control. The mobile home park shall be kept free of litter, rubbish
and other flammable and unsightly material.
H. Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers rated for Classes B and C
shall be kept in service buildings and at other locations conveniently
and readily accessible for use by all occupants and shall be maintained
in good operation condition. Their capacity shall be not less than two
and one-half (2 1/2) pounds.
A. Improvements or guaranty thereof. Before approving any land
development plan for recording, the City Council shall either require
that the necessary grading, paving and other street improvements as
required in Article IX all have been installed in strict accordance with
the standards and specifications of the city or that the city shall be
assured by means of a proper contract and completion guaranty, as set
forth in Article IX, that the improvements will subsequently be installed
by the developer. Where the land development plan has been approved
and recorded, either after the specified improvements have been
completed and approved by the City Council or, if prior to completion,
upon proper completion guaranty as aforesaid, purchasers and
mortgagees of lots in the development, with or without buildings
thereon or on any of them, shall be relieved of any and all liability for
any deficiency in lack of or failure to complete the improvements above
mentioned as set out in said plan or required as a condition precedent
to the approval of the plan of development; and any failure to complete
or properly complete said improvements shall not encumber any or all
of the lots in the development.
B. Agreement to complete improvements. In all cases where the necessary
grading, paving and other street improvements required herein shall
not have been installed in strict accordance with the standards and
specifications of the city, the developer shall enter into a written
agreement with the city in accordance with Articles III and IX and in the
manner and form approved by the City Solicitor, wherein the developer
shall agree, to the extent applicable:
(1) To construct or cause to be constructed, at his or her own expense,
all streets, bridges, culverts, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks,
water systems, drainage facilities, streetlighting facilities, street
signs, monuments, sanitary sewerage, street trees and parks and
other improvements shown on said land development plan, all in
strict accordance with standards and specifications of the city and
within the time specified in said agreement.
§ 197-98 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-99
197:719
§ 197-100. Revocation or suspension of permit.
If any fine assessed under this chapter shall remain unpaid for the term
of 15 days or for such further period as the city may permit for cause
shown, then and in that event all permits and licensees shall forthwith be
suspended until such time as all fines, costs and fees have been satisfied.
Further, upon continued or repeated violation or violations within any
mobile home park, the right to the issuance of a permit or other continued
operation thereunder may be suspended for a fixed term or permanently
revoked by the City Council.
(2) To make adequate provision with the City Engineer for the
inspection of the construction of the aforesaid improvements to
assure compliance with city standards and specifications.
(3) To maintain, at the developer's cost, said streets, bridges, culverts,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water systems, drainage
facilities, streetlighting facilities, street signs, monuments, sanitary
sewerage, street trees, parks and other improvements until the
same are accepted; and, for a period of two years thereafter, to
repair and reconstruct the same or any part of one of them when
such repair or reconstruction shall be specified by the City Council
as necessary by reasons of faulty construction, workmanship or
materials.
(4) To pay all costs, charges or rates of the utility furnishing electric
service for the streetlighting facilities installed by the developer
until such time as the streets shown on the land development plans
shall have been accepted or condemned by the city for public use
and to indemnify and save harmless the city from and against all
suits, actions, claims and demands for electric service as aforesaid
or any part thereof to the time that said streets shall be accepted or
condemned as public streets in the manner herein above set forth.
(5) To post contemporaneous with the execution of such agreement a
bond, in accordance with Article IX, and to follow all other
requirements of Article IX.
(6) To file copies of a final plan with the City Council accurately
showing, as built, the location of all utility lines, underground
drains, storm drainage lines and permanent monuments and the
like, as a condition precedent to acceptance of the streets and
other required improvements.
§ 197-99 COATESVILLE CODE § 197-100
197:720
Chapter 203
TAXATION
§ 197-100 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 197-100
197:721

ARTICLE I
Amusement Tax
§ 203-1. Title. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
This article shall be known and designated as the "Miscellaneous
Amusement Tax Ordinance."
§ 203-2. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for the
purpose of this article, the meanings herein indicated:
DEVICE — Any pool table, bowling alley, jukebox and/or mechanical,
electronic or video amusement device taxable under this article.
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disk or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated
for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any device, other than a jukebox,
which, upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated
for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering
a score and whether or not a prize is offered, provided that it shall not
include any gambling device or any mechanism that has been judicially
determined to be a gambling device or is so certified by the owner or
operator thereof.
PERSON — Includes a natural person, firm, association, copartnership or
corporation.
§ 203-3. Application; renewal.
All persons liable to a tax under the provisions of this article shall make an
application to the City of Coatesville on or before the 15th day of March
1948, and shall make application for renewal thereof on or before March 15
in every year thereafter; and upon installation of any device subject to said
tax, application shall be made for the installation thereof and the tax paid
thereon until the 31st day of March next ensuing.
§ 203-4. Taxes imposed.
A. The following taxes are imposed for general City purposes:
(1) On each bowling alley installed for use within the City: $75 per year
or portion thereof.
(2) On each pool table installed for use within the City: $75 per year or
portion thereof.
(3) On each mechanical amusement device installed for use or
available for rental within the City: $75 per year or portion thereof.
§ 203-1 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-4
197:723
§ 203-5. Payment. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 1009-95]
The taxes imposed under this article shall be payable to the City of
Coatesville by the person operating or managing any device subject to such
tax, unless such tax shall first be paid by the person owning or leasing such
device. Such tax shall be payable on or within 30 days of the billing date
of each year as long as the device remains installed or available for rental.
No deduction or refund of any tax under this article shall be granted in
the case of any tax payable for less than a full year, nor in the case of any
device destroyed, stolen, sold or otherwise disposed of or transferred after
payment of the tax.
§ 203-6. Certificates.
(4) On each jukebox installed for use or available for rental within the
City: $50 per year or portion thereof.
(5) Dealer's license. On each owner of any amusement device placing
the same under lease or other arrangement with any person as an
operator within the City: a tax of $100 per year or portion thereof,
which fee shall be a license fee for the privilege of placing such
devices within the City, and no such owner may place any such
device unless so licensed. Any such licensee placing any such
device with any person within the City who permits the use of such
device in any manner which may be determined by the Codes
Officer, with the concurrence of the Chief of Police, to be improper
and objectionable, shall be given five days' notice to have such
device removed, and if not removed within such period, his or her
license shall be forthwith revoked. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord.
No. 1012-96; 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96]
(6) Vending machines. On each vending machine installed for use
within the City of Coatesville where such machine is located in the
right-of-way: $35 per year or portion thereof. [Added 12-19-1996
by Ord. No. 1039-96]
B. No tax shall be imposed under this article on any pool table or bowling
alley, wherever located or used, for the use of which no fee is charged
or collected. No tax shall be imposed more often than once in any year
on an individual device taxable under this article.
A. The Director of Finance shall procure, at the expense of the City, a
sufficient number of certificates, on each of which the following
information shall be printed or inserted in ink or by typewriter:
(1) The name of the City.
(2) The number of the certificate.
(3) The name and address of the person paying the tax.
(4) The year for which the tax shall have been paid.
§ 203-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-6
197:724
§ 203-7. Information to be confidential.
Any information gained by the Director of Finance or any other official or
agent of the City as a result of any returns, investigations or verifications
required or authorized by this article shall be confidential, except for official
purposes and except in accordance with proper judicial order or as
otherwise provided by law; any disclosure of any such information contrary
to the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 203-8. Penalty for unpaid taxes.
If any tax imposed in pursuant of this article shall not be paid when due, a
penalty of 10% of the amount of tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto.
§ 203-9. Recoverability.
All taxes levied by this article, together with all penalties, shall be
recoverable by the City Solicitor as other debts of like amount are
recovered.
§ 203-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Any person convicted in summary proceedings of violating or failing to carry
out any of the provisions or requirements of this article, or of neglecting,
failing or refusing to furnish correct and complete reports or returns or to
pay over any tax levied by this article at the time required, or of knowingly
making any incomplete, false or fraudulent returns, or of attempting to do
anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax
imposed by this article, shall be liable to a fine or penalty not exceeding
$600 for each and every offense, and the costs of prosecution thereof, or
to undergo imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90
(5) The type of device for which the tax shall have been paid, giving the
trade name, manufacturer's name and/or identification number
when available.
(6) The date when the device was installed or made available for
rental, or the fact that the device was installed or made available
for rental on or before March 15, 1948.
(7) The amount of tax paid.
B. Whenever any tax shall have been paid under this article, the Director
of Finance shall prepare in duplicate a certificate. The original of such
certificate, to which the City Seal shall be affixed, shall be given to the
person paying the tax, and the duplicate shall be kept on file by the
Director of Finance.203
203. Editor's Note: Former Subsections C and D, which immediately followed this subsection
and covered replacement of certificates or seals and amended certificates for relocated
devices, were repealed 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96.
§ 203-6 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-10
197:725
days, or both such fine and imprisonment, provided that such fine or penalty
shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of this
article.
§ 203-10 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-10
197:726
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)204
§ 203-11. (Reserved)
§ 203-12. (Reserved)
204. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Per Capita Tax, as amended, was repealed 12-10-2001 by
Ord. No. 1180-2001.
§ 203-11 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-12
197:727

ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax205
§ 203-13. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context
or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
CITY OF COATESVILLE — The area within the corporate limits of the
City of Coatesville.
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency
designated by the City of Coatesville to collect and administer the tax
herein imposed.[Added 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1341-2010]
CORPORATION — Any corporation or joint-stock association, organized
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or any other state, territory, or foreign country or
dependency.[Added 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1265-2005]
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[Added 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
1341-2010]
DIRECTOR — The Director of Finance under whose direction this tax
shall be enforced.
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE — The Director of Finance of the City of
Coatesville.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section
13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1257,
§ 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.[Added 10-25-2010 by
Ord. No. 1341-2010]
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental
body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a selfemployed
person.[Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1341-2010]
FISCAL YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31.206
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the City of
Coatesville.[Added 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1341-2010]
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 of the
205. Editor's Note: The former title of Art. III, Emergency and Municipal Services Tax, was
amended to Local Services Tax 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1341-2010.
206. Editor's Note: The former definition of "individual," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1265-2005.
§ 203-13 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-13
197:729
Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as
amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.[Added 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
1341-2010]
NONRESIDENT — An individual, fiduciary, partnership, or other entity
domiciled outside the City of Coatesville.[Added 12-22-2005 by Ord.
No. 1265-2005]
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned
on or performed within the corporate limits of the City of Coatesville
for which compensation is charged or received; whether by means
of salary, wages, commission or fees for services rendered.[Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1341-2010]
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, association, corporation
or fiduciary. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing
a penalty, the term “person” as applied to associations shall mean
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.[Added 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1265-2005]
RESIDENT — An individual, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled in the City of Coatesville.[Added 12-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1265-2005]
SALARIES, WAGES, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER COMPENSATION —
Includes salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments,
fees and tips that may accrue or be received by an individual for
services rendered, whether directly or through an agent and whether in
cash or in property, but shall not include periodic payments for sick or
disability benefits and those commonly recognized as old-age benefits,
retirement pay, or pensions to be paid to persons retired from service
after reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment;
public assistance or unemployment compensation payments; nor any
wages or compensation paid by the United States to any person for
active service in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the United States
or any bonus or additional compensation paid by the United States
or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state for such
service.[Added 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1265-2005]
TAX — The local services tax levied by this article.[Amended
5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96; 12-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1265-2005; 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1341-2010]
TAXPAYER — a person required hereunder to file a return on earnings
or net profits or to pay a tax thereon. The singular shall include the
plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.[Added 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1265-2005]
B. "He," "his" or "him" shall mean the singular and plural number as well
as male, female and neuter gender.
§ 203-13 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-14
197:730
§ 203-14. Tax levied; use of funds. [Amended 12-22-2005 by Ord.
No. 1265-2005; 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1341-2010]
§ 203-14.1. Exemption and refunds. [Added 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
1341-2010]
A. Imposition of tax.
(1) For specific revenue purposes, The City of Coatesville hereby levies
and imposes an annual local services tax upon:
(a) All nonresidents who hold an occupation in the City of
Coatesville; and
(b) All residents who hold an occupation in the City of Coatesville.
(2) This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature
heretofore levied by the City of Coatesville.
B. Use of funds.
(1) The local services tax revenue is restricted for the following uses:
(a) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(b) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(c) Reduction of property taxes; and/or
(d) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 85
Subch. F.
(2) The City of Coatesville shall use no less than 25% of the funds
derived from the local services tax for emergency services.
A. The following persons shall be exempt from the local services tax:
(1) Any person whose total earned income and net profits from all
sources within the City of Coatesville is less than $12,000 for the
fiscal year in which the local services tax is levied.
(2) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent permanent disability.
(3) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this Subsection A(3), "reserve
§ 203-14 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-14.1
197:731
§ 203-15. Amount of tax. [Amended 12-22-2005 by Ord. No.
1265-2005; 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1341-2010207]
Each occupation, as hereinbefore defined, engaged in within the corporate
limits of the City of Coatesville is subject to a local services tax in the
amount of $52 per annum. A person subject to the local services tax shall
be assessed a pro rata share of the tax for each payroll period in which the
person is engaging in an occupation, determined by dividing the combined
rate of the local services tax levied for the calendar year by the number of
payroll periods in which the individual is subject to the tax. The tax shall be
no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the
number of political subdivisions within which a person may be employed.
§ 203-16. Procedure to claim exemption. [Added 10-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 1341-2010208]
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine
Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States
Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Refunds. The Director, in consultation with the collector and DCED,
shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims for any
tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which procedures
shall be in accord with provisions of the General Municipal Law relating
to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments. Refunds
made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the last day
the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of the
calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Director or the collector shall determine eligibility
for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax may
annually file an exemption certificate with the City of Coatesville and
with the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably
expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources within
the City of Coatesville of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for
which the exemption certificate is filed. The City of Coatesville shall
provide a copy of the exemption certificate to the Director or the City's
authorized/designated collection agency or collector. The exemption
certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all the employee's last pay
stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the City of Coatesville for
the year prior to the fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to
207. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that the tax imposed by this ordinance would be
effective 1-1-2011 and all calendar years thereafter unless repealed or modified by
ordinance of the City.
208. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 203-16, Duties of employers, as
amended.
§ 203-14.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-16
197:732
§ 203-17. Duties of employers; collection and return of tax.
[Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96; 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96; 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1341-2010]
be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate
and until otherwise instructed by the City of Coatesville or except as
required by Subsection B, the employer shall not withhold the tax
from the person during the calendar year or the remainder of the
calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers
shall ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available
to employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be the
uniform form provided by the City of Coatesville.
B. With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar
year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the person or by
the City of Coatesville that the person has received earned income and
net profits from all sources within the City of Coatesville subdivision
equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person
is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or
upon an employer's payment to the person of earned income within the
City of Coatesville in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax from
the person under Subsection C.
C. If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from
the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B, the employer shall withhold the tax for the remainder of
that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from the person, for the
first payroll period after receipt of the notification under Subsection B,
a lump sum equal to the amount of tax that was not withheld from the
person due to the exemption claimed by the person under this
subsection, plus the per payroll amount due for that first payroll period.
The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll
periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for
other employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in that
calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of
tax due, and the City of Coatesville may pursue collection under this
article.
D. Except as provided in Subsection B, it is the intent of this section that
employers shall not be responsible for investigating exemption
certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any
employee from the local services tax.
A. Each employer within the City of Coatesville, as well as those employers
situated outside the City of Coatesville but who engage in business
within the City of Coatesville, is hereby charged with the duty of
collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the City of Coatesville and making a return
§ 203-16 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-17
197:733
and payment thereof to the collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the City of
Coatesville.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
paragraph, combined rate shall mean the aggregate annual rate of the
tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The Director shall provide a taxpayer a
receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the City of Coatesville if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 203-16 of
this article and remits the amount so withheld in accordance with this
article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 203-17 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-17
197:734
§ 203-18. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
[Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord. No. 1009-95; 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
1341-2010]
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the collector on or before the 30th day following the end of
each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 203-19. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision. [Amended
12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1265-2005; 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
1341-2010]
§ 203-20. Self-employed individuals. [Amended 12-11-1995 by Ord.
No. 1009-95; 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1341-2010]
All self-employed individuals who perform services of any type or kind,
engaged in any occupation or profession within the City of Coatesville, shall
be required to comply with this article and pay the pro rata portion of the
H. Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of
the tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the collector. If an
employer fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the
employer makes collection thereof from the salary, wages or
commissions paid by him or her to an employee, except as provided
hereafter in this article, the employer shall be responsible for the
payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been originally levied
against the employer.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
§ 203-17 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-20
197:735
tax due to the collector on or before the 30th day following the end of each
quarter.
§ 203-21. Nonresident self-employed individuals and employers
performing services within City.
All employers and residing or self-employed individuals having their place
of business outside of the City of Coatesville but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
City of Coatesville do by virtue thereof agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents
of the City of Coatesville. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the City of Coatesville and an employee of a nonresident employer
may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person,
and in the event that this tax is not paid, the City shall have the option of
proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of
this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 203-22. Administration of tax. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1033-96; 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1341-2010]
§ 203-23. Suits for collection.
A. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount received by
him or her from each employer or self-employed person, together with
the date the tax was received.
B. The collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered to
prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions of the examination of the payroll records of any
employer subject to this article, the examination and correction of any
return made in compliance with this article and any payment alleged or
found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to
have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector
shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Chester
County as in other cases provided.
C. The collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
§ 203-20 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-23
197:736
§ 203-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required
by this article, or who refuses inspection of his or her books, records
or accounts in his or her custody and control setting forth the number
of employees subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or
whoever fails or refuses to file any return required by this article, shall,
upon summary conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
or be imprisoned in Chester County Prison for a period not exceeding 90
days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each offense. It is further
provided that the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may
be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer
who has failed or refuses to file a return required for this article.
§ 203-25. Construction of provisions. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord.
No. 1033-96]
interest and penalty. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1033-96;
10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1341-2010]
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of said tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of said tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be
responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the City
of Coatesville to levy and collect tax hereby imposed on any occupation
not within the taxing power of the City under the Constitution of the
United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax, or the validity of
the tax so imposed, on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 203-23 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-25
197:737

ARTICLE IV
General Revenue Tax
[Added 12-3-1999 by Ord. No. 1113-99209]
§ 203-26. Tax levied; rate. [Amended 12-10-2001 by Ord. No.
1180-2001; 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 1207-2002; 12-8-2003 by Ord.
No. 1227-2003; 12-13-2004 by Ord. No. 1238-2004; 12-12-2005 by
Ord. No. 1264-2005; 12-11-2006 by Ord. No. 1281-2006; 1-28-2008
by Ord. No. 1299-2008; 12-8-2008 by Ord. No. 1313-2008;
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 1330-2009; 12-13-2010 by Ord. No.
1344-2010; 12-12-2011 by Ord. No. 1371-2011; 12-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 1399-2012; 12-9-2013 by Ord. No. 1421-2013; 3-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 1450-2014; 12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 1469-2015; 12-12-2016
by Ord. No. 1484-2016; 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 1501-2017210;
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 1519-2018]
A tax be and the same is hereby levied on all property within the City of
Coatesville subject to taxation for City purposes for the fiscal year 2019
pursuant to Chapter 9 of the Code of the City of Coatesville, County of
Chester, Pennsylvania, as follows:
Tax rate for general purposes: the sum of 13.759 mills on each dollar
of assessed valuation, or the sum of 13.759 on each $1,000 of assessed
valuation.
§ 203-27. Assessment on real estate. [Amended 12-10-2001 by Ord.
No. 1180-2001; 12-12-2005 by Ord. No. 1264-2005; 12-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 1330-2009]
In accordance with P.L. 534 (19590 of the Pennsylvania Third Class City
Code211), the City of Coatesville will levy 8.915 mills on all real estate
assessments.
§ 203-28. Billing procedures. [Amended 11-27-2017 by Ord. No.
1498-2017]
Taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes assessed by the City of
Coatesville shall be entitled to three equal installment payments of the
face amount with payment due dates of March 31, April 30 and May 31.
A discount of 2% is available if the full amount (discounted by 2%) is paid
by March 31. Each installment payment must be made within the time
specified or the entire bill (any remaining unpaid portion of the bill) will be
treated as delinquent and subject to a late fee or penalty of 10%.
209. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. IV, General Revenue Tax, as
amended.
210. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2018.
211. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 35101 et seq.
§ 203-26 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-28
197:739

ARTICLE V
Deed Tax
§ 203-29. Title.
This Article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance (Deed
Tax) of the City of Coatesville."
§ 203-30. Legislative authority. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
City of Coatesville, regardless of where the documents making the transfer
are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place.
§ 203-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
devises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or devise of title to
real estate but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Documents" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 203-30 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
§ 203-29 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-31
197:741
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal decendents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners, thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL-ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the City of Coatesville,
including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees, and other improvements, immovables or interests
which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
A.
§ 203-31 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-31
197:742
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 203-32. Tax imposed; interest.
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof, where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate; provided, that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon
the foreclosure of a mortgage by judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations.
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interests.
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvement to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principle of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
§ 203-31 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-32
197:743
§ 203-33. Exemptions.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment or the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 203-34. Excluded transactions.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 2% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due, shall be added and collected.
D. It is the intent of this article that the tax imposed herein on a person or
transfer shall be apportioned as follows: one and one-half percent (1 1/
2%) to the City of Coatesville, and the balance to any other political
subdivision also imposing such a tax.
A. The tax imposed by § 203-32 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the City of Coatesville is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
§ 203-32 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-34
197:744
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
covenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister, and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration or property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's advisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his or her principal, no tax
would be imposed under this article. Where the document by which
title is acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth
that the property was acquired by the grantee from or for the
benefit of his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capaCity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
§ 203-34 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-34
197:745
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his or her interest in or
ownership of the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of
the corporation or the interest in the association has been held by
the grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, [68A Stat. 3, U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
§ 203-34 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-34
197:746
§ 203-35. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 203-34, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 203-36. Acquired companies.
§ 203-37. Credits against tax.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
(23) Deeds to persons qualifying as first-time home buyers under the
Chester County First-time Home Buyers Program. Proof of such
participation shall be included with the statement of value when
submitted to the Recorder of Deeds. [Added 12-11-1995 by Ord.
No. 1009-95]
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of family farm corporation
under this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
§ 203-34 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-37
197:747
§ 203-38. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 203-39. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of or any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him or her in connection therewith. If the proceeds of
the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser
shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 203-40. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him or her within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him or her shall be given to him or her toward the amount of
the tax due upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to City of
§ 203-37 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-40
197:748
§ 203-41. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of deeds for
recording, shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and a statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 203-42. Civil penalties.
Coatesville based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from City of Coatesville.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
City of Coatesville all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for
use of the county, together with a report containing the information as
is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax. The two-percent
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
by the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
§ 203-40 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-42
197:749
§ 203-43. Unpaid tax to become lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the City of Coatesville, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein, are described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable and continue until
discharge by payment or in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas
of Chester County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 203-44. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 203-45. Regulations.
The designee of the City of Coatesville is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., are incorporated into and made apart of this article.
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 203-42 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-45
197:750
ARTICLE VI
Earned Income Tax
[Amended 10-25-2010 by Ord. No. 1340-2010]
§ 203-46. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Coatesville Earned
Income Tax Ordinance."
§ 203-47. Definitions.
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act212 shall have the meanings
set forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth
herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2011.
GOVERNING BODY — The City of Coatesville City Council.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
subsequently amended or as will be amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this enactment.
TAXING AUTHORITY — City of Coatesville.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount
of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted, or
reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
THIS ENACTMENT — The City of Coatesville Earned Income Tax
Ordinance.
§ 203-48. Imposition of tax; rate.
A. General purpose resident tax. The taxing authority hereby reestablishes
the prior amounts of taxation previously in effect pursuant to the
authority of the then-existing ordinances and imposes a tax for general
212. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 203-46 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-48
197:751
§ 203-49. Exemptions.
Although credits and deductions against the tax are permitted under certain
circumstances as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from tax based on age, income, or other factors.
revenue purposes at the rate of 2 1/2% on earned income and net
profits of individual residents of the taxing authority, consisting of:
(1) One percent on earned income received and net profits earned by
individual residents of the City of Coatesville which is subject to
reduction by 1/2 so long as the same tax is imposed by the
Coatesville Area School District or any other political subdivision
with authority to impose such tax pursuant to the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
(2) An additional tax of 1 1/2 on earned income received and net profits
earned by individual residents of the City of Coatesville which is not
subject to reduction on account of any such tax imposed by any
other political subdivision.
(3) Currently, the total rate applicable to residents of the City of
Coatesville, including the tax imposed by the school district is 2 1/
2%.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The taxing authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned
income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of
the taxing authority from any work, business, profession, or activity, of
any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this
enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this enactment upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
E. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations; and with policies and procedures adopted by the TCC or by
the collector. This includes any regulations, policies, and procedures
adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 1937.
§ 203-48 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-50
197:752
§ 203-50. Tax returns and payments.
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 203-51. Employer withholding, remittance, and tax returns.
Every employer shall register, withhold, and remit tax, and file tax returns
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 203-52. Collection of tax.
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector.
§ 203-53. Interest, penalties, costs, and fines.
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs, and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 203-54. Severability.
The provisions of this enactment are severable and if any of its provisions
are ruled by a court invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this enactment. It is
declared to be the intention of the governing body that this enactment
would have been adopted if such invalid or unconstitutional provision had
not been included.
§ 203-55. Purpose; effect on prior provisions.
The primary purpose of this enactment is to conform the earned income
and net profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time frame
required by Act 32. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income
or net profits of individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read
as stated in this enactment. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior
enactment conflicting with the provisions of this enactment is rescinded
insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in
force immediately prior to adoption of this enactment, the provisions of
this enactment are intended as a continuation of such prior enactment and
not as a new enactment. If this enactment is declared invalid, any prior
enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall
not be affected by adoption of this enactment. If any part of this enactment
is declared invalid, the similar part of any prior enactment levying a similar
tax shall remain in effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this
enactment. The provisions of this enactment shall not affect any act done
or liability incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish an
offense under the authority of any enactment in force prior to adoption
§ 203-50 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-55
197:753
of this enactment. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, this
enactment shall amend and restate on the effective date any enactment
levying a tax on earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to
the effective date.213
213. Editor's Note: For effective date, see § 203-47, Definitions.
§ 203-55 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-55
197:754
ARTICLE VII
Exemption for Real Estate Improvements
§ 203-56. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DETERIORATED PROPERTY (COMMERCIAL) — Any industrial, commercial
or other business property owned by an individual, association or
corporation and located in a qualified area, as hereinafter provided, or any
such property which has been the subject of an order by a government
agency requiring the unit to be vacated, condemned or demolished by
reason of noncompliance with laws, ordinances or regulations.
DETERIORATED PROPERTY (RESIDENTIAL) — A dwelling unit located in
a qualified area, as hereinafter provided, or a dwelling unit which has been
or upon request is certified by a health, housing or building inspection
agency as unfit for human habitation, for rent withholding or other health
or welfare purposes or has been the subject of an order by such an agency
requiring the unit to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of
noncompliance with laws, ordinances or regulations.
DWELLING UNIT — A house, double house or duplex, townhouse or row
house, apartment or any building intended for occupancy as living quarters
by an individual, a family or families or other groups of persons, which living
quarters contain a kitchen or other cooking equipment for the exclusive use
of the occupant or occupants.
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated
structure, either commercial or residential, so that it becomes habitable
or attains higher standards of safety, health, economic use or amenity or
is brought into compliance with laws, ordinances or regulations governing
such standards. Ordinary upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an
"improvement."
QUALIFIED AREAS — The following areas within the City of Coatesville
determined by the City Council to be eligible for tax exemption under Act
76 of 1977, Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act, and Act 42 of
1977, Improvement of Deteriorating Real Property or Areas Tax Exemption
Act:
Area No. 1, Central Business District Redevelopment Area: Beginning
at the point of intersection of the west right-of-way line of First Avenue
with the north right-of-way line extended of Lumber Street; thence,
east along the north right-of-way line and extension thereof of Lumber
Street to the point of intersection of said right-of-way line with the
west right-of-way line of Second Avenue; thence, north along the west
right-of-way line of Second Avenue to the point of intersection of said
right-of-way line with the north right-of-way line of Fleetwood Street,
which right-of-way line is coincidental with the south right-of-way line
formerly of the Penn-Central Railroad Company (Conrail); thence,
A.
§ 203-56 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-56
197:755
generally east following the irregular right-of-way line of the Conrail
to the point of intersection of said Conrail property line with the east
right-of-way line extended of Fifth Avenue; thence, south along the east
right-of-way line and extension thereof of Fifth Avenue to the point
of intersection of said right-of-way line with the south right-of-way
line extended of Park Alley; thence, west along the south right-of-way
line and extension thereof of Park Alley to the point of intersection of
said right-of-way line with the east right-of-way line of Fourth Avenue;
thence, north along the east right-of-way line of Fourth Avenue to the
point of intersection of said right-of-way line with the south rightof-
way line extended of Kersey Street; thence, west along the south
right-of-way line and extension thereof of Kersey Street to the point of
intersection of said right-of-way line with the east right-of-way line of
Third Avenue; thence, south along the east right-of-way line of Third
Avenue to the point of intersection of said right-of-way line with the
north right-of-way line extended of Maple Street; thence, west along
the north right-of-way line of Maple Street to the point of intersection
of said right-of-way line extended with the west right-of-way line of
First Avenue; thence, north along the west right-of-way line of First-
Avenue to the point of intersection of said right-of-way line with the
north right-of-way line extended of Lumber Street, the point and place
of the beginning.
Area No. 2, Merchant Street Urban Renewal Area: Beginning at the
point of intersection of the south right-of-way line of East Chestnut
Street with the west right-of-way line of North Eighth Avenue; thence,
north along the west right-of-way line of North Eighth Avenue to the
point of intersection of said right-of-way line extended with the north
right-of-way line of Merchant Street; thence, east along the north rightof-
way line of Merchant Street to the point of intersection of said
right-of-way line with the east right-of-way line of North Tenth Avenue;
thence, south along the east right-of-way line of North Tenth Avenue
to the point of intersection of said right-of-way line with the extended
south right-of-way line of Lumber Street; thence, west along the south
right-of-way line of Lumber Street to the point of intersection of said
right-of-way line with the east right-of-way line of North Ninth Avenue;
thence, south along the east right-of-way line of North Ninth Avenue to
the point of intersection of said right-of-way line with the south rightof-
way line of East Chestnut Street; thence, west along the south rightof-
way line of East Chestnut Street to the point of intersection of said
right-of-way line with the west right-of-way line of North Eighth Avenue,
the point of the beginning.
B.
Area No. 3, Coates Street Urban Renewal Area: Beginning at the point
of intersection of the north right-of-way line of Poplar Street and the
west right-of-way line of Glendale Avenue; thence, east along the north
right-of-way line of Poplar Street to the east right-of-way line of
Boundary Street; thence, south along the east right-of-way line of
Boundary Street to the point of intersection of said right-of-way line
with the south right-of-way line of Coates Street; thence, west along
C.
§ 203-56 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-56
197:756
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION — The building or erection of dwelling
units, as defined above, upon vacant land or land specifically prepared to
receive such structures.
§ 203-57. Exemption granted.
§ 203-58. Maximum exemption.
the south right-of-way line of Coates Street to the point of intersection
of said right-of-way line with the west right-of-way line of Glendale
Avenue; thence, north along the west right-of-way line of Glendale
Avenue to the point of intersection of said right-of-way line with the
north right-of-way line of Poplar Street the point of beginning.
A. There is hereby exempted from all real property taxation the assessed
valuation of:
(1) Improvements to deteriorated properties (commercial) and/or
deteriorated properties (residential).
(2) Improvements to any residential or commercial properties, without
regard to whether such properties qualify as deteriorated
properties (commercial) or deteriorated properties (residential),
provided that said improvements are constructed within a qualified
area.
(3) New residential construction built in any qualified area.
B. The exemption authorized by the above provisions of this section shall
be in the amounts and in accordance with the provisions and limitations
hereinafter provided.
A. The exemption from real property taxes shall be limited to:
(1) That portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual
cost of improvements to deteriorated property (commercial).
(2) The additional assessment attributable to the actual cost of
improvements but not in excess of the maximum cost per dwelling
unit specified herein in the case of improvements to deteriorated
property (residential).
(3) The assessment valuation attributable to the cost of construction of
the new dwelling unit but not in excess of the maximum cost per
dwelling unit specified herein in the case of new residential
construction within a qualified area.
B. The maximum cost per dwelling unit eligible for exemption shall be
$20,000 per dwelling unit on the assessment attributable to the actual
cost of improvements constructed or new construction constructed
after the effective date of this article and subsequent years. The date of
the construction shall be the date of issuance of the building permit,
improvement record, or other required notification of construction. No
§ 203-56 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-58
197:757
§ 203-59. Exemption schedule; conditions.
§ 203-60. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
tax exemption shall be granted under the provisions of this article
for any improvements to any dwelling unit in excess of the maximum
cost specified above. This limitation shall not apply to nonresidential,
industrial, commercial or other business properties which are eligible
for exemption under this article.
C. In all cases the exemption from taxes shall be limited to that portion of
the additional assessment attributable to the improvement or new
construction, as the case may be, and for which a separate assessment
has been made by the County Board of Assessment Appeals and for
which an exemption has been separately requested. No tax exemption
shall be granted if the property owner does not secure the necessary
and proper permits prior to improving the property. No tax exemption
shall be granted if the property as completed does not comply with the
minimum standards of the Housing and Building Codes of the City of
Coatesville.
D. In any case after the effective date of this article where deteriorated
property (commercial) or deteriorated property (residential) is
damaged, destroyed or demolished, by any cause or for any reason, and
the assessed valuation of the property affected has been reduced as a
result of said damage, destruction or demolition, the exemption from
real property taxation authorized by this article shall be limited to that
portion of new assessment attributable to the actual cost of
improvements or construction that is in excess of the original
assessment that existed prior to damage, destruction or demolition of
the property.
A. The schedule of real estate taxes to be exempted shall be in accordance
with the below portion of improvements to be exempted each year. After
the third year the exemption shall terminate.
Length Portion
First year 100%
Second year 100%
Third year 100%
B. The exemption from taxes granted under this article shall be upon the
property and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the
property.
C. If an eligible property is granted tax exemption pursuant to this article,
the improvement shall not, during the exemption period, be considered
as a factor in assessing other properties.
§ 203-58 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-60
197:758
A. Any person desiring tax exemption pursuant to this article should apply
to the City of Coatesville at the time a building permit is secured for
construction of the improvement or new residential construction, as the
case may be. The application must be in writing, upon forms specified
by the City, setting forth the following information:
(1) The date the building permit was issued for said improvement.
(2) The location of the property to be improved.
(3) The nature of the property to be improved.
(4) The type of improvements (commercial or residential).
(5) The summary of the plan of the improvements.
(6) The cost of the improvements.
(7) Whether or not the property has been condemned by any
governmental body for noncompliance to laws or ordinances.
(8) The property has been inspected and verified by the Building
Official.
(9) Such additional information as the City may require.
B. A copy of the exemption request shall be forwarded to the County Board
of Assessment Appeals by the Building Official. The Board shall, after
completion of construction, assess separately the improvement and
calculate the amounts of the assessment eligible for tax exemption in
accordance with the limits established by this article and notify the
taxpayer and the local taxing authorities of the reassessment and
amounts of the assessment eligible for exemption. In the case of new
residential construction the Board shall assess separately the dwelling
unit and the land upon which the new residential construction stands
and shall otherwise perform its duties as above provided for
construction of improvements to residential and commercial properties.
C. The cost of improvements to commercial properties or costs of
improvements or construction per dwelling unit of residential
properties, as the case may be, to be exempted and the schedule of
taxes exempted existing at the time of the initial request for tax
exemption shall be applicable to that exemption request, and a
subsequent amendment to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests
initiated prior to its adoption.
D. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount eligible for the
exemption may be taken by the City or by the taxpayer as provided by
law.
§ 203-60 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-61
197:759
§ 203-61. When effective.
The Article shall become effective upon adoption by the Coatesville Area
School District and by the County of Chester of resolutions exempting
from real property taxation properties in accordance with the terms of this
article.
§ 203-62. Amendments.
No amendments to this article shall be effective unless consented to by
resolution or ordinance of each local taxing authority who has consented to
be bound by the terms of this article.
§ 203-63. Termination date.
This Article shall automatically expire and terminate three years following
the effective date hereof; provided, however, that any taxpayer who has
received or applied for the exemption granted by this article prior to the
expiration date herein provided shall, if said exemption is granted, be
entitled to the full exemption authorized herein.
§ 203-61 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-63
197:760
ARTICLE VIII
Business Privilege Tax
§ 203-64. Title.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Coatesville Business
Privilege Tax Ordinance."
§ 203-65. Legislative authority.
This Article is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act 511 of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended.214
§ 203-66. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS, TRADES, OCCUPATIONS, PROFESSIONS AND OTHER
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY — Any activity carried on or exercised for gain
or profit in the City of Coatesville, including, but not limited to, the sale
of merchandise or other tangible personal property or the performance of
services.
CITY — The City of Coatesville.
COLLECTOR — The Director of Finance of the City of Coatesville.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association or
corporation.
TAXPAYER — Any person subject to the payment of the tax imposed by this
article.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period from April 1 to March 30 of the
following year.
§ 203-67. Tax levied.
For the tax year beginning April 1, 1982, and each tax year thereafter, the
City hereby imposes an annual business privilege tax in the manner and at
the fees and rates hereinafter set forth on every person engaging in any
business, trade, occupation, profession or other commercial activity in the
City of Coatesville.
§ 203-68. Rate of tax.
Each taxpayer shall pay an annual tax of $75 as herein provided.
§ 203-69. Registration of taxpayers.
214. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 3501 et seq.
§ 203-64 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-69
197:761
§ 203-70. Returns.
§ 203-71. Payment of tax; late payment charge.
§ 203-72. Powers and duties of Collector.
A. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall forthwith
register with the Collector and set forth his or her name, address,
business address and the nature of the business activity in which he or
she is engaged.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences
business subsequent to the beginning of the tax year shall register
within 30 days of commencing such business.
C. Each application for registration shall be signed by the applicant if a
natural person and, in the case of an association or a partnership, by a
member or partner thereof, and in the case of a corporation, by an
officer thereof. Each applicant shall receive a certificate of registration
from the Collector which shall not be assignable, and which must be
displayed at every business location or produced on demand.
A. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall make a
return no later than June 1 of each tax year, or within 30 days of
registration for any taxpayer first liable for such tax after June 1 of any
tax year.
B. Every return shall include a verification that the statements made
therein are true and correct and that any false statements made therein
are made subject to the penalties of 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 4904 relating to
unsworn falsification to authorities.
A. The amount of tax due shall be paid in full to the Collector at the time of
the filing of each return.
B. If the tax imposed by this article shall not be paid when due, a penalty of
10% of the amount of the tax due and unpaid shall be added thereto,
plus an additional 1% per month or fractional part of a month until paid.
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive the taxes, fines
and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his or her duty to
keep a record showing the amount received by him from each person
paying the tax and the date of such receipts.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article, and is hereby empowered
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this article, including provision for the examination, reexamination
and correction of returns and payments alleged or found to be
incorrect, or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred, and to make refunds where necessary. Any person aggrieved
§ 203-69 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-72
197:762
§ 203-73. Exemptions.
by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal to court
as in other cases provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to issue subpoenas, if necessary, to
compel the production of books, papers and records, and the
attendance of all persons before him, whether as parties or witnesses,
whom he or she believes to have knowledge of such receipts.
D. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and
records of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer, in order to verify the
accuracy of any return made or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax due. Every such taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed
and required to give to the Collector the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examination and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
E. The Collector may sue for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under
this article, including late payment charges and interest.
A. Persons and businesses. Persons employed for a wage or salary;
nonprofit corporations or associations organized for religious,
charitable or educational purposes, agencies of the government of the
United States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
business of any political subdivision, or of any authority created or
organized under and pursuant to any act of assembly are exempt from
the provisions of this article.
B. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on a privilege, transaction,
subject or occupation which is subject to a state tax or license fee, and
which tax or license fee has been held by the Courts of Pennsylvania to
be the basis for exemption from the imposition of a business privilege or
mercantile tax by a municipality.
C. Utilities. No such tax shall be assessed and collected on the gross
receipts from utility service of any person or company whose rates of
service are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission, or on any public utility service rendered by any such
person or company or on any privilege or transaction involving the
rendering of any such public utility service.
D. Production and manufacture. No such tax shall be assessed and
collected on goods, articles and products or on by-products of
manufacture or on minerals, timber, natural resources and farm
products, manufactured, produced or grown in the City of Coatesville or
on the preparation or processing thereof for use or market or on any
privilege, act or transaction related to the business of manufacturing,
the production, preparation or processing of minerals, timber and
natural resources or farm products, by manufacturers, by producers
and by farmers with respect to the goods, articles and products of their
§ 203-72 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-73
197:763
§ 203-74. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
Any person, as defined in this article, or any Officer, agent, servant or
employee thereof, who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of
the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in summary proceedings,
be subject to a fine of not more than $600 or a period of imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, in addition to any
other penalty imposed by this article.
own manufacture, production or growth, or any privilege, act or
transaction relating to the business of processing by-products of the
manufacturer, or on the transportation, loading, unloading or dumping
or storage of such goods, articles, products or by-products.
E. Any person subject to the business privilege tax imposed by this article
and who is also subject to and has paid the City of Coatesville
emergency and municipal services tax during any tax year may deduct
the amount of such emergency and municipal services tax payment
from the amount of tax imposed by this article for the same tax year.215
F. Persons otherwise subject to the business privilege tax imposed by this
article having gross receipts of less than $10,000 in any taxable year
are exempt from the provisions of this article.
215. Editor's Note: See Article III, Emergency and Municipal Services Tax, of this chapter.
§ 203-73 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-74
197:764
ARTICLE IX
Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
[Added 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 1306-2008]
§ 203-75. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Coatesville LERTA District
Ordinance."
§ 203-76. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Coatesville, Chester County, Pennsylvania.
IMPROVEMENTS — Any repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations or additions, which has the effect of either:
LERTA DISTRICT — Properties owned by an individual, association,
corporation, or other entity located in the area which is designated as an
area eligible for tax exemption relief under LERTA, hereinbelow.
§ 203-77. LERTA District designation.
The City Council of the City of Coatesville hereby determines that the area,
as more particularly described in Exhibit A,216 is deteriorated with regard to
the criteria of the Neighborhood Assistance Act, is vacant, overgrown and
unsightly, is also adjacent to areas meeting the criteria of this section, such
that all new construction on property located within the LERTA District,
as hereinbelow defined, would encourage, enhance and/or accelerate
improvement of deteriorated properties within the City.
§ 203-78. Length of exemption; applicability; delinquency.
Rehabilitating a property within the LERTA District so that it attains
higher standards of safety, health, economic use or amenity; or
A.
B. Constitutes new residential construction within the LERTA District.
A. There is hereby exempted from real property taxation by the City that
portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual costs of
improvements to eligible properties in the LERTA District, with the
length of the schedule of taxes exempted to be for a ten-year period,
which shall commence with the effective date of said exemption.
B. The exemption of taxes authorized by this article shall be upon the
property exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of
the property.
216. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 203-75 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-78
197:765
§ 203-79. Exemption schedule.
The schedule of real estate taxes to be exempted shall be in accordance
with the following percentage of improvements to be exempted each year,
up to, but not exceeding, a total improvements assessment of $200,000 for
a maximum of 72 dwelling units. The exemption shall commence in the
tax year in which the improvements are completed, such that the Year 1
exemption shall apply to, and therefore exempt, the city's share of "interim
taxes" otherwise due and payable.
Year Amount Exempted
1 100%
2 100%
3 100%
4 100%
5 100%
6 100%
7 80%
8 60%
9 40%
10 20%
§ 203-80. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
C. The exemption from taxes authorized by this article shall only be
applicable to those properties upon which all taxes and other municipal
charges/fees/levies are current. In the event of delinquency, all
exemption from the point of delinquency and into succeeding years
shall be forfeited, and taxes shall be at 100% of assessed valuation. For
purposes of this article, "delinquency" shall be defined as a failure to
pay any assessment by the date on such assessment as required by law
to be paid, on or before the end of the penalty period as set forth in each
such tax bill.
A. Any person, association or corporation desiring an exemption pursuant
to this article shall apply to the Building Inspector of the City of
Coatesville within 90 days of the date the building permit is issued for
construction of the improvements. The application must be in writing
on a form provided by the City of Coatesville and shall contain the
following information:
(1) The date the building permit was issued for such improvements;
(2) The location of the property to be improved;
(3) The nature of the property to be improved;
(4) The type of improvements;
§ 203-78 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-80
197:766
§ 203-81. Applicability to county taxes.
To the extent permissible by law, the provisions of this article are intended
to apply to that portion of the annual property taxes payable to the County
of Chester ("county"). The county is requested to acknowledge that the
county will join in the provisions of this article.
(5) A summary of the plan improvements;
(6) The cost of the improvements;
(7) Whether the property has been condemned by any governmental
body for noncompliance with laws of the City Code; and
(8) Such additional information as the City may require.
B. A copy of the exemption application shall be forwarded to the City
Council of the City of Coatesville or its designee within 60 days of the
date of receipt by the City. The City Council shall decide whether the
application for exemption is in conformity with the provisions of this
article and, if so, shall approve same. Written notice of the City
Council's decision, and the basis therefore if denied, shall be provided
to the applicant.
C. In all cases where the exemption is granted, the City of Coatesville shall
forward a copy of the exemption request to the Chester County Board of
Assessment. The Board of Assessment shall, upon completion of the
improvements and notification from the Building Inspector of the City
of Coatesville that the improvements comply with all applicable
building codes and provisions of the Coatesville City Code, assess
separately the improvements and calculate the amount of the
assessment eligible for tax exemption. The exemption provided herein
shall be effective with the next assessment immediately following the
date on which the exemption is granted. Appeals from the reassessment
and the amount eligible for the exemption may be taken by the taxpayer
or any taxing authority as provided by law.
D. The cost of improvements to be exempted and the schedule of taxes
exempted existing at the time of the initial request for tax exemption
shall be applicable to that exemption request, and subsequent
amendments to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated
prior to their adoption.
§ 203-80 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-81
197:767

ARTICLE X
MU Mixed Use Development Overlay LERTA District
[Added 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1503-2018]
§ 203-82. Title.
This article shall be known as the "MU Mixed Use Development Overlay
LERTA District."
§ 203-83. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth below:
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — Certain specifically identified industrial,
commercial or other business properties owned by an individual,
association or corporation, and located in a deteriorated area, as provided
by resolution of the City Council.
IMPROVEMENT(S) —
MUNICIPAL GOVERNING BODY — The City Council of the City of
Coatesville.
§ 203-84. Exemption.
Repair, construction or reconstruction, including alterations or
additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated property so
that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of safety, health,
economic use or amenity or is brought into compliance with laws,
ordinances or regulations governing such standards or constitutes an
improvement raising the assessed value of the property. Ordinary
upkeep and maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
A.
"Improvements" to deteriorated industrial, commercial and other
business property as referenced in this article as well as apartments,
condominiums, or other multiunit dwelling units (three or more units
in a single building) which are within the MU Mixed Use Development
Overlay District as defined in the City Zoning Code and within the MU
Mixed Use Development Overlay LERTA District.
B.
A. The exemption from real property taxes shall be limited:
(1) To the exemption schedule as established within this article.
(2) To that portion of the additional assessment attributable to the
actual cost of improvements to the deteriorated property that
consist of industrial, commercial and other business property as
well as apartments, condominiums, or other multiunit dwelling
units (three or more units in a single building) which are within the
MU Mixed Use Development Overlay District as defined in the City
Zoning Code, and within the MU Mixed Use Development Overlay
LERTA District.
§ 203-82 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-84
197:769
§ 203-85. Exemption area.
(3) To the assessment valuation attributable to the cost of construction
of a new industrial, commercial or other business unit, as well as
apartments, condominiums, or other multiunit dwelling units (three
or more units in a single building) which are within the MU Mixed
Use Development Overlay District as defined in the City Zoning
Code, and within the MU Mixed Use Development Overlay LERTA
District.
B. In all cases, the exemption from taxes shall be limited to that portion of
the additional assessment attributable to the improvement and for
which a separate assessment has been made by the Chester County
Board of Assessment and for which an exemption has been separately
requested.
C. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner does not
secure the necessary and proper permits prior to improving the
property.
D. No tax exemption shall be granted if the property owner is delinquent in
the payment of real estate taxes at the time of application for tax
exemption or owes any fees to the City or to any other taxing entity.
E. Any failure to timely pay real estate taxes to all taxing bodies by year
end shall immediately terminate the exemption effective as of the end of
the year of delinquency.
F. In any case, after the effective date of this article, when deteriorated
property is damaged, destroyed or demolished, by any cause or for any
reason, and the assessed valuation of the property affected has been
reduced as a result of said damage, destruction or demolition, the
exemption from real property taxation authorized by this article shall
be limited to that portion of new assessment attributable to the actual
cost of improvements that is in excess of the original assessments that
existed prior to damage, destruction or demolition of the property.
A. The City enacted Resolution No. 2018-03 which identifies the
deteriorated areas, and which is coextensive and equal to the area that
constitutes the MU Mixed Use Development Overlay District previously
identified and defined by the City Zoning Map and designated under
Article XXIII of the City Zoning Code at § 224-9B(3).
B. A copy of Resolution No. 2018-03, and the exhibits to the resolution, are
collectively attached hereto and incorporated as an appendix to this
article.217 Subject to the limitations set forth in this article, properties
located in the deteriorated areas as specifically identified in Resolution
No. 2018-03 may be eligible to participate in the tax exemption
program established in this article.
217. Editor's Note: Resolution No. 2018-03 is on file in the City offices.
§ 203-84 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-86
197:770
§ 203-86. Exemption schedule.
§ 203-87. Notice to taxpayers.
A. The schedule of real estate taxes to be exempted shall be in accordance
with the following percentage of improvements to be exempted each
year:
Year Portion to Be Exempt
First year 100%
Second year 90%
Third year 80%
Fourth year 70%
Fifth year 60%
Sixth year 50%
Seventh year 40%
Eighth year 30%
Ninth year 20%
Tenth year 10%
B. The exemption from taxes granted under this article shall run with the
property, and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the
property.
C. If an eligible property is granted tax exemption pursuant to this article,
the improvement shall not, during the exemption period, be considered
a factor in assessing other properties.
D. After the 10th year, the exemption shall terminate.
A. There shall be placed on the form application for a building permit the
following notation:
"Under the provisions of Ordinance No. 1503-2018, you may be
entitled to a property tax exemption on your contemplated alteration
or new construction, where the improvements consist of industrial,
commercial and other business property as well as apartments,
condominiums, or other multiunit dwelling units (three or more units
in a single building) which are within the MU Mixed Use Development
Overlay District as defined in the City Zoning Code, and within the
MU Mixed Use Development Overlay LERTA District. An application
for exemption may be secured from the Code Enforcement Office and
must be filed with the City at the time a building permit is secured."
B. At the time a building permit is secured for the construction of an
improvement for which an exemption is requested, the taxpayer shall
apply to the City for the exemption provided for in this article. A request
§ 203-86 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-87
197:771
§ 203-88. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
A copy of the written request for exemption shall be forwarded to the
Chester County Assessment Office (the "Assessor") by the City for
notification purposes only. Upon completion of the improvement, the
taxpayer shall notify the City so that the City may have the Assessor assess
the improvements separately for the purpose of calculating the amount
of assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the limits
established in this article. The Assessor shall notify the taxpayer and the
local taxing authorities of the reassessment and amounts of the assessment
eligible for exemption. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount
eligible for the exemption may be taken by the taxpayer or by the City as
provided by law.
§ 203-89. Termination and applicability.
Unless otherwise repealed by the City Council, this article shall be
applicable from the effective date hereof for a period of 10 years, expiring
on December 31, 2028, unless extended by ordinance duly adopted. Any
applicant for tax abatement must have a building permit to be eligible for
tax abatement treatment hereunder, with that permit having been issued
on, or before, the 31st day of December 2028, and, in addition, the
application for exemption must also be filed with the City by that same
date. All timely applications shall be entitled to the ten-year exemption
schedule as set forth herein. Nothing contained herein shall act to prohibit
the City from enacting a similar article or ordinance, or amending the
for the exemption must be in writing and include the following
information:
(1) The date the building permit was issued for the improvements.
(2) The location of the property.
(3) The use being made or to be made of the property.
(4) The type of improvement.
(5) The summary of the plan of the improvement.
(6) The cost of the improvement.
(7) Whether or not the property has been condemned or cited by any
governmental body for noncompliance with laws, regulations and/
or ordinances.
(8) Whether the applicant has paid any and all fees owed to any taxing
entity.
(9) Whether the applicant is current on all real estate taxes with
respect to the property at issue with all taxing entities.
(10) Any or all such additional information required.
§ 203-87 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-89
197:772
scope of this article. The cost of new construction or improvements to
be exempted and the schedule of taxes exempted existing at the time of
the initial request for tax exemption shall be applicable to that exemption
request, and subsequent amendments to this article, if any, shall not apply
to requests initiated prior to their adoption.
§ 203-89 SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 203-89
197:773
Chapter 207
TELEVISION, CABLE
§ 203-89 COATESVILLE CODE § 203-89
207:774
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 207-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Coatesville
Cable Television Ordinance Amendments of 1993."
§ 207-2. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 339-65, known as the "Television Cable Franchise"
(hereinafter the "Cable Ordinance"), is amended as hereinafter provided.
All other ordinances of the City of Coatesville (hereinafter the "city") are
repealed to the extent inconsistent herewith. All franchise agreements
between the city and cable operators are abrogated to the extent and
only to the extent inconsistent herewith, except to the extent abrogation
is not required by the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992 or the regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 207-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate cable television in the exercise of
the power of the city to:
§ 207-4. Federal provisions.
This chapter is enacted under the Federal Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, which permits local franchising
authorities to regulate cable television, subject to certain substantive and
procedural limitations.
§ 207-5. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, these provisions
shall be construed broadly as required for the maintenance of peace, good
government, safety and welfare of the city and its trade, commerce and
manufactures.
§ 207-6. Conflicts with federal law.
It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Coatesville that this chapter
conform to the federal law. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any
provision of this chapter to be in conflict with the federal law, the federal
law will control and this chapter, to the extent that any provision is declared
to be in conflict with the federal law, shall not apply.
A. Regulate telephone, telegraph and electric power poles and other
obstructions erected upon or in the streets and roads of the city, and
B. Provide for the maintenance of peace, good government, safety and
welfare of the City of Coatesville and its trade, commerce and
manufacturers.
§ 207-1 TELEVISION, CABLE § 207-6
207:775

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 207-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ASSOCIATED EQUIPMENT — All equipment in a cable subscriber's home
that is used to receive the basic service, regardless of whether such
equipment is additionally used to receive other tiers of regulated
programming service and/or unregulated service. Equipment shall include,
but not be limited to converter boxes, remote control units, connections for
additional television receivers and other cable home wiring.
BASIC SERVICE — At a minimum, all signals of domestic television
broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily
transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station,
regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system),
any public, educational and governmental programming required by the
franchise to be carried on the basic tier and any additional video
programming signals a service added to the basic tier by the cable operator.
BASIC SERVICE RATE — The rate charged by cable operator for basic
service and associated equipment costs.
CABLE OPERATOR — Any person or group of persons that provides cable
service over a cable system and directly or, through one (1) or more
affiliates, owns a significant interest in such cable system or who otherwise
owns, controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management and operation of a cable system.
CABLE SERVICE —
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment, that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community but does not
include:
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service; and
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such
video programming or other programming service.
B.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1)
or more television broadcast stations;
A.
A facility that serves only subscribers in one (1) or more multiple-unit
dwellings under common ownership, control or management, unless
such facility uses any public right-of-way;
B.
§ 207-7 TELEVISION, CABLE § 207-7
207:777
FEDERAL LAW — The Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as
amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act
of 1992, and all regulations promulgated by the FCC thereunder, as any of
the foregoing may be amended from time to time.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council of the City of Coatesville.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Coatesville, city of the third class.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases,
"normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one (1)
night per week and/or some weekend hours.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those service conditions which
are within the control of the cable operator. Those conditions which are
not within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited
to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network
outages and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which
are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not
limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular
peak- or seasonal-demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the cable
system.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one (1) or more
cable channels.
A facility of a common carrier except to the extent that such facility is
used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers;
or
C.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems.
D.
§ 207-7 COATESVILLE CODE § 207-7
207:778
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 207-8. Appointment of compliance officer; powers.
§ 207-9. Duties of compliance officer.
The compliance officer shall be responsible for:
A. For the administration of this chapter, a compliance officer, who shall be
the City Manager or his designee, is appointed by the City Council.
B. The compliance officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with
its literal terms.
A. Taking such action on behalf of the city as may from time to time be
required to obtain or maintain the city's certification to regulate basic
service rates.
B. Notifying all cable operators serving the city when the city has been
certified by the FCC to regulate basic service rates.
C. Notifying all cable operators serving the city that the city intends to
enforce the minimum customer service standards established by the
federal law.
D. Making all filings required or permitted to be made to the FCC by the
city pursuant to the federal law, subject to oversight and control of the
City Council.
E. Receiving, filing in the public records of the city, reviewing for
completeness and placing on the Council's agenda for consideration all
submissions, petitions and other filings required or permitted to be
made to the city pursuant to the federal law. All submissions, petitions
and other filings made to the city pursuant to the federal law shall be
made via first class mail, postage prepaid, to the following address: City
of Coatesville, One City Hall Place, Coatesville, PA 19320.
F. Receiving and transmitting to the proper officer of the city any filing
fees paid pursuant to this chapter. The filing fees shall be as provided in
Chapter 108, Fees.218
G. Enforcing the provisions of this chapter and all decisions of the Council
made hereunder to the fullest extent permitted by the federal law,
subject to the oversight and control of the Council.
H. Taking such other actions as may be necessary from time to time,
subject to the oversight and control of the Council, to protect the right
of the city to regulate cable television to the fullest extent permitted by
the federal law.
218. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 207-8 TELEVISION, CABLE § 207-9
207:779

ARTICLE IV
Rate Regulation
§ 207-10. Regulation of basic service rates.
The City Council shall regulate basic service rates in accordance with the
substantive and procedural provisions of the federal law and any applicable
state law or regulations or local ordinances.
§ 207-11. Duties of cable operators.
§ 207-12. Duties of City of Coatesville.
A. Within thirty (30) days of receiving written notification from the city
that the city has been certified by the FCC to regulate rates for the
basic service, a cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the
basic service and associated equipment with the city (together with the
fee specified by § 207-9F).
B. At least thirty (30) days prior to increasing its rates for the basic
service, a cable operator shall notify each subscriber of the proposed
rate increase and shall file a notice of its proposed rate increase with
the city (together with the fee specified by § 207-9F).
C. At the time of filing a schedule of rates or a proposed rate increase with
the city, a cable operator shall publish a summary of the rates or rate
increase in a local newspaper for at least three (3) consecutive days and
cablecast a summary of the rates or rate increase on its public
information channel at least twice daily at such times as are reasonably
expected to reach the largest audience, over a three-day period, in each
case notifying interested parties that they must submit written
comments by a date certain [within fifteen (15) days of the cable
operator's filing with the municipality], at the appropriate address.
D. A cable operator shall comply with all orders of the city, except that a
cable operator shall not be required to comply with an order if the cable
operator demonstrates that complying with the order would require the
cable operator to disclose proprietary information.
A. Upon receipt of a cable operator's schedule of rates or a proposed rate
increase, the city shall cablecast a summary of the rates or rate
increases on the channel(s) allocated to the city, at least twice daily at
such times as are reasonably expected to reach the largest audience,
over a three-day period, along with a notice that interested parties shall
submit written comments to the city by a date certain [within fifteen
(15) days of the cable operator's filing with the city], at One City Hall
Place, Coatesville, PA 19320.
B. The city shall make any decision on the reasonableness of current basic
service rates and proposed rate increases pursuant to the procedural
and substantive provisions of the federal law.
§ 207-10 TELEVISION, CABLE § 207-12
207:781
§ 207-13. Enforcement.
In rendering its decisions, the Council shall have the full authority granted
to it pursuant to the federal law to order a cable operator to take any and
all actions as the federal law permits, including, without limitation:
§ 207-14. Violations and penalties.219
In the event that a cable operator does not comply with a decision made
pursuant to this chapter and directed specifically toward the cable operator,
the city may assess a fine against the cable operator as provided in § 207-16.
C. In making a decision on the reasonableness of current basic service
rates or proposed rate increases, the city shall have the authority to
compel the production of proprietary information from cable operators;
and in such circumstances, the city shall be subject to the
confidentiality provisions set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
A. Ordering a cable operator to implement a reduction in basic service tier
or associated equipment rates where necessary to bring rates into
compliance with the standards set forth in the federal law.
B. Prescribing a reasonable rate for the basic service tier or associated
equipment after it determines that a proposed rate is unreasonable.
C. Ordering a cable operator to refund to subscribers that portion of
previously paid rates determined to be in excess of the permitted tier
charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless the operator has
submitted a cost-of-service showing which justified the rate charged as
reasonable. Before ordering such a refund, however, the city shall give
the operator notice and shall give the operator fifteen (15) days from
the date such notice is given to submit written comments to the city.
Any such refund order shall be further subject to the limitations
contained in the federal law.
219. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 207-12 COATESVILLE CODE § 207-14
207:782
ARTICLE V
Customer Service Standards
§ 207-15. Federal minimum standards adopted.
It is the intent of the city to enforce the following minimum customer
service standards as established by the federal law:
A. Cable system office hours and telephone availability.
(1) The cable operator will maintain a local, tollfree or collect-call
telephone access line, which will be available to its subscribers
twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.
(a) Trained company representatives will be available to respond
to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours.
(b) After normal business hours, the access line may be answered
by a service or an automated-response system, including an
answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business
hours must be responded to by a trained company
representative on the next business day.
(2) Under normal operating conditions, telephone-answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed
thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs
to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30)
seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety percent
(90%) of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on
a quarterly basis.
(3) The operator will not be required to acquire equipment or perform
surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering
standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates
a clear failure to comply.
(4) Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a
busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
(5) Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at
least during normal business hours and will be conveniently
located.
B. Installations, outages and service calls. Under normal operating
conditions, each of the following four (4) standards will be met no less
than ninety-five percent (95%) of the time measured on a quarterly
basis:
(1) Standard installations will be performed within seven (7) business
days after an order has been placed. "Standard installations" are
those that are located up to one hundred twenty-five (125) feet
from the existing distribution system.
§ 207-15 TELEVISION, CABLE § 207-15
207:783
(2) Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, the cable
operator will begin working on service interruptions promptly and
in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours after the interruption
becomes known. The cable operator must begin actions to correct
other service problems the next business day after notification of
the service problem.
(3) The appointment-window alternatives for installations, service calls
and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours.
(The operator may schedule service calls and other installation
activities outside of normal business hours for the express
convenience of the customer.)
(4) An operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after
the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled
appointment.
(5) If a cable operator representative is running late for an
appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the
appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The
appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is
convenient for the customer.
C. Communications between cable operators and cable subscribers.
(1) Notifications to subscribers:
(a) The cable operator shall provide written information on each of
the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least
annually to all subscribers and at any time upon request:
[1] Products and services offered;
[2] Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other
services;
[3] Installation and service maintenance policies;
[4] Instructions on how to use the cable service;
[5] Channel positions of programming carried on the system;
and
[6] Billing and complaint procedures, including the address
and telephone number of the local franchise authority's
cable office.
(b) Billing.
[1] Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must
be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not
limited to, basic and premium service charges and
§ 207-15 COATESVILLE CODE § 207-15
207:784
§ 207-16. Enforcement.
In furtherance thereof, the compliance officer, ninety (90) days after giving
notice to the cable operators of the city's intent to enforce these standards,
shall have the authority and responsibility to enforce these standards to
the fullest extent permitted by the federal law and in accordance with all
substantive and procedural requirements of the federal law. In furtherance
thereof, the compliance officer may make any and all such orders and assess
any and all such penalties for violations of these standards as are permitted
by the federal law, subject to the oversight and control of the Council,
including without limitation:
§ 207-17. Other standards not affected.
All other customer service standards, whether established by franchise
agreement, state law or regulation or local ordinance and whether now or
hereafter enacted, shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that
such other customer service standards are not preempted by the federal
law.
equipment charges. Bills will also clearly delineate all
activity during the billing period, including optional
charges, rebates and credits. [Amended 9-9-1996 by
Ord. No. 1033-96]
[2] In case of a billing dispute, the cable operator must
respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within
thirty (30) days.
(c) Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly but no later
than either:
[1] The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of
the request or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier; or
[2] The return of the equipment supplied by the cable
operator if service is terminated.
(d) Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the
customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a
credit is warranted.
A. Ordering the cable operation to pay credits or refunds to the
subscribers to the cable operator's system;
B. Filing suit against a cable operator to compel specific performance; and
C. Conducting performance evaluations at the time of renewal of the cable
operator's franchise agreement.
§ 207-15 TELEVISION, CABLE § 207-17
207:785
Chapter 210
TOWING SERVICES
§ 210-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE —
DISABLED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is inoperable due to
mechanical failure or malfunction but is not wrecked.
IMPOUNDING AUTHORITY — The authority of the Chief of Police, any
peace officer or official having such authority by law to impound any motor
vehicle for any lawful reason(s).
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
OWNER — Any person who holds the legal title of a motor vehicle or who
has the legal right of possession thereof.
STORAGE FACILITY — A garage, parking lot or any type of facility owned by
a person other than a governmental entity for storing or parking ten (10) or
A vehicle, other than a pedalcycle, shall be presumed to be abandoned
under one (1) or more of the following circumstances, but the
presumption is rebuttable by a preponderance of the evidence:
The vehicle is physically inoperable and is left unattended on a
highway or other public property for more than forty-eight (48)
hours.
(1)
The vehicle has remained illegally on a highway or other public
property for more than forty-eight (48) hours.
(2)
The vehicle is left unattended on or along a highway or other public
property for more than forty-eight (48) hours and does not bear the
following:
(a) A valid registration plate.
(b) A certificate of inspection.
(c) An ascertainable vehicle identification number.
(3)
A.
The vehicle has remained on private property without the consent of
the owner or person in control of the property for more than forty-eight
(48) hours.
B.
Vehicles and equipment used or to be used in construction or in the
operation or maintenance of highways or public utility facilities, which
are left in a manner which does not interfere with the normal movement
of traffic, will not be considered to be abandoned.
C.
§ 207-17 COATESVILLE CODE § 210-1
210:786
more vehicles which is in full compliance with the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation, Bureau of Motor Vehicles/Salvor Unit.
VEHICLE — Every device in or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved only
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rail or tracks, and shall
include trailers and semitrailers.
WRECKED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which is disabled due to collision
with another vehicle or object.
WRECKER — Any motor vehicle used for the purpose of towing or removing
disabled or wrecked vehicles.
WRECKER BUSINESS — The business of towing or removing disabled,
wrecked or abandoned vehicles on the public street or right-of-way.
WRECKER COMPANY — Any person engaged in the wrecker business.
§ 210-2. Permit to operate wrecker service.
A. Every person desiring to engage in the wrecker business in the city
shall, at the times of his or her application, first be authorized by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to operate as a salvor and shall be so
qualified in accordance with 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 et seq. (relating to
authorization of salvors). Further, the applicant shall be in complete
compliance with the rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania pertaining to salvors as said rules and regulations are set
forth in Chapter 253 of Title 67 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
B. Permit to operate: application; fee; nontransferable; expiration date.
Every person desiring to engage in the wrecker business in the city
shall make application in writing, on a form provided for that purpose,
to the Code Administrator or his or her designee for a permit to engage
in wrecker business and for a permit for each wrecker proposed to be
operated, and such application shall contain the name, address,
telephone number, the number and types of wrecker equipment
operated and the true owner of the company concerned, along with
other pertinent information. Every application when filed shall be
sworn to by the applicant and accompanied by a permit application fee
in the sum as provided in Chapter 108, Fees. No permit shall be
transferable, and every permit shall expire on the 31st day of December
of the calendar year in which it is issued.220
C. Issuance of permit. The City Codes Department shall issue a permit to
engage in the wrecker business to all applicants complying with the
provisions of this section and shall issue a permit to all wreckers of such
applicants so complying.
D. Permit requirements.
220. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 210-1 TOWING SERVICES § 210-2
210:787
(1) All towing vehicles shall be in compliance with the rules and
regulations of the Department of Transportation of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with respect to equipment lighting,
emergency equipment and safety features. This chapter hereby
incorporates, by reference, herein the provisions of the rules and
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as the same are
set forth in Chapter 253 of Title 67 et seq. and in 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 7301 et seq. as the same are amended.
(2) Insurance will be maintained as follows:
(a) Every towing carrier shall be bonded in such amount as is
required of salvors by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(b) Every towing carrier shall obtain and keep in force at all times
public liability and property damage insurance or surety bond
providing the same coverage, issued by some insurance or
surety company authorized to do business in the city by the
city, which shall be in such form, with such schedules and
endorsements as may be prescribed by the city, covering all
towing vehicles which may, at any time, be operated by or for
or which may be under the control of the towing carrier. Such
coverage shall be accomplished by a waiver-of-description
endorsement on each policy, which shall be attached to and
become a part of the policy.
(c) As evidence of such coverage, there shall be filed with the city
a certificate of insurance in the form and manner prescribed by
the city, which shall be executed by a duly authorized agent of
the insurer. Such coverage shall be in no less amounts than the
following:
[1] Public liability and property damage for death or injury to
any one (1) person: three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.).
[2] Total liability in any one (1) accident: three hundred
thousand dollars ($300,000.).
[3] Property damage: fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.).
[4] Cargo coverage: The cargo coverage filed shall provide
adequate coverage to the minimum extent of two thousand
dollars ($2,000.) to cover the carrier's legal liability for
loss or damage to property of any person or persons other
than the assured carried in, upon or attached to the motor
vehicle and/or trailers or dollies operated by or for or
under the control of the assured (towing carrier). The
original policy is to be retained by the assured and kept
available for inspection by any authorized representative
of the City of Coatesville.
§ 210-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 210-2
210:788
§ 210-3. Call to accident scene required.
(d) All insurance coverage must be filed with the same name,
initials, trade name or corporate name and address as listed on
the application for the permit. Subsequent name and address
changes and policy number changes shall be reflected on the
certificate by the filing of an endorsement by the insurer.
(e) Every insurance certificate required by and filed with the city
shall be kept in force and effect unless and until canceled by
thirty (30) days' written notice by the insurer, which time shall
commence from the date the notice is actually received by the
city, and the prescribed certificate of insurance shall contain a
statement to this effect.
E. Inspections. All inspections to qualify for a permit shall be made by the
Chief of Police or his designee inspector within the City Police
Department. The inspector shall fill out an inspection sheet and sign the
same. If the wrecker does not comply with the specifications of this
chapter, the inspector shall make a notation on the inspection form of
this fact. The inspection forms, as set out in this section, shall be kept
by the City Codes Department. The police official in charge of the
wreckers will be in charge of inspection.
(1) In addition to a permit authorizing a person to engage in wrecker
business, there shall be issued a permit for each approved wrecker
vehicle owned by the permittee. Each permit for a wrecker vehicle
shall state that such wrecker has been inspected by the Chief of
Police or his designee inspector and approved by the City Secretary
and shall be affixed securely to the inside of the windshield of the
appropriate wrecker vehicle. No person shall operate a wrecker
commercially on the public streets of the city unless a permit to
engage in the wrecker business has been issued to the owner of
such wrecker. No permit shall be transferable, and every permit
shall expire at 12:00 midnight on the 31st day of December of the
calendar year in which it was issued.
(2) Each wrecker vehicle permit (sticker) shall be issued in a color
different from the previous permit year.
F. Operation without permits. No person shall operate a wrecker
commercially on the public streets of the city unless a current
inspection permit has been duly issued for such vehicle by the City
Codes Department. No person shall operate a wrecker on the public
streets of the city unless the permit duly issued to such wrecker is
posted on the windshield of such wrecker as provided in this section.
A. Wreckers responding to the scene or situs of an accident or collision
may do so only if they are responding to a call by the Police Department
or an individual. The prohibition of this section shall be inapplicable,
provided that it is necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any
§ 210-2 TOWING SERVICES § 210-3
210:789
§ 210-4. Soliciting business.
No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the streets
of the city, the business of towing any vehicle which is wrecked or disabled
due to accident or police action on a public street, regardless of whether the
solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting the business of towing, removing,
repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or purchasing said vehicle.
§ 210-5. Wrecker preference; rotation procedure.
person involved in an accident or collision. If a wrecker driver is called
to an accident by an individual, he must advise the Police Department
of the person's name, the type of vehicle and the exact location of the
accident or collision prior to arrival.
B. One (1) wrecker service may not authorize another wrecker service to
handle calls for the other in the event that its wrecker/driver is not
available.
C. Nothing in this section is to prevent a wrecker service who happens to
be in the area, passing by, on no other business, from stopping to assist
the wrecker service handling the wreck scene, provided that the
dispatched wrecker has arrived at the scene.
A. The police officer investigating the accident shall ask the individuals
involved if they have a wrecker preference from among wrecker permit
owners, and if they have such a preference, he or she shall instruct the
dispatcher to call the wrecker preferred.
(1) The wrecker operator must have well-lighted storage either inside
storage which can be locked up at night or outside storage
surrounded by a fence at least six (6) feet high which can be locked
up at night. The permit owner must have these facilities located
within a five-mile radius of the intersection of Lincoln Highway,
East, and First Avenue.
(2) The wrecker permit owner/driver must respond to all calls by the
Police Department within twenty (20) minutes of the initial call.
B. A rotating list of all wrecker permit owners qualifying under § 210-6
shall be maintained in the City Police Department. The list shall provide
for rotation among wrecker permit owners on a weekly basis, Sunday
through Saturday. In the event that the individual has no preference or
is unable to designate a call preference or the individual's preference
does not answer or is unwilling or unable to provide a wrecker
immediately, then the investigating officer shall call the wrecker
designated on said rotating list. Said rotation shall, as nearly as
possible, equitably distribute the wrecker calls to the above-mentioned
wrecker permit owners. If there is no answer or the owners are
unwilling or unable to provide a wrecker immediately, then the
investigating officer shall call the next wrecker owner on said rotating
§ 210-3 COATESVILLE CODE § 210-5
210:790
§ 210-6. Eligibility for rotating list.
list and shall continue in this manner until a wrecker is dispatched to
the accident in question.
C. There shall be maintained a separate rotating list comprised of the
wrecker permit owners qualifying under § 210-6 with a power-takeoffdriven
winch of a capacity of not less than six thousand (6,000) pounds.
When, in the opinion of the investigating officer, the condition of or
location of a vehicle is such that a wrecker with power-takeoff-driven
winch is required to safely and expeditiously remove the vehicle and the
owner has no preference, then the officer shall call the next wrecker
permit owner on the list of wrecker owners with power-takeoff-driven
winches. If there is no answer or the wrecker owners are unwilling or
unable to provide a wrecker immediately, then the investigation officer
shall call the next wrecker owner on said list and shall continue in this
manner until a wrecker is dispatched or until all wrecker owners on the
list have been called and a wrecker has not been dispatched, the officer
shall go to the rotating list of all wrecker permit owners established in
Subsection B above and follow the procedures set forth therein until a
wrecker is dispatched.
A. In order to be placed on the rotating list, a wrecker permit owner must
comply with the following requirements:
(1) The permit owner must have facilities complying with the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Motor
Vehicles/Salvor Unit, or must show proof of a contractual
agreement between the permit owner and the owner of a facility
which meets the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Motor Vehicles/Salvor Unit. This facility must be located within a
five-mile radius of the intersection of First Avenue and Lincoln
Highway, East.
(2) All vehicles towed or removed by the wrecker permit owner in
response to a rotating list must be stored at the above-mentioned
facility unless the wrecker permit owner is requested by the owner
of the vehicle or a police official to transport the vehicle to another
location.
(3) The wrecker owner must make any vehicle stored at this facility
available to the vehicle owner between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. and shall have a sign clearly visible at the entrance,
clearly readable from the street, setting out the name of the
storage facility/lot, the street address and telephone number(s)
where the facility owner/operator can be reached to release stored
vehicles to owners. Access to stored vehicles shall not be
unreasonably denied between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., where the
facility owner/operator is available to release the stored vehicle.
§ 210-5 TOWING SERVICES § 210-6
210:791
§ 210-7. Impounding of vehicles.
The impounding of any vehicle in any vehicle storage facility which is in full
compliance with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Bureau of
Motor Vehicles/Salvor Unit, shall be at the direction of the Chief of Police,
any peace officer or official having such authority by law. Police officers
requiring access to any vehicle stored in a storage facility lot as part of an
official investigation shall be permitted such access on a twenty-four-hour
basis.
§ 210-8. Scope.
This chapter shall be cumulative of all laws of the commonwealth and the
United States governing the subject matter of this chapter.
§ 210-9. Violations and penalties.
(4) The wrecker permit owner/driver must respond to all calls by the
Police Department within twenty (20) minutes of the initial call.
B. Eligibility for city rotation shall be determined initially by the Chief of
Police on the foregoing requirements. Similarly, the Chief of Police
summarily removes the wrecker permit owner from city rotation upon
his or her determination of that owner's subsequent ineligibility. Any
such decision of the Chief of Police may be appealed to the City Council
by giving notice of such appeal within the ten-day period following the
action of the Chief of Police.
A. Any person, either by himself, herself or agent, who shall do any act or
thing prohibited by the terms of this chapter or in any way violate the
provisions thereof, upon conviction, shall be fined not more than six
hundred dollars ($600.) or imprisoned for a period not to exceed ninety
(90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. It shall not be necessary
for the complaint to allege or for proof to be made that the act was
knowingly done, nor shall it be necessary for the complaint to negate
any exception contained in this chapter concerning any prohibited act,
but any such exception made therein may be urged as a defense by any
person charged by such complaint.221
B. If any such offense is in violation of §§ 210-2, 210-4, 210-11 and 210-12
of this chapter:
(1) The Chief of Police shall suspend the wrecker permit owner from
the city rotation list for a period of thirty (30) days from the first
violation.
(2) In case of two (2) of such violations within a twelve-month period,
the Chief of Police will suspend the wrecker permit owner from the
city rotation list for a period of ninety (90) days.
221. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 210-6 COATESVILLE CODE § 210-9
210:792
§ 210-10. Police Chief's authority.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to allow wrecker owners without
a permit to haul wrecked or disabled vehicles when police investigation is
finished and the same is not in any way interfering with traffic.
§ 210-11. Wrecker to comply with police officer's instructions.
While at the scene of an accident, the wrecker or wreckers which have been
dispatched shall be under the direction of the police officer investigating the
accident and shall carry out his or her instructions, including the cleaning
of glass and debris.
§ 210-12. Revocation of wrecker permit.
A wrecker permit may be revoked by the City Council upon a determination
by it that:
C. Any such action on the part of the Chief of Police may be appealed by
the wrecker permit owner to the City Council of the City of Coatesville
by giving written notice to the City Secretary within ten (10) days after
such action by the Chief of Police.
A. The owner of the wrecker for which such permit was issued or any
employee or agent of such owner or the applicant for such permit or any
employee or agent of such applicant has violated any provision of this
chapter within the sixty (60) days immediately preceding the date of
revocation.
B. The owner of the wrecker for which such permit was issued or the
applicant for such permit is failing to comply and to maintain such
wrecker in compliance with the requirements set forth in § 210-2D of
this chapter for the issuance of such permit.
C. The owner of the wrecker for which such permit was issued or any
employee or agent of such owner or the applicant for such permit or any
employee or agent of such applicant has been convicted, within sixty
(60) days immediately preceding the date of revocation, of a moving
violation of the traffic laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or its
political subdivisions, provided that such moving violation occurs while
the violator is driving or operating a wrecker for which a permit has
been issued under the provisions of this chapter.
D. The owner of the wrecker for which such permit was issued or any
employee or agent of such owner or the applicant for such permit or any
employee or agent of such applicant has used information received
from a broadcast on the shortwave radio frequency of the Police
Department or Fire Department for his or her own benefit or for the
benefit of another person in connection with the operation of wrecker
business within the sixty (60) days immediately preceding the date of
revocation.
§ 210-9 TOWING SERVICES § 210-13
210:793
§ 210-13. Towing vehicles.
No towing carrier shall commence to tow any vehicle unless the conditions
enumerated in at least one (1) of the following Subsections A through C are
first met:
§ 210-14. Inspection of records and facilities.
Chapter 212
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 102.
Fire protection and prevention — See Ch. 115.
Lifesafety standards — See Ch. 151.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 156.
Plumbing — See Ch. 176.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
§ 212-1. Administration and enforcement election.
The City of Coatesville hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. §§ 72l0.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
A. The towing service is requested by the custodian of the vehicle to be
towed. "Owner" or "custodian of the vehicle," as used herein, shall
include any person legally entitled to possession of said vehicle.
B. The towing service is to be performed pursuant to the direction of a
duly constituted law enforcement officer.
C. The vehicle is to be towed from private property upon the direction of
the owner of the property or an agent of the owner of such property to
remove such vehicle therefrom. Such direction shall be in writing and
shall identify the vehicle and the time and place of pickup of the vehicle
and the destination or delivery point.
A. The authorized representatives of the City of Coatesville shall at times
have the authority to inspect the books and records connected with the
towing and storage operations of any towing carrier, and the carrier
shall make his or her records available to the city's representative upon
request by the representative during normal business hours.
B. The authorized representatives of the City of Coatesville shall at times
have authority to inspect towing carriers' equipment and facilities used
in providing storage and towing services during normal business hours.
§ 210-13 COATESVILLE CODE § 212-2
210:794
§ 212-2. Adoption of the Uniform Construction Code (UCC).
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the City
of Coatesville.
§ 212-3. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within the City of Coatesville
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the
governing body of the City of Coatesville from time to time by resolution:
§ 212-4. Board of Appeals.
A. By the designation of an employee of the City of Coatesville to serve as
the municipal code official to act on behalf of the City of Coatesville.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the City of Coatesville.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this chapter through an
intermunicipal agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter on behalf of this
municipality.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing
body of the City of Coatesville in conformity with the requirements of
the relevant provisions of the Code, as amended from time to time, and
for the purposes set forth therein, If at any time enforcement and
administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other
municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action
of the participating municipalities.
B. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Board of Use Registration Appeals absent from
three or more consecutive regular meetings of the Board of Use
Registration Appeals without an approved leave of absence granted
by the City Council after public hearing and prior written notice
thereof shall be removed from the Board of Use Registration
Appeals by the City Council of the City of Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the Board of Use Registration Appeals absent from
20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Board of
§ 212-2 TOWING SERVICES § 212-4
210:795
§ 212-5. Disposition of existing ordinances.
§ 212-6. Fee schedule.
Fees assessable by the City of Coatesville for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the Code shall be
paid in accordance with the schedule of fees as established, from time
to time, by ordinance of the City Council as set forth in Chapter 108 of
the Code of the City of Coatesville pertaining to the schedule of fees and
charges.
Chapter 214
USE REGISTRATION
Use Registration Appeals within any one-year period shall be
notified in writing by the City Manager acting on behalf of the
City Council of the attendance requirements of this subsection. Any
member of the Board of Use Registration Appeals who is absent
from 20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings within a
one-year period shall thereafter be removed for cause from such
position by the City Council with prior written notice after public
hearing unless such member resigns in writing or waives the public
hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the Board of Use Registration Appeals may be
removed for cause as determined by the City Council after public
hearing and prior written notice thereof.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Board of Use Registration Appeals without
cause by the City Council when authorized by state law, City
Charter or City ordinance.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the City of Coatesville on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue in full
force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or
exceed the minimum requirements of the Code, as amended from time
to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect in the City of Coatesville as of the effective date of this chapter
and whose requirements are less than the minimum requirements of
the Code are hereby amended to conform with the comparable
provisions of the Code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the City of
Coatesville not governed by the Code shall remain in full force and
effect.
§ 212-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 214-1
210:796
§ 214-1. Title.
Chapter 214 of the Code of the City of Coatesville, Chester County,
Pennsylvania, shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Coatesville
Use Registration Ordinance."
§ 214-2. Legislative authority; purpose.
This chapter is enacted by authority of the Act of 1976, June 23, P.L. 400,
No. 89,222 and for the purposes therein set forth as legislative findings by
the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 214-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGREEMENT OF SALE — Any agreement or written instrument which
provides that title to any property shall thereafter be transferred from one
owner to another owner and shall include inter alia written leases which
contain options to purchase the leased property and leases which provide
that the lessee of the property shall acquire title thereto after the payment
of a stipulated number of regular rent payments or after a stipulated period
of time.
APPROPRIATE MUNICIPAL OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of
the City of Coatesville.[Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
OWNER — Any person, copartnership, association, corporation or fiduciary
having legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term "owner,"
as applied to copartnerships and associations, shall mean the partners or
members thereof and, as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PROPERTY — Any building or structure situate in the City of Coatesville,
except buildings or structures used, designed or intended to be used
exclusively for single-family or two-family occupancy, churches or other
places of religious worship, except that for the purpose of certification or
statements regarding notices of housing, building, safety or fire violations,
the word "property" shall include all buildings or structures.
§ 214-4. Delivery of certificates required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner to sell or transfer his or her property
or any interest therein unless the owner shall first deliver to the
purchaser at or prior to the time for settlement a certification of the
zoning district classification, issued by the appropriate municipal
officer, indicating the zoning classification and the legality of the
existing use of the property to be sold.
222. Editor's Note: See 21 P.S. § 611 et seq.
§ 214-1 TOWING SERVICES § 214-4
210:797
§ 214-5. Agreements of sale.
§ 214-6. Compliance.
A certificate from the appropriate municipal officer certifying that the
property has been approved or designated as a nonconforming use shall be
deemed compliance with this chapter.
§ 214-7. Board of Use Registration Appeals.
B. It shall be unlawful for an owner to sell or transfer his or her property
or any interest therein unless the owner shall first deliver to the
purchaser at or prior to the time for settlement a certificate, issued by
the appropriate municipal official, disclosing whether there exists any
notice of an uncorrected violation of the housing, building, safety or fire
ordinances.
C. It shall be unlawful for an owner to sell or transfer his property or any
interest therein unless the owner shall first deliver to the purchaser at
or prior to the time for settlement a certificate for all gas/oil heating
equipment. [Amended 2-23-2009 by Ord. No. 1319-2009]
A. Every owner shall insert in every agreement for the sale of property a
provision showing the zoning classification of such property and stating
whether the present use of the property is in compliance with or in
violation of zoning laws and ordinances, and every owner shall insert in
every agreement for the sale of property a provision disclosing whether
there exists any notice of an uncorrected violation of the housing,
building, safety or fire ordinances.
B. If any owner fails to include any provisions required by this chapter in
an agreement, for the sale of property, then in any action, at law or in
equity, instituted by a purchaser against an owner, it shall be
conclusively presumed that the owner, at the time of the signing of such
agreement, represented and warranted to the purchaser that such
property was being used in compliance with the then existing zoning
laws and ordinances and that there was no uncorrected violation of the
housing, building, safety or fire ordinances.
A. Any person aggrieved by the denial of an application for certification of
his property as a nonconforming use may appeal to the Board of Use
Registration Appeals.
B. A Board of Use Registration Appeals is hereby constituted for the
purpose of hearing appeals from the decisions of the appropriate
municipal official with respect to approval or designation of
nonconforming uses in the City of Coatesville. The City Council shall
appoint three members, who shall be residents of the City. The
members who are first appointed shall serve for terms of one, two and
three years, respectively, from the date of their appointment as shall be
specified at the time of their appointment. Thereafter, the term of office
§ 214-4 COATESVILLE CODE § 214-7
210:798
shall be three years. A member shall hold office until his or her
successor has been duly appointed and qualified. The members shall
select from among themselves a Chairman.
C. The function of the Board of Use Registration Appeals shall be only to
make determinations of legally existing nonconforming uses; it shall
have no authority to establish or approve any new nonconforming use,
grant variances or exceptions or to authorize any change in use.
D. The Board shall fix a time and place for the hearing of appeals, and such
hearings shall be had within a reasonable time after filing the notice of
appeal. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent by mail
to the applicant or to his attorney of record, and such hearing shall not
be less than 10 days after the mailing of such notice. The testimony may
be stenographically recorded, and a full and complete record may be
kept of the proceedings at the request of any party agreeing to pay the
costs thereof.
E. All adjudication shall be in writing, shall contain findings and the
reasons for the adjudication and shall be served upon all parties or their
counsel personally or by mail.
F. Any person aggrieved by a final adjudication who has a direct interest
in such adjudication shall have the right to appeal therefrom to the
Court of Common Pleas of Chester County pursuant to the Local Agency
Law.223
G. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at
such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman or, in his
or her absence, the Acting Chairman may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to
the public.
H. The Board may adopt such further rules of procedure which may be
necessary and consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
I. The City Council shall act as the Board of Use Registration Appeals.
[Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
J. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Board of Use Registration Appeals absent from
three or more consecutive regular meetings of the Board of Use
Registration Appeals without an approved leave of absence granted
by the City Council after public hearing and prior written notice
thereof shall be removed from the Board of Use Registration
Appeals by the City Council of the City of Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the Board of Use Registration Appeals absent from
20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Board of
223. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 551 et seq.
§ 214-7 TOWING SERVICES § 214-7
210:799
§ 214-8. Fees. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
§ 214-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96; 5-14-2001 by Ord. No. 1163-2001]
Any owner who shall violate any provision of this chapter or shall violate or
fail to comply with any order made by the Codes Enforcement Official shall
be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs, or to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues, following notice
thereof, shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 218
Use Registration Appeals within any one-year period shall be
notified in writing by the City Manager acting on behalf of the
City Council of the attendance requirements of this subsection. Any
member of the Board of Use Registration Appeals who is absent
from 20% or more of the regularly scheduled meetings within a
one-year period shall thereafter be removed for cause from such
position by the City Council with prior written notice after public
hearing unless such member resigns in writing or waives the public
hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the Board of Use Registration Appeals may be
removed for cause as determined by the City Council after public
hearing and prior written notice thereof.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Board of Use Registration Appeals without
cause by the City Council when authorized by state law, City
Charter or City ordinance.
A. A fee as provided in Chapter 108, Fees, is hereby established for the
initial inspection under this chapter and one subsequent inspection for
certification by the appropriate municipal officer indicating the zoning
district classification, the legality of the existing use of the property to
be sold and whether there exists any violation or any notice of an
uncorrected violation of the housing, building, safety or fire ordinances.
For each follow-up inspection or visit after the first two inspections or
visits, an additional fee as provided in Chapter 108, Fees, per inspection
or visit shall be imposed on the owner. [Amended 2-23-2009 by Ord.
No. 1319-2009]
B. A fee as provided in Chapter 108, Fees, is hereby established for an
appeal to the Board of Use Regulation Appeals.
C. In default of making application of certificate prior to transfer of
property or any interest therein, the seller shall pay two times the
appropriate registration fee along with all penalties listed under
§ 214-9. [Added 10-28-1996 by Ord. No. 1029-96]
§ 214-7 COATESVILLE CODE § 214-9
210:800
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 193. Towing services — See Ch. 210.
§ 214-9 TOWING SERVICES § 214-9
210:801

Part 1
General Regulations
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 218-1. Words and phrases defined.
A. Whenever any words and phrases are used in this Part 1, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Section 102 of the Vehicle Code shall
be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.
B. The following words and phrases not defined in Section 102 of the
Vehicle Code shall, for the purpose of this Part 1, have the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in this article, except when the context
otherwise requires:
PARKING METERS — Devices intended to assist public authorities in
enforcing the provisions of this Part 1, limiting the time during which
vehicles may be parked on any highway within the parking meter zone.
PARKING METER ZONES — Highways or portions of the highways on
which parking meters are installed, operated and used.
THE VEHICLE CODE — The Act of April 29, 1959, P.L. 58, as
amended.224
224. Editor's Note: See Title 75 of Purdon's Statutes Annotated.
§ 218-1 TOWING SERVICES § 218-1
210:803

ARTICLE II
Parking Regulations
§ 218-2. Parking against the flow of traffic prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle against the flow of traffic on any
street within the City of Coatesville with the exception of the west side of
the following locations:
Street Limits
Chester Avenue Between Harmony Street and Oak
Street
Church Street, North [Added
5-22-2000 by Ord. No.
1129-2000]
Between Lincoln Highway, West, and
Chestnut Street, West
Eighth Avenue, South Between Stirling Street and Oak
Street
Eleventh Avenue Between Olive Street and Oak
Street
Fifth Avenue, South Between Maple Avenue and Oak
Street
Fourth Avenue, South Between Maple Avenue and Oak
Street
Pennsylvania Avenue Between Olive Street and Oak
Street
Rosemont Avenue Between Walnut Street and Oak
Street
Sixth Avenue, South Between Olive Street and Oak
Street
Tenth Avenue Between Olive Street and Oak
Street
Twelfth Avenue Between Stirling Street and Oak
Street
Virginia Avenue Between Olive Street and Oak
Street
Woodland Avenue Between Olive Street and Oak
Street
§ 218-3. Obstruction of driveways.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle so as to obstruct any driveway within
the City of Coatesville.
§ 218-4. Double-parking.
It shall be unlawful to double-park at any time within the City of Coatesville.
§ 218-2 TOWING SERVICES § 218-5
210:805
§ 218-5. Fire hydrants.
It shall be unlawful to park within 15 feet of any fire hydrant within the City
of Coatesville.
§ 218-6. Intersections.
It shall be unlawful to park within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection
within the City of Coatesville.
§ 218-7. Loading zones.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers
or materials.
FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight.
PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE — A place adjacent to a curb
reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or
unloading of passengers.
B. Prohibited acts.
(1) Standing in passenger curb loading zone. No person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than
for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place
marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the
regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and
then only for a period not to exceed three minutes.
(2) Standing in freight curb loading zone.
(a) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or
length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and
delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place
marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the
provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case
shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30
minutes.
(b) The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a
place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of
and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers
when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle
used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to
enter or about to enter such zone.
(3) Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands. No person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop (or other than
§ 218-5 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-7
210:806
a hackney in a hackney stand) or other than a taxicab in a taxicab
stand when any such stop has been officially designated and
appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle
may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping
does not interfere with any bus (hackney) or taxicab waiting to
enter or about to enter such zone.
C. Designation.
(1) Curb loading zones. Upon recommendation of the City Manager,
City Council shall, by ordinance, determine the location of
passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and
maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the
hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable.
(2) Public carrier stops and stands. Upon recommendation of the City
Manager, City Council shall, by ordinance, establish bus stops, bus
stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger commoncarrier
motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in
such number as it shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand,
taxicab stand or other stand shall be designated by appropriate
signs.225
(3) Loading zones, passenger loading zones, school zones and freight
loading zones. Loading zones, passenger loading zones, school
zones and freight loading zones shall be as follows:
(a) Loading zones.
165 Chestnut Street, East
220 Chestnut Street, East
West side of Eighth Avenue, South, south of Lincoln Highway,
East
First Avenue, South, 35 feet north of Oak Street, east side
[Added 4-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1070-98]
151 Harmony Street
239 Harmony Street
3 Hope Avenue
112 Lincoln Highway, East
209 Lincoln Highway, East
268 Lincoln Highway, East
300 Lincoln Highway, East
734 Lincoln Highway, East
225. Editor's Note: The list of current bus stops is attached at the end of this chapter as Exhibit
A.
§ 218-7 TOWING SERVICES § 218-7
210:807
301 Madison Street
642 Merchant Street, 50 feet east and west of center of
property lines, no parking between signs [Added
11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 1146-2000]
9 through 11 Second Avenue, North [Added 2-23-1998 by
Ord. No. 1066-98]
Northwest corner of Third Avenue and Lincoln Highway
(b) Passenger loading zones.
546 Diamond Street, East
351 Kersey Street (between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. during
school year)
235 Lincoln Highway, East226
305 Lincoln Highway, East (between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday) [Added 8-10-1998 by Ord.
No. 1080-98; amended 9-23-2002 by Ord. No.
1203-2002]
245 Lincoln Highway, East (from 8:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday) [Added 9-11-2006 by Ord. No.
1277-2006]
339 Lincoln Highway, East
545 Lincoln Highway, East (between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
during school year)
30 Tenth Avenue, South
(c) School zones. The following locations are designated school
zones and have posted speed limits of 15 miles per hour (mph).
[Added 3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 1067-98]
Between 538 and 573 Lincoln Highway, East
Between 600 and 639 Lincoln Highway, East
Between 824 and 899 Chestnut Street, East
500 Block of Diamond Street, East (entire block)
300 Block of Kersey Street (entire block)
Church Street, North (entire street)
Charles Street between Hope Avenue and Fifth Avenue, West
Sixth Avenue, North, between Lincoln Highway, East, and
Chestnut Street, East
226. Editor's Note: The former entry regarding the area between 241 and 245 Lincoln Highway,
East, which immediately followed this entry, was added 11-24-1997 by Ord. No. 1057-97
and was repealed 7-12-1999 by Ord. No. 1105-99.
§ 218-7 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-7
210:808
§ 218-7.1. Official City vehicles.
It shall be unlawful to park in specially designated spaces to be marked
by signs stating "Reserved for Official City Vehicle," such spaces to be
designated in the following locations:
Street Sides Location
City Hall Place [Added
5-12-2003 by Ord.
No. 1217-2003]
East Kersey Street to south side of sidewalk
entrance to City Hall
Harmony Street
[Added 3-11-2002 by
Ord. No. 1188-2002]
South From City Hall Place to the driveway at
250 Harmony Street
(d) Freight loading zones. [Added 10-22-2001 by Ord. No.
1175-2001]
Name of Street Side Location
Merchant Street South 642 Merchant Street; 25 feet east
and west of center of property
line; no parking between signs
D. Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxis.
(1) The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than at a bus stand so designated as
provided herein.
(2) The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or
their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone so designated as provided herein, except in case of an
emergency.
(3) The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger
loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when
stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a
position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not farther than
18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the
curb, so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
(4) The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon
any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated
as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other
stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers.
§ 218-7 TOWING SERVICES § 218-7.1
210:809
Street Sides Location
Kersey Street [Added
5-12-2003 by Ord.
No. 1217-2003]
South Between City Hall Place and Third
Avenue
Lincoln Highway North From 20 feet east to the intersection of
Seventh Avenue and Lincoln Highway
Lincoln Highway South 20 feet east of the intersection of
Pennsylvania Avenue and Lincoln
Highway
Lincoln Highway South The area of the walkway across from the
intersection at Second Avenue and
Lincoln Highway
Seventh Avenue East From 20 feet south to the intersection of
Seventh Avenue and Diamond Street
Seventh Avenue East 20 feet south of the intersection of
Seventh Avenue and Merchant Street
Strode Avenue West 20 feet north of the fire station
§ 218-7.2. Handicapped parking space. [Added 11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 1394-2012]
It shall be unlawful to park in specially designated spaces to be marked
by signs identifying such spaces as for "Handicapped Parking" or
"Handicapped Zone" without a vehicle legally displaying a handicapped
plate or placard or a severely disabled veteran plate or placard operated
by or for transportation of the person with a disability or seriously disabled
veteran.
§ 218-7.3. No Parking Zone. [Added 11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
1394-2012]
It shall be unlawful to park in specially designated spaces to be marked by
signs identifying such spaces as a "No Parking Zone."
§ 218-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1997 by Ord. No.
1056-97; 8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 1077-98; 11-13-2012 by Ord. No.
1394-2012; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 1453-2015]
A. Any violation of the provisions of § 218-2, 218-4, 218-6, 218-7, 218-7.1
or 218-7.3 shall be subject to a fine of $25 to be paid within 10 days.
Violations of § 218-3 (Obstruction of driveways) and § 218-5 (Fire
hydrants) shall be subject to respective fines of $45 and $65 to be paid
within 10 days. Violations of § 218-7.2 (handicapped parking) shall be
subject to a fine of $65 if paid within 10 days (and shall be subject to
towing and payment of the costs thereof if noted on the signage
designating the location).
§ 218-7.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-8
210:810
B. Any violation of the provisions of § 218-2, 218-4, 218-6, 218-7.1 or
218-7.3 shall be subject to a fine of $50 to be paid after 10 days but
before 20 days. Violations of § 218-3 (obstruction of driveways) and
218-5 (Fire hydrants) shall be subject to respective fines of $90 and
$130 to be paid after 10 days but before 20 days. Violations of § 218-7.2
(handicapped parking) shall be subject to a fine of $130 if paid after 10
days but before 20 days (and shall be subject to towing and payment of
the costs thereof if noted on the signage designating the location).
C. Any violation of the provisions of § 218-2, 218-4, 218-6, 218-7, 218-7.1
or 218-7.3 shall be subject to a fine of $75 to be paid after 20 days, but
before citation. Violations of § 218-3 (Obstruction of driveways) and
§ 218-5 (Fire hydrants) shall be subject to respective fines of $110 and
$200 to be paid after 20 days but before citation. Violations of § 218-7.2
(handicapped parking) shall be subject to a fine of $200 if paid after 20
days but before citation (and shall be subject to towing and payment of
the costs thereof if noted on the signage designating the location).
D. Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid shall, after
28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the defendant. Thereafter,
the prosecution shall proceed in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, and, upon conviction for the offense, the
defendant shall be ordered to pay the maximum fine prescribed by law,
together with the costs of prosecution, and/or to be incarcerated in the
county prison for not more than five days.
§ 218-8 TOWING SERVICES § 218-8
210:811

ARTICLE III
No Parking on Certain Streets
§ 218-9. No parking in prohibited areas.
It shall be unlawful to park in prohibited areas within the City of Coatesville,
as designated from time to time by action of the City Council and notice
thereof posted by street signs, as listed in § 218-11.
§ 218-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1997 by Ord.
No. 1056-97; 8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 1077-98; 12-22-2005 by Ord.
No. 1266-2005; 11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1394-2012; 6-8-2015 by
Ord. No. 1453-2015]
§ 218-11. Schedule of Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain
Streets.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times on the following streets:
Street Sides Location
Belmont Street South Between Sixth Avenue and the eastern
terminus thereof
Cedar Street North From Harlan Drive to Black Horse
Road
Charlotte Street Both Between Rosemont Avenue and New
Street
Chester Avenue, South West From a point 100 feet from Lincoln
Highway and running south for 18 feet
Chestnut Street North Between Ninth Avenue and Tenth
Avenue
Chestnut Street South 230 Chestnut Street, East, Post Office,
in vicinity of mailboxes
A. Any person violating the provisions of § 218-9 shall be subject to a fine
of $25 to be paid within 10 days.
B. Any person violating the provisions of § 218-9 shall be subject to a fine
of $50 to be paid after 10 days but within 20 days.
C. Any violation of the provisions of § 218-9 shall be subject to a fine of $75
to be paid after 20 days, but before citation.
D. Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid shall, after
28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the defendant. Thereafter,
the prosecution shall proceed in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, and, upon conviction for the offense, the
defendant shall be ordered to pay the maximum fine prescribed by law,
together with the costs of prosecution, and/or to be incarcerated in the
county prison for not more than five days.
§ 218-9 TOWING SERVICES § 218-11
210:813
Street Sides Location
Chestnut Street South Beginning 181 feet east of Second
Avenue, North, and continuing east for
a distance of 80 feet
Chestnut Street, West Both Between Church Street, East to dead
end
Church Street, North West Starting at Lincoln Highway, running
46 feet north
Church Street, South East Starting at Lincoln Highway, running
south 52 feet
City Hall Place [Added
5-12-2003 by Ord.
No. 1217-2003]
East Harmony Street to south side of the
sidewalk entrance to City Hall
City Hall Place
[Amended 5-12-2003
by Ord. No.
1217-2003]
West Between Harmony Street and Kersey
Street
Coates Street North From Blackhorse Road west to dead
end
Coates Street South From Blackhorse Road 90 feet east
Coates Street South From Blackhorse Hill Road west to
approximately 60 feet east of Third
Avenue, North
Coates Street South From Graham Avenue east 40 feet
Coronet Drive [Added
6-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 1458-2015]
North Between Regency Drive and Coronet
Drive
Coronet Drive [Added
6-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 1458-2015]
South Between Coronet Drive and Regency
Drive
Country Run Drive
[Added 5-10-2004 by
Ord. No. 1234-2004]
Cul-desac
Inside curb area
Diamond Street Both From First Avenue to Ninth Avenue
Diamond Street, East Both Between Eleventh Avenue and Twelfth
Avenue
Diamond Street, East
[Added 5-22-2000 by
Ord. No. 1129-2000]
Both From Twelfth Avenue, North, to End
Street
Diamond Street, West Both Between dead end and dead end
Diamond Street, West South From Church Street to Mt. Pleasant
Street
§ 218-11 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-11
210:814
Street Sides Location
Eighth Avenue East Starting at Lincoln Highway running
north to first driveway
Eleventh Avenue, North
[Repealed 5-22-2000
by Ord. No.
1129-2000]
Eleventh Avenue, North
[Added 5-22-2000 by
Ord. No. 1129-2000;
repealed 3-10-2008
by Ord. No.
1300-2008]
Eleventh Avenue, North
[Added 5-22-2000 by
Ord. No. 1129-2000;
repealed 3-10-2008
by Ord. No.
1300-2008]
Eleventh Avenue, North
[Added 3-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 1300-2008]
East From Lincoln Highway to East Diamond
Street; from East Chestnut Street to
Merchant Street
Eleventh Avenue, North
[Added 3-10-2008 by
Ord. No. 1300-2008]
West From Lincoln Highway to East
Chestnut Street
Fifth Avenue, North East From a point 20 feet from the
intersection of Fifth Avenue, North, and
Chestnut Street and proceeding north
30 feet along the east side of Fifth
Avenue
First Avenue, North Both Between Lincoln Highway and the City
line
First Avenue, South East From Lincoln Highway, East, to Oak
Street
First Avenue, South East Between Oak Street and the City line
First Avenue, South West Between Lincoln Highway and a point
330 feet south of Harmony Street
First Avenue, South West From 102 First Avenue, South, south to
Lukens Steel property line
Fleetwood Street North Between Third Avenue and
Fourth Avenue
400 Fleetwood Street
[Added 4-12-1999 by
Ord. No. 1099-99]
North From northeast corner of North Fourth
Avenue and Fleetwood Street east 75
feet
§ 218-11 TOWING SERVICES § 218-11
210:815
Street Sides Location
Fourth Avenue, South Both From Lincoln Highway to Harmony
Street
Fourth Avenue, South East Between Harmony Street and Kersey
Street
Fourth Avenue, South West Between Harmony Street and north
property line of Gordon Junior High
School
Franklin Street Both From Walnut Street to Oak Street
Glendale Avenue East Between Coates Street and Poplar
Street
Harmony Street North Between First Avenue and
Eighth Avenue
Harmony Street North From Fifth Avenue east to Sixth Avenue
Harmony Street North From 151 Harmony Street west
to First Avenue
Harmony Street
[Repealed 5-29-2018
by Ord. No.
1509-2018]
Harmony Street South Between Third Avenue and Fourth
Avenue
Harmony Street
[Added 5-29-2018 by
Ord. No. 1509-2018]
South Corner of First Avenue and Harmony
Street, 300 feet (east from intersection)
Harmony Street South From Modena Alley to Eighth Avenue
Harmony Street South West of First Avenue to a point 165 feet
west of First Avenue
Harmony Street, East Both From Sixth Avenue to Eighth Avenue
Harmony Street, West Both From Church Street, South, to Hope
Avenue
High Street Both Between Charles Street and Lemon
Street
Hope Avenue Both From Lincoln Highway, West, south to
Harmony Street, West
Juniper Street Both From Eighth Avenue, South, to eastern
terminus of Juniper Street
Kersey Street
[Amended 5-12-2003
by Ord. No.
1217-2003]
North Between City Hall Place and Third
Avenue
§ 218-11 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-11
210:816
Street Sides Location
Kersey Street [Added
9-23-2013 by Ord.
No. 1414-2013]
North Between Third Avenue, North, to
Fourth Avenue, North
Kersey Street South Between Third Avenue, South, to
Fourth Avenue, South
Lemon Street Both West from Strode Avenue to
Hope Avenue
Lime Street Both Between Valley Road north to Harmony
Street, West
Lincoln Highway, West South Between northeast corner of Polish
Club parking lot to Strode Avenue
Lincoln Highway, East North 657-669 Lincoln Highway, East, 78 feet
from corner
Lincoln Highway, East North Between Thirteenth Avenue and the
City line
Lincoln Highway, East South From Thirteenth Avenue, South, west a
distance of 80 feet
Lincoln Highway, West
[Deleted 8-25-2008
by Ord. No.
1308-2008]
Lincoln Highway, West
[Amended 4-12-1999
by Ord. No. 1099-99]
North Between Lower Mt. Pleasant Street and
240 feet west of Strode Avenue (345 W.
Lincoln Highway)
Lincoln Highway, West North From Lincoln Highway, West, west to
bridge at City line
Lincoln Highway, West South Between Reading Railroad and Church
Street
Lumber Street Both Between First Avenue and Ninth
Avenue
Lumber Street South Between Ninth Avenue, North, and
Tenth Avenue, North
Maple Avenue [Added
1-26-1998 by Ord.
No. 1064-98]
South From First Avenue, South, to Third
Avenue, South
Marquis Drive [Added
5-10-2004 by Ord.
No. 1234-2004]
Cul-desac
Inside curb area
Millview Drive [Added
2-26-2000 by Ord.
No. 1160-2001]
Cul-desac
Inside curb area
§ 218-11 TOWING SERVICES § 218-11
210:817
Street Sides Location
Mt. Pleasant Street,
lower [Repealed
12-13-1999 by Ord.
No. 1115-99]
Mt. Pleasant Street,
upper
Both From Lincoln Highway, west east to
dead end
Merchant Street North Between Sixth Avenue and Seventh
Avenue
Ninth Avenue, North East Between Chestnut Street and Lumber
Street
Ninth Avenue, North
[Added 2-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 1445-2015]
Both From Coates Street to Poplar Street
Oak Street North Between Eleventh Avenue and Twelfth
Avenue
Oak Street [Amended
6-24-2013 by Ord.
No. 1408-2013]
North Between Rosemont Avenue and Fourth
Avenue, South
Olive Street North Between Sixth Avenue and White Alley
Olive Street North Between Pearl Alley and Eighth Avenue
Olive Street South Between Sixth Avenue and Eighth
Avenue
Palmer Avenue Both From Lincoln Highway, East, south to
dead end south of Olive Street
Palmer Avenue Both Between Lincoln Highway and
Harmony Street
Palmer Avenue Both From Harmony Street to 150 feet north
of Olive Street
Pearl Alley Both Between Lincoln Highway and
Harmony Street
Pierce Court Entire area
Pine Street East From New Street to Oak Street
Pine Street [Added
2-26-2001 by Ord.
No. 1159-2001]
West From New Street north for 25 feet
Rosemont Avenue Both Between Oak Street and Charlotte
Street
Second Avenue, South East From Walnut Street 126.78 feet north
to the dead end
Second Avenue, North West Between Lincoln Highway and
Chestnut Street, East
§ 218-11 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-11
210:818
Street Sides Location
Spring Alley Both From Fourth Avenue, South, east to
Fifth Avenue, South
Star Alley Both From Harmony Street to Lincoln
Highway
Stirling Street North Between Eleventh Avenue and
Thirteenth Avenue
Strode Avenue Both Between Valley Road and south City
line
Strode Avenue Both From Lincoln Highway to Charles
Street
Strode Avenue East From Madison Street running 114 feet
north
Strode Avenue East 70 feet south from the corner of
Charles Street
Strode Avenue West From Lincoln Highway to Charles
Street
Strode Avenue Both Between Valley Road and the south City
line
Sumner Street Both From Strode Avenue west to the west
City line
Tenth Avenue, North Both Between Diamond Street and Merchant
Street
Tenth Avenue North West Between Lincoln Highway, East, and
Merchant Street
Third Avenue, North Both Between Fleetwood Street and Coates
Street
Third Avenue, South Both From Harmony Street to Lincoln
Highway
Third Avenue, South
[Added 6-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 1355-2011]
East From north of the existing driveway at
149 South Third Avenue south to its
intersection with Oak Street
Third Avenue, South West From Maple Avenue to Oak Street
Third Avenue, South West From Maple Avenue south to Oak
Street
Twelfth Avenue East From Lincoln Highway, East, to Oak
Street
Union Street West From Valley Road, East, north 200 feet
Valley Road North From Strode Avenue west to Sixth
Avenue, West
Valley Road South At any point east of Strode Avenue
§ 218-11 TOWING SERVICES § 218-11
210:819
Street Sides Location
Valley Road South From the intersection of Strode Avenue
and Valley Road proceeding west along
the south side of Valley Road for 65 feet
Walnut Street Both Between Pearl Alley and Palmer Avenue
White Alley [Added
2-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 1098-99]
East From Pansy Alley to Olive Street
Woodland Avenue Both From Oak Street to the City line
§ 218-11 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-11
210:820
ARTICLE IV
Parking of Trucks and Other Vehicles and Equipment
§ 218-12. Parking of certain vehicles prohibited.
A. It shall be unlawful to park trucks, buses, mobile homes, equipment or
other vehicles, as defined in § 218-13, in prohibited areas and streets
within the City of Coatesville, as designated from time to time by action
of the City Council. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall be effective
when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon such
streets and in such areas.
B. When bus or truck parking prohibited zones or bus or truck parking
restricted zones are established by the City Council, it shall be unlawful
for the driver, owner or lessee, lesser, consignee or consignor of a bus,
motor truck or other vehicle or equipment, as defined in § 218-13, to
allow such bus, motor truck or other vehicle or equipment to remain
parked upon such street in violation of the established prohibition or
restrictions.
C. No commercial vehicle or part thereof or combination thereof, having a
registered gross weight, either solely or in combination, exceeding
8,000 pounds or which is in excess of 18 feet in length, shall be parked,
stored or maintained on any street, road, right-of-way or lot within any
building or structures in any City residential district or central business
district, except temporarily during actual performance of work on the
premises where such vehicle or equipment is parked, stored or
maintained. For the purpose of this section, the term "registered gross
weight" shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the definition section of
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
D. Parking of certain vehicles prohibited. Parking is prohibited for any
motor vehicle designed or adapted for use as a mobile dwelling or
office, except a motor vehicle equipped with a truck camper.
E. In addition to the restrictions set forth herein, no school bus shall be
parked in any street within the City of Coatesville at any time except as
is necessary to safely pick up or discharge passengers.
F. Towing. No operator of a tractor-trailer or any combination thereof
shall park such tractor-trailer or any combination thereof on any street,
roadway, alleyway, public right-of-way, private lane or public or private
property in the City of Coatesville longer than is necessary to unload
the same, and no such driver shall, at any time, unhitch the tractor from
the trailer while the rigging is parked on a City street, roadway,
alleyway, public right-of-way, private lane or public or private property
in the City of Coatesville.
G. A violation of this section is considered a nuisance, and the City of
Coatesville police are hereby authorized to tow and remove such
illegally parked tractor-trailer or any combination thereof.
§ 218-12 TOWING SERVICES § 218-12
210:821
§ 218-13. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the
purposes of this article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section as follows:
BUS — A commercial vehicle designed or constructed primarily for the
purpose of carrying more than 13 persons.
CAMPER/MOTOR HOME — A motor vehicle designed or adapted for use as
a mobile dwelling or office, except a motor vehicle equipped with a truck
camper.
H. Removal and impounding of illegally parked tractor-trailers or any
combination thereof.
(1) Authority to remove and impound. The City of Coatesville police are
hereby authorized to remove and impound or to order the removal
and impounding of any vehicle of the type mentioned herein parked
on any street, roadway, alleyway, public right-of-way, private lane
or public or private property in the City of Coatesville in violation of
any of the provisions of the law or any ordinance of the City of
Coatesville. However, no tractor-trailer or any combination thereof
shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to this
subsection.
(2) Records. The City of Coatesville Police Department shall keep a
record of all vehicles of the kind mentioned herein impounded and
shall be able, at all times, to furnish the owners or agents thereof
with information as to the place of storage of such vehicle.
(3) Payment of towing and impounding charges. The payment of any
towing and impounding charges authorized by this section shall be
borne by the owner or operator of the tractor-trailer or any
combination thereof, of the kind mentioned herein.
(4) Liability of owners and operators. The payment of towing and
storage charges shall not operate to relieve the owner or operator
of any tractor-trailer or combination thereof from the liability for
any fine or penalty for a violation of any law or ordinance on
account of which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
(5) Restrictions upon removal. Tractor-trailers or any combination
thereof, of the kind mentioned herein, shall be removed by the City
of Coatesville Police Department under authority of this section;
however, if, at the time of the intended removal thereof, the owner
or person for the time being in charge of such illegally parked
tractor-trailer or combination thereof is present and expresses a
willingness and intention to remove such tractor-trailer or
combination thereof, the removal must proceed immediately by the
owner or person in charge of such illegally parked tractor-trailer or
combination thereof.
§ 218-12 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-13
210:822
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle designed or used
for the transportation of property, not including a passenger bus, passenger
automobile, motorcycle, panel delivery truck or pickup truck, having a
registered gross weight, either solely or in combination, exceeding 8,000
pounds or which is in excess of 18 feet in length. "Registered gross weight"
shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the definition section of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
EQUIPMENT — Includes but without limitation pole or pipe dolly, special
mobile equipment, specially constructed vehicle, reconstructed vehicle and/
or any load placed thereon.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle, as herein defined, which is selfpropelled.
PASSENGER CAR — A motor vehicle designed for carrying 10 passengers
or fewer and primarily used for the transportation of persons.
SCHOOL BUS — Any vehicle used, either on a full-time or part-time basis,
for the transportation of students to or from school or a school-related
activity except such vehicles as fall within the definition of "passenger car"
as defined herein.
SEMITRAILER — Every vehicle of the trailer type so designed or used in
conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that
of its own load rests upon or is carried by another motor vehicle.
TRAILER — Every vehicle without motive power designed or used to carry
property or passengers wholly on its own structure and to be drawn by a
motor vehicle.
TRUCK-TRACTORS or TRACTOR-TRAILERS — Every motor vehicle
designed or used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so
constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle
and load drawn.
VEHICLE — Every mechanical device in, upon or by which any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway,
including motor vehicles, commercial motor vehicles, truck-tractors,
trailers and semitrailers, severally, as herein defined, but excepting devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationery rails or tracks.
§ 218-14. Exceptions.
The restrictions set forth in § 218-12 above shall not apply to the following:
A. Vehicles of the City of Coatesville or the City of Coatesville Authority.
B. Fire apparatus.
C. Ambulances.
D. Vehicles actually engaged in the course of construction or repair of
streets or while actually engaged in making deliveries or rendering
services in or upon any property located within the City.
§ 218-13 TOWING SERVICES § 218-14
210:823
§ 218-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 1394-2012; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 1453-2015]
§ 218-16. Schedule of Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain
Streets for Trucks and Other Vehicles and Equipment.
E. Any school bus actually engaged in picking up or discharging students
but only for a period of time necessary to safely pick up and discharge
students.
A. Any person, firm, corporation or any agent or employee thereof who
violates the provisions of § 218-12 shall be subject to a fine of $65 to be
paid within 10 days.
B. Any person violating the provisions of § 218-12 shall be subject to a fine
of $130 to be paid after 10 days but within 20 days.
C. Any violation of the provisions of § 218-12 shall be subject to a fine of
$200 to be paid after 20 days, but before citation.
D. Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid shall, after
28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the defendant. Thereafter,
the prosecution shall proceed in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, and, upon conviction for the offense, the
defendant shall be ordered to pay the maximum fine prescribed by law,
together with the costs of prosecution, and/or to be incarcerated in the
county prison for not more than 10 days for each such violation.
A. Parking shall be prohibited for trucks and other vehicles and equipment
as defined herein on the following streets and parts of streets:
Street Side Location
Lincoln Highway Both Entire length
Oak Street Both Entire length
B. Parking shall be prohibited for buses as defined herein at the following
locations on City streets and/or parts of streets:
Street Side Location
Lincoln Highway North 339 East Lincoln Highway
Lincoln Highway South 320 through 360 East Lincoln Highway
§ 218-14 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-16
210:824
ARTICLE V
No Parking Certain Hours
§ 218-17. No parking during prohibited hours.
In accordance with § 218-19, it shall be unlawful to park during prohibited
hours at designated street locations within the City of Coatesville, as
designated from time to time by action of the City Council and notice
thereof posted by street signs.
§ 218-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1997 by Ord.
No. 1056-97; 3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 1068-98; 8-10-1998 by Ord. No.
1077-98; 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1266-2005; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No.
1453-2015]
§ 218-19. Schedule of Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets.
Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets during the hours
indicated:
Street Side Hours Location
Charles Street North Thursdays, from
10:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon
From Church Street,
South, to City line
Charles Street South Fridays, from
10:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon
From Church Street,
South, to City line
Chestnut Street
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98]
North Fridays, from 7:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
From First Avenue
to Ninth Avenue
A. Any person, firm, corporation or any agent or employee thereof who
violates the provisions of § 218-17 shall be subject to a fine of $25 to be
paid within 10 days.
B. Any person violating the provisions of § 218-17 shall be subject to a fine
of $50 to be paid after 10 days but within 20 days.
C. Any violation of the provisions of § 218-17 shall be subject to a fine of
$75 to be paid after 20 days, but before citation.
D. Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid shall, after
28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the defendant. Thereafter,
the prosecution shall proceed in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, and, upon conviction for the offense, the
defendant shall be ordered to pay the maximum fine prescribed by law,
together with the costs of prosecution, and/or to be incarcerated in the
county prison for not more than 10 days for each such violation.
§ 218-17 TOWING SERVICES § 218-19
210:825
Street Side Hours Location
Chestnut Street South Thursdays, from
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
From First Avenue
to Eleventh Avenue
Chestnut Street, East North Sundays, 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon
825 Chestnut Street,
East
Chestnut Street, East
[Added 10-27-1997
by Ord. No. 1053-97;
amended 7-12-1999
by Ord. No. 1105-99]
South Monday through
Friday, from 7:15
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
135 feet from the
intersection of Sixth
Avenue, North, and
Chestnut Street,
East
Coates Street North Monday through
Friday, 6:30 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and 3:00
p.m. to 5:00 p.m.
569 Coates Street
Coates Street
[Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
North Wednesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Blackhorse
Road to Boundary
Street
Coates Street South All day for train
commuters
West of Third
Avenue
Coates Street
[Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
South Thursdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Blackhorse
Road to Boundary
Street
Eighth Avenue, North
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
4-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 1071-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
East Wednesdays, from
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to
Merchant Street
Eighth Avenue, North
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
4-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 1071-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
West Tuesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to
Merchant Street
Eighth Avenue, South
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
East Fridays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to Oak
Street
§ 218-19 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-19
210:826
Street Side Hours Location
Eighth Avenue, South
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
West Thursdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to Oak
Street
Elm Street South Tuesdays, from
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
Between Fifth
Avenue, North, and
Sixth Avenue, North
Fifth Avenue, North
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
East Wednesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to Elm
Street
Fifth Avenue, North
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
West Thursdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to
Fleetwood Street
Fifth Avenue, South
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98]
East Thursdays, from
3:00 a.m. to 5:00
a.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to Oak
Street
Fifth Avenue, South
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001;
5-29-2007 by Ord.
No. 1285-2007]
West Wednesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to Oak
Street
First Avenue, South
[Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
West Wednesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Oak Street to
the South
Coatesville Borough
line
Fleetwood Street
[Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
North Thursdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Second
Avenue to Third
Avenue
Fleetwood Street
[Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
South Wednesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Second
Avenue to Fourth
Avenue
§ 218-19 TOWING SERVICES § 218-19
210:827
Street Side Hours Location
Fourth Avenue, North
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
East Wednesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to
Fleetwood Street
Fourth Avenue, North
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
West Thursdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to
Fleetwood Street
Fourth Avenue, South
[Added 1-26-1998 by
Ord. No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
East Tuesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Harmony
Street to Oak Street
Fourth Avenue, South
[Added 5-29-2007 by
Ord. No. 1285-2007]
West Thursdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Harmony
Street to Oak Street
Glendale Avenue
[Added 7-12-1999 by
Ord. No. 1105-99]
West Monday through
Friday, from 6:30
a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 3:00 p.m. to
5:30 p.m.
15 feet from
intersection
Harmony Street South Wednesdays, from
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
Between Fifth
Avenue, South, and
Sixth Avenue, South
Kersey Street North Monday through
Friday, from 7:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
during school year
351 Kersey Street,
between signs
Lincoln Highway
[Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
North Tuesday, Thursday
and Saturday, 6:00
a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
From City line east
to City line west
Lincoln Highway, East North Monday through
Friday, from 7:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m.,
during school year
545 Lincoln
Highway, East,
between signs
Lincoln Highway
[Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
South Wednesday, Friday
and Sunday, 6:00
a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
From City line east
to City line west
§ 218-19 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-19
210:828
Street Side Hours Location
Lincoln Highway, East
[Added 10-27-1997
by Ord. No. 1053-97]
North Monday through
Friday, from 7:30
a.m. to 8:30 a.m.
and 1:30 p.m. to
2:30 p.m.
120 feet from the
intersection of Sixth
Avenue, North, and
Lincoln Highway,
East
Lincoln Highway, West
[Added 8-25-2008 by
Ord. No. 1308-2008;
amended 7-9-2012
by Ord. No.
1387-2012]
North Monday through
Sunday, from 8:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
(free parking 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m.)
Between
Brandywine Railroad
tracks and west
property line of G.O.
Carlson Tract (Tax
Parcel Nos. 16-5-16
and 16-5-16.1)
Madison Street North Fridays, from
10:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon
From Church Street,
South, to the City
line
Madison Street South Thursdays, from
10:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon
From Church Street,
South, to the City
line
Maple Avenue
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
5-29-2007 by Ord.
No. 1285-2007]
North Wednesdays and
Fridays from 10:00
a.m. to 12:00 noon
From Fourth
Avenue, South, to
Fifth Avenue, South
Maple Avenue [Added
5-29-2007 by Ord.
No. 1285-2007]
South Tuesday and
Thursday, from
10:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon
From Fourth
Avenue, South to
Fifth Avenue, South
Maple Avenue
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
repealed 5-29-2007
by Ord. No.
1285-2007]
Merchant Street
[Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
North Wednesdays, from
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
Seventh Avenue,
North, to Tenth
Avenue, North
Merchant Street
[Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
South Tuesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
Between Sixth
Avenue and Tenth
Avenue
§ 218-19 TOWING SERVICES § 218-19
210:829
Street Side Hours Location
Ninth Avenue, North
[Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
East Wednesdays, from
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to
Merchant Street
Ninth Avenue, North
[Amended 7-9-2001
by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
West Tuesdays, from
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to
Merchant Street
Oak Street [Added
6-24-2013 by Ord.
No. 1408-2013]
North Thursdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Fourth
Avenue, South, to
Rosemont Avenue
Oak Street [Added
1-26-1998 by Ord.
No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
North Tuesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Fourth
Avenue, South, to
Fifth Avenue, South
Oak Street [Added
8-22-2011 by Ord.
No. 1359-2011]
North Tuesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Rosemont
Avenue to South
First Avenue
Oak Street [Added
1-26-1998 by Ord.
No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
South Thursdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Fourth
Avenue, South, to
Fifth Avenue, South
Olive Street North Tuesdays, from
8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Between Fifth
Avenue, South, and
Pennsylvania Avenue
Olive Street South Thursdays, from
8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Between Fifth
Avenue, South, and
Sixth Avenue, South
Second Avenue, North East Wednesdays, from
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to Lumber
Street
Seventh Avenue, North Both 6:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Between Lincoln
Highway and
Diamond Street
Seventh Avenue, North
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
4-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 1071-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
East Wednesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to
Merchant Street
§ 218-19 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-19
210:830
Street Side Hours Location
Seventh Avenue, North
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
4-13-1998 by Ord.
No. 1071-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
West Tuesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to
Merchant Street
Sixth Avenue, North
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
East Wednesdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to
Merchant Street
Sixth Avenue, North East 7:30 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturday and
Sunday
Between Chestnut
Street and Lincoln
Highway
Sixth Avenue, North
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001]
West Thursdays, from
12:00 noon to 2:30
p.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to Elm
Street
Sixth Avenue, South
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98]
East Thursdays, from
8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to Oak
Street
Sixth Avenue, South
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98]
West Tuesdays, from
8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
From Lincoln
Highway to Oak
Street
Strode Avenue East Fridays, from 9:00
a.m. to 11:00 a.m.
From Charles Street
to Valley Road
Strode Avenue West Thursdays, from
9:00 a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
From Charles Street
to Lemon Street
Third Avenue, North
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98;
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001; 4-8-2002
by Ord. No.
1189-2002;
11-24-2003 by Ord.
No. 1224-2003;
5-29-2007 by Ord.
No. 1285-2007]
East Wednesdays,
Fridays and
Sundays from 6:00
a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
From Lincoln
Highway East to
Fleetwood Street
§ 218-19 TOWING SERVICES § 218-19
210:831
Street Side Hours Location
Third Avenue, North
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98
7-9-2001 by Ord. No.
1165-2001;
11-24-2003 by Ord.
No. 1224-2003;
5-29-2007 by Ord.
No. 1285-2007]
West Tuesdays,
Thursdays and
Saturdays from
6:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m.
From Lincoln
Highway East to
Fleetwood Street
Third Avenue, South
[Added 1-26-1998 by
Ord. No. 1064-98]
East Tuesdays, from
8:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
From Harmony
Street to Oak Street
Valley Road, East South Thursdays, from
10:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon
From Strode Avenue
to Sumner Street
Walnut Street Avenue,
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98]
North Fridays, from
10:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon
Between First
South, and Pearl
Alley
Walnut Street Avenue,
[Amended 1-26-1998
by Ord. No. 1064-98]
South Thursdays, from
10:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon
Between First
South, and Pearl
Alley
§ 218-19 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-19
210:832
ARTICLE VI
Time-Limit Parking
§ 218-20. Parking prohibited in excess of time limits.
It shall be unlawful to park for any period of time in excess of the time limits
at designated street locations when such time limits have been established
from time to time by action of the City Council and notice thereof posted on
street signs and listed in §§ 218-22 and 218-23.
§ 218-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1997 by Ord.
No. 1056-97; 3-9-1998 by Ord. No. 1068-98; 8-10-1998 by Ord. No.
1077-98; 12-22-2005 by Ord. No. 1266-2005; 11-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 1394-2012; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 1453-2015]
§ 218-22. Schedule of Parking Time Limited at All Times on Certain
Streets.
Parking time shall be limited as indicated on the following streets:
A. Any person violating the provisions of § 218-20 shall be subject to a fine
of $25 to be paid within 10 days.
B. Any person violating the provisions of § 218-20 shall be subject to a fine
of $50 to be paid after 10 days but within 20 days.
C. Any violation of the provisions of § 218-20 shall be subject to a fine of
$75 to be paid after 20 days, but before citation.
D. Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid shall, after
28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the defendant. Thereafter,
the prosecution shall proceed in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, and, upon conviction for the offense, the
defendant shall be ordered to pay the maximum fine prescribed by law,
together with the costs of prosecution, and/or to be incarcerated in the
county prison for not more than five days.
A. Two-hour parking limit.
Street Sides Location
Chester Avenue Both From Lincoln Highway, East, to
Harmony Street
Lincoln Highway, West
[Added 8-25-2008 by
Ord. No. 1308-2008;
repealed 7-9-2012 by
Ord. No. 1387-2012]
Lincoln Highway, West North Between west property line of G.O.
Carlson and Mt. Pleasant Street,
lower
§ 218-20 TOWING SERVICES § 218-22
210:833
Street Sides Location
Lincoln Highway, West South Between Church Street and Mt.
Pleasant Street, lower
Tenth Avenue, North East Between Lincoln Highway and
Diamond Street
B. Thirty-minute parking limit.
Street Sides Location
Fourth Avenue, North
[Repealed 5-22-2000
by Ord. No.
1129-2000]
Harmony Street South From a point 165 feet west of First
Avenue west 100 feet
C. Fifteen-minute parking limit.
Street Sides Location
Charles Street North Commencing 20 feet from Strode
Avenue and proceeding 61 feet
Charles Street North From Strode Avenue to Lime Street
Chestnut Street South In front of the post office property
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.
Chestnut Street, East North In front of post office between 8:00
a.m. and 5:30 p.m.
Church Street, South,
[Added 2-9-19998 by
Ord. No. 1065-98]
West From 15 feet south of West
Harmony Street for 20 feet
Eighth Avenue, North West Commencing from the yellow line at
the corner of Eighth Avenue and
Lincoln Highway to Pierce Court,
Monday through Saturday, 8:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m. At all other times,
there shall be no parking.
Eighth Avenue, South East From Lincoln Highway, East, to
Olive Street
Eighth Avenue, South West From Lincoln Highway, East, to
Harmony Street
Lincoln Highway, East North 655 Lincoln Highway, East
602 Lincoln Highway,
East
223 Lincoln Highway,
West
§ 218-22 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-22
210:834
§ 218-23. Parking time limited between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on
certain streets.
Parking time shall be limited between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on the
following streets:
Street Sides Location
249 Lumber Street,
North
A. Two-hour parking limit.
Street Sides Location
Chestnut Street Both Between First Avenue and Fourth
Avenue
Eighth Avenue, North Both Between Lincoln Highway and
Diamond Street
Fourth Avenue, North
[Added 5-22-20000
by Ord. No.
1129-2000]
East From Diamond Street to Chestnut
Street
Fourth Avenue, North
[Added 5-22-2000
by Ord. No.
1129-2000]
West From Lincoln Highway to Chestnut
Street
Fourth Avenue, South [Repealed 5-22-2000 by Ord. No.
1129-2000]
Lincoln Highway, East Both From Fifth Avenue to Sixth Avenue
Lincoln Highway, East Both From Eighth Avenue to Tenth
Avenue
Madison Street North From Strode Avenue to Plum Street
Sixth Avenue, South East Between Lincoln Highway and
Harmony Street
Sixth Avenue, South West From Lincoln Highway running
south for a distance of 100 feet
Third Avenue Both From Chestnut Street to Fleetwood
Street
Third Avenue Both Between Harmony Street and
Kersey Street
Valley Road North From Strode Avenue running east
for a distance of 80 feet
B. One-hour parking limit.
§ 218-22 TOWING SERVICES § 218-23
210:835
Street Sides Location
Second Avenue, North East Lincoln Highway to Chestnut Street
C. Thirty-minute parking limit.
Street Sides Location
(Reserved)
§ 218-23 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-23
210:836
ARTICLE VII
Parking on Snow Emergency Routes
§ 218-24. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
A. In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of excessive snow and ice on the highways or portions of highways
named in § 218-24D of this article, the City Manager, or his designee
(including the Chief of Police or Emergency Management Coordinator,
who are specifically so designated), in his or her discretion, may declare
an emergency due to such hazards or the potential for such hazards.
[Amended 2-28-2014 by Ord. No. 1425-2014]
B. After any such emergency shall have been declared, it shall be unlawful
during the period of such emergency for any person to park a motor
vehicle or to allow the same to remain parked on any highway or
portion thereof named in § 218-24D of this article. Further, it shall be
unlawful to operate any motor vehicle on any such highway or portion
thereof unless such vehicle shall be equipped with snow tires or chains
that provide sufficient traction to keep such vehicle in motion so that
other traffic on such highways will not be blocked or seriously impeded.
C. Public notice.
(1) In order to assist the operators of motor vehicles in determining the
highways affected by this article, signs shall be posted on the
highways or portions thereof designated in this article, reading as
follows:
SNOW
EMERGENCY
ROUTE
SNOW TIRES OR
CHAINS REQUIRED
NO PARKING
DURING EMERGENCY
VEHICLES
TOWED AWAY
(2) The City Manager or his or her designee or the Chief of Police shall
also, through radio, newspaper or other available media and means
of communications, disseminate information as to the existence of
such an emergency.
§ 218-24 TOWING SERVICES § 218-24
210:837
§ 218-25. Use of off-street City parking lots; removal of vehicles.
§ 218-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-9-1998 by Ord. No.
1068-98; 11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1394-2012; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No.
1453-2015]
D. The highways or portions thereof to which the provisions of this article
shall be applicable during all periods of emergency declared as
provided in § 218-24 of this article are as follows:
(1) Lincoln Highway, from the eastern City boundary to the western
City boundary (both north and south sides).
(2) Strode Avenue, from Lincoln Highway to southern City boundary
(both east and west sides).
(3) Pennsylvania Avenue (west side only).
(4) Chestnut Street (south side only).
(5) Oak Street, from First to Eighth Avenue (south side only).
(6) Charles Street, from Church Street to western City boundary
(south side only).
(7) Third Avenue, from Oak Street to Coates Street (west side only).
A. The City off-street parking lots may be used without charge for parking
for a period of 24 hours following declaration of a snow or ice
emergency.
B. Upon declaration of a snow or ice emergency, any vehicles remaining
parked, stuck or stalled upon any of such highways and streets
designated in § 218-24D may be removed in accordance with the City
ordinance providing for removal and impounding of illegally parked
cars (see Chapter 210, Towing Services).
A. Any person violating the provisions of § 218-24 shall be subject to a fine
of $40 to be paid within 10 days.
B. Any person violating the provisions of § 218-24 shall be subject to a fine
of $80 to be paid after 10 days but within 20 days.
C. Any violation of the provisions of § 218-24 shall be subject to a fine of
$100 to be paid after 20 days, but before citation.
D. Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid shall, after
28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the defendant. Thereafter,
the prosecution shall proceed in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, and, upon conviction for the offense, the
defendant shall be ordered to pay the maximum fine prescribed by law,
together with the costs of prosecution, and/or to be incarcerated in the
county prison for not more than five days.
§ 218-24 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-26
210:838
ARTICLE VIII
Stopping, Standing or Parking During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets Prohibited
§ 218-27. (Reserved)
§ 218-27 TOWING SERVICES § 218-27
210:839

ARTICLE IX
Through Highways
§ 218-28. Through highways designated.
Pursuant to Section 102 of the Vehicle Laws of Pennsylvania, the streets
or parts of streets described in § 218-30 are hereby designated as through
highways, and operators of vehicles shall stop at every intersection before
entering such through highway. Stop signs shall be installed at the
entrances thereto from intersecting highways.
§ 218-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1997 by Ord.
No. 1056-97]
Any person violating the provisions of § 218-28 shall, upon conviction in
summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and cost of
prosecution.
§ 218-30. Schedule of Through Highways.
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as through
highways:
Street Limits
Chester Avenue, South Between Lincoln Highway and Oak Street
Church Street, South Lincoln Highway and dead end
Eighth Avenue, South Between Lincoln Highway and Oak Street
Eleventh Avenue, South Between Lincoln Highway and Oak Street
Fifth Avenue, South Between Lincoln Highway and Oak Street
First Avenue, North Between Lincoln Highway and the north City
line
Fourth Avenue, South Between Lincoln Highway and Oak Street
Pennsylvania Avenue Between Lincoln Highway and Oak Street
Sixth Avenue, South Between Lincoln Highway and Oak Street
Strode Avenue Between Lincoln Highway and Valley Road
Tenth Avenue, South Between Lincoln Highway and Oak Street
Thirteenth Avenue,
South
From Lincoln Highway south to the south City
line
§ 218-28 TOWING SERVICES § 218-30
210:841

ARTICLE X
Stop Intersections
§ 218-31. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to Section 102 of the Vehicle Laws of Pennsylvania, the
intersections described in §§ 218-33 and 218-35 are hereby designated as
stop intersections, and operators of vehicles shall stop before entering a
through highway from an intersecting highway. Stop signs shall be installed
at the entrance to said stop intersections from intersecting highways.
§ 218-32. (Reserved)
§ 218-33. Schedule of Stop Intersections.
The following intersections are designated as stop intersections:
Through Street Intersecting Street
Adams Drive [Added 9-28-2015
by Ord. No. 1460-2015]
Dulles Drive
Adams Drive Harlan Drive
Blackhorse Road Cedar Street
Blackhorse Road Coates Street
Blackhorse Road Graham Avenue
Buchanan Drive Adams Drive
Buchanan Drive [Added
9-28-2015 by Ord. No.
1460-2015]
Dulles Drive
Buchanan Drive Harlan Drive, east of entrance
Charles Street [Added
11-22-1999 by Ord. No.
1112-99]
Eighth Avenue, West
Charles Street Fifth Avenue, West
Charles Street [Added
11-22-1999 by Ord. No.
1112-99]
Ninth Avenue, West
Charles Street Seventh Avenue, West
Chester Avenue Harmony Street
Chester Avenue Oak Street
Chester Avenue Olive Street
Chester Avenue Walnut Street
Chester Road, West Oak Street
§ 218-31 TOWING SERVICES § 218-33
210:843
Through Street Intersecting Street
Church Street [Amended
11-22-1999 by Ord. No.
1112-99]
Charles Street
Church Street Diamond Street, West
Church Street Madison Street
Coates Street Chester Avenue, North
Coates Street Fourth Avenue
Coates Street Harlan Drive
Coates Street (eastbound) [Added
5-29-2001 by Ord. No.
1164-2001]
North Third Avenue
Coolidge Drive [Added 9-28-2015
by Ord. No. 1460-2015]
Dulles Drive
Coronet Drive [Added 5-10-2004
by Ord. No. 1234-2004]
Coldbrook Lane, East
Coronet Drive [Added 5-10-2004
by Ord. No. 1234-2004]
Mayfield Drive, East
Coronet Drive [Added 5-10-2004
by Ord. No. 1234-2004]
Regency Drive, West
Coronet Drive [Added 5-10-2004
by Ord. No. 1234-2004]
Wesley Lane, East
Country Run Drive, North and
South [Added 5-10-2004 by Ord.
No. 1234-2004]
Country Run Drive, West
Eighth Avenue, South Harmony Street
Eighth Avenue, South Oak Street
Eighth Avenue, South Olive Street
Eighth Avenue, South Sampson Street, west, and
Buttonwood Lane, west
Eighth Avenue, South Stirling Street
Eighth Avenue, South Walnut Street
Eleventh Avenue Oak Street
Eleventh Avenue Olive Street
Eleventh Avenue Walnut Street
Eleventh Avenue, North Diamond Street
Eleventh Avenue, South Olive Street
§ 218-33 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-33
210:844
Through Street Intersecting Street
Eleventh Avenue, South Sampson Street, east and west,
Buttonwood Lane, east and west,
Juniper Street, east and west, and
Harmony Street, east and west
Eleventh Avenue, South Stirling Street
Elmwood Gardens entrance Harlan Drive
Fifth Avenue, North Diamond Street
Fifth Avenue, North Elm Street
Fifth Avenue, South Harmony Street
Fifth Avenue, South Maple Avenue
Fifth Avenue, South Oak Street
Fifth Avenue, South Olive Street
Fifth Avenue, South Park Alley
Fifth Avenue, South Walnut Street
First Avenue, North Chestnut Street
First Avenue, North Lumber Street
First Avenue, South Harmony Street
First Avenue, South Maple Avenue
First Avenue, South New Street
First Avenue, South Oak Street
Fourth Avenue, North Coates Street
Fourth Avenue, North Diamond Street
Fourth Avenue, North Fleetwood Street
Fourth Avenue, North Lumber Street
Fourth Avenue, South Harmony Street
Fourth Avenue, South Maple Avenue
Fourth Avenue, South Oak Street
Fourth Avenue, South Walnut Street
Glencrest Road, East [Added
5-10-2004 by Ord. No.
1234-2004]
Coronet Drive, North
Graham Avenue Cedar Street
Harlan Drive [Added 9-28-2015
by Ord. No. 1460-2015]
Dulles Drive
Harmony Street Buttonwood Street
Harmony Street Palmer Avenue
Harmony Street Pearl Alley
§ 218-33 TOWING SERVICES § 218-33
210:845
Through Street Intersecting Street
Harmony Street Third Avenue
Harmony Street, West Harmony Street, West (westbound
only)
Harmony Street, West [Repealed
8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 1081-98]
Hill Drive South [Added
9-28-2015 by Ord. No.
1460-2015]
Dulles Drive
Hope Avenue Charles Street
Hope Avenue Madison Street
Lime Street Concord Street
Lincoln Highway Chester Avenue
Lincoln Highway Ninth Avenue
Lincoln Highway Tenth Avenue
Lincoln Highway Thirteenth Avenue
Lincoln Highway Twelfth Avenue
Lincoln Highway, West Hope Avenue
Lincoln Highway, West Mt. Pleasant Street
Madison Street Fifth Avenue, West
Madison Street [Added
11-22-1999 by Ord. No.
1112-99]
Hope Avenue
Madison Street Lime Street
Madison Street Seventh Avenue, West
Marquis Drive [Added 5-10-2004
by Ord. No. 1234-2004]
Mayfield Drive, West
Marquis Drive [Added 5-10-2004
by Ord. No. 1234-2004]
Wesley Lane, North
Merchant Street Chester Avenue, North
Ninth Avenue, North [Added
2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
1446-2015]
Poplar Street
North on Tenth Avenue Chestnut Street and south on Tenth
Avenue
Oak Street Pine Alley
Olive Street Pearl Alley
Olive Street Virginia Avenue
Olive Street Woodland Avenue
§ 218-33 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-33
210:846
Through Street Intersecting Street
Pennsylvania Avenue Harmony Street
Pennsylvania Avenue Oak Street
Pennsylvania Avenue Olive Street
Pennsylvania Avenue Walnut Street
Regency Drive [Added 5-10-2004
by Ord. No. 1234-2004]
Marquis Drive, South
Regency Drive [Added 5-10-2004
by Ord. No. 1234-2004]
Millview Drive, North
Rosemont Avenue Oak Street
Second Avenue, North Diamond Street
Second Avenue, North Lumber Street
Seventh Avenue, North [Added
8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 1078-98]
Coates Street
Seventh Avenue, North Diamond Street
Seventh Avenue, North Lumber Street
Sixth Avenue, North [Added
8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 1078-98]
Coates Street
Sixth Avenue, North Diamond Street
Sixth Avenue, North Lumber Street
Sixth Avenue, South Harmony Street
Sixth Avenue, South Oak Street
Sixth Avenue, South Olive Street
Sixth Avenue, South Walnut Street
Slack Drive, East [Added
9-28-2015 by Ord. No.
1460-2015]
Dulles Drive
Slack Drive, West [Added
9-28-2015 by Ord. No.
1460-2015]
Dulles Drive
South on Twelfth Avenue Stirling Street and north on Twelfth
Avenue
Tenth Avenue, North Diamond Street
Tenth Avenue, South Oak Street
Tenth Avenue, South Olive Street
Tenth Avenue, South Sampson Street, east and west,
Buttonwood Lane, east and west,
Juniper Street, east and west, and
Harmony Street, east and west
Tenth Avenue, South Stirling Street
§ 218-33 TOWING SERVICES § 218-33
210:847
Through Street Intersecting Street
Tenth Avenue, South Walnut Street
Third Avenue, North Diamond Street
Third Avenue, North Fleetwood Street
Third Avenue, North Lumber Street
Third Avenue, South Kersey Street
Third Avenue, South Maple Avenue
Third Avenue, South Walnut Street
Thirteenth Avenue, South Oak Street
Thirteenth Avenue, South Olive Street
Thirteenth Avenue, South Sampson Street, east and west,
Buttonwood Lane, east and west,
Juniper Street, east and west, and
Harmony Street, east and west
Thirteenth Avenue, South Stirling Street
Thirteenth Avenue, South Walnut Street
Twelfth Avenue Oak Street
Twelfth Avenue Walnut Street
Twelfth Avenue, North Diamond Street
Twelfth Avenue, South Oak Street
Twelfth Avenue, South Olive Street
Twelfth Avenue, South Sampson Street, east and west,
Buttonwood Lane, east and west,
Juniper Street, east and west, and
Harmony Street, east and west
Twelfth Avenue, South Stirling Street
Twelfth Avenue, South Walnut Street
Valley Road Fifth Avenue, West
Valley Road Sixth Avenue, West
Virginia Avenue Oak Street
Virginia Avenue Walnut Street
Walnut Street Rosemont Avenue
Wesley Lane [Added 5-10-2004
by Ord. No. 1234-2004]
Coldbrooke Lane, West
West on Charles Street Eighth Avenue, West, and east on
Charles Street
Woodland Avenue Hillcrest Drive
Woodland Avenue Walnut Street
§ 218-33 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-34
210:848
§ 218-34. Through highway traffic direction designated.
The intersections set forth in § 218-30 are hereby designated as stop
intersections in the directions indicated, and operators shall stop before
entering except for the direction designated as through highway traffic.
Stop signs shall be installed at the entrances to said stop intersections from
the other intersecting highways.
§ 218-35. (Reserved)
§ 218-34 TOWING SERVICES § 218-35
210:849

ARTICLE XI
Four-Way Stop Intersections
§ 218-36. Four-way stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to Section 102 of the Vehicle Laws of Pennsylvania, the
intersections described in § 218-33 are hereby designated as stop
intersections, and operators of vehicles shall stop before entering such
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed at all entrances to said
intersections.
§ 218-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of § 218-36 shall, upon conviction in
summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment
for not more than three days.
§ 218-38. Schedule of Four-Way Stop Intersections.
The following intersections shall be designated as four-way stop
intersections:
Charles Street (both eastbound and westbound) and Ridge Avenue (both
northbound and southbound)
Charles Street and Sixth Avenue, West
Eighth Avenue, North, and Chestnut Street
Fifth Avenue, North, and Chestnut Street
First Avenue, South, at Lincoln Highway (eastbound)
Fourth Avenue, North, and Chestnut Street
Hope Avenue and Charles Street
Kersey Street (both eastbound and westbound) and Third Avenue (both
northbound and southbound) [Added 2-27-2017 by Ord. No.
1487-2017]
Madison Street and Eighth Avenue, West
Madison Street and Fifth Avenue, West
Madison Street and Sixth Avenue, West
Ninth Avenue, North, and Chestnut Street
Regency Drive (both eastbound and westbound) and Coronet Drive
(southbound) and Country Run Drive (northbound) [Added 5-10-2004 by
Ord. No. 1234-2004]
Seventh Avenue, North, and Chestnut Street
§ 218-36 TOWING SERVICES § 218-38.1
210:851
§ 218-38.1. Schedule of Three-Way Stop Intersections.
The following intersections shall be designated as three-way stop
intersections:
Chestnut Street (eastbound) and Eleventh Avenue, North (both
northbound and southbound traffic)
Coates Street and Eighth Avenue, North
Coates Street and Glendale Avenue
Coates Street and Ninth Avenue, North
Eighth Avenue, North, and Merchant Street
Harmony Street, West, and Ridge Avenue [Added 8-10-1998 by Ord.
No. 1081-98]
Ninth Avenue, North, and Merchant Street
Second Avenue, North, and Chestnut Street, East
Seventh Avenue, North, and Merchant Street
Sixth Avenue and Chestnut Street
Third Avenue, South, and Harmony Street
Woodland Avenue and Oak Street
§ 218-38.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-38.1
210:852
ARTICLE XII
Yield Intersections
§ 218-39. (Reserved)
§ 218-39 TOWING SERVICES § 218-39
210:853

ARTICLE XIII
Turning and Travel Movements
§ 218-40. Turning and travel movements designated. [Added
7-13-1998 by Ord. No. 1074-98; amended 11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
1087-98]
No person shall operate, travel or turn a vehicle at the following locations
during the designated times and at the designated locations:
Street
Hours/
Days Location
Chestnut Street,
East
--- From Ninth Avenue, North, to Tenth
Avenue, North
§ 218-41. Right-turn prohibitions.
(Reserved)
§ 218-42. No turns.
Pursuant to Section 102 of the Vehicle Laws of Pennsylvania, no operator of
a vehicle shall make a turn at any of the following locations:
Street Days/Hours Intersection
Diamond Street, East
[Added 4-9-2001 by
Ord. No. 1162-2001]
Monday through Friday
during the school year
and only when school is
in session/8:45 a.m. to
9:15 a.m. and 2:45 p.m.
to 3:15 p.m.
Fifth Avenue, North
Diamond Street, East Monday through Friday,
during the school year/
7:30 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
and 2:00 p.m. to 2:30
p.m.
Sixth Avenue, North
Fourth Avenue, South
[Added 3-10-1997 by
Ord. No. 1049-97]
Monday through
Sunday, starting on the
last day of the school
year in June and lasting
until the first school
day after summer vacation,
as posted by the
Coatesville Area School
Dis-trict/ 5:00 p.m. to
9:00 p.m.
Kersey Street
§ 218-40 TOWING SERVICES § 218-43
210:855
§ 218-43. U-turns. [Added 5-22-2000 by Ord. No. 1130-2000]
No driver shall turn any vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction at
any of the following locations:
Street Location
Lincoln
Highway
From bridge to bridge
§ 218-43 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-43
210:856
ARTICLE XIV
One-Way Streets
§ 218-44. One-way streets designated.
Pursuant to Section 102 of the Vehicle Laws of Pennsylvania, the streets
or parts of streets described in § 218-46 are hereby designated as one-way
streets, and traffic shall move only in the direction indicated.
§ 218-45. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating the provisions of § 218-39 through 218-42,
218-44 or 218-46 shall, upon conviction in summary proceedings, pay a fine
of $25 and, in default of payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for a
period not to exceed three days.
§ 218-46. Schedule of One-Way Streets.
The following streets or parts of streets are designated as one-way streets:
Street Direction Limits
Boundary Street
[Added 7-24-2000 by
Ord. No. 1138-2000]
South From Poplar Street to Coates Street
Cedar Street East From property line of Elmwood
Gardens, Inc., to Blackhorse Road
Chestnut Street West Between First Avenue and Sixth
Avenue
Chestnut Street, West East Between Mt. Pleasant Street and
Church Street
Diamond Street
[Amended 5-28-2018
by Ord. No.
1510-2018]
East From First Avenue to Ninth Street,
excluding as a two-way street that
portion of East First Avenue
extending from the intersection with
the existing First Avenue a distance
of 358 feet east (339 feet east of
First Avenue - after realignment) as
identified in attached Exhibit "A"227
Diamond Street
[Repealed 2-28-2000
by Ord. No.
1122-2000]
Diamond Street, East
[Added 2-28-2000 by
Ord. No. 1122-2000]
East From 11th Avenue, North to 12th
Avenue, North
227. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices
§ 218-44 TOWING SERVICES § 218-46
210:857
Street Direction Limits
Diamond Street, East
[Added 2-28-2000 by
Ord. No. 1122-2000]
East From 10th Avenue, North to 11th
Avenue, North
Diamond Street, West West Between Mt. Pleasant Street and
Church Street
Eighth Avenue, West North Between Valley Road and Lemon
Street
Fleetwood Street West Between Second Avenue and Fourth
Avenue
Glendale Avenue
[Added 7-24-2000 by
Ord. No. 1138-2000]
North From Coates Street to Poplar Street
Harmony Street
[Amended 8-13-2012
by Ord. No.
1388-2012]
East From First Avenue to Eighth Avenue
Kersey Street West Between Third Avenue and Fourth
Avenue
Lemon Street East Between Fifth Avenue, West, and
Hope Avenue
Lumber Street
[Amended 8-23-1999
by Ord. No. 1109-99]
East From Second Avenue, North, to
Tenth Avenue, North
Mt. Pleasant Street,
lower [Added
12-13-1999 by Ord.
No. 1115-99]
North Between Lincoln Highway, West, and
Chestnut Street, West
Olive Street [Added
10-27-2003by Ord.
No. 1223-2003]
East Between Eighth Avenue and Tenth
Avenue
Olive Street West Between Sixth Avenue and Eighth
Avenue
Palmer Avenue South From Lincoln Highway to Harmony
Street
Park Alley [Added
5-22-2000 by Ord.
No. 1129-2000]
East From Fourth Avenue, South, to Fifth
Avenue, South
Pearl Alley South Between Lincoln Highway and Olive
Street
Pine Street North From New Street to Oak Street
Plum Street South Between Charles Street and Lemon
Street
§ 218-46 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-46
210:858
Street Direction Limits
Poplar Street [Added
7-24-2000 by Ord.
No. 1138-2000]
East From Glendale Avenue to Boundary
Street
Star Alley North From Harmony Street to Lincoln
Highway, East
Stirling Street [Added
10-27-2003by Ord.
No. 1223-2003]
West Between Tenth Avenue and Eighth
Avenue
Third Avenue, South North Between Oak Street and Walnut
Street
§ 218-46 TOWING SERVICES § 218-46
210:859

ARTICLE XV
Speed Limits
§ 218-47. Speed limits established.
Pursuant to Section 3362(a)(1), (2) and (3) and (c) of the Vehicle Laws of
Pennsylvania, no operator shall operate such vehicle at a speed greater than
listed in § 218-49 upon any of the streets or parts of streets designated
under such limits in said § 218-49.
§ 218-48. (Reserved)
§ 218-49. Schedule of Speed Limits.
Speed limits shall be established as follows. All other streets not listed in
this section (as 35, 15 or 12 miles per hour) will be so designated as 25
miles per hour.
A. Fifty-five miles per hour.
Street Location
Route 82 From high bridge at Lumber Street to City line
B. Thirty-five miles per hour.
Street Location
First Avenue, North From Lincoln Highway to the high bridge at
Lumber Street
Lincoln Highway Between the east City line and Eighth Avenue
Lincoln Highway Between Strode Avenue and the west City line
Thirteenth Avenue Between Lincoln Highway and the south City
line
Valley Road From Strode Avenue to City line
C. Fifteen miles per hour.
Street Location
Charles Street [Added
5-22-2000 by Ord. No.
1129-2000]
From Hope Avenue to Sixth Avenue, West
Fleetwood Street [Added
3-24-2008 by Ord. No.
1301-2008]
From Second Avenue to Fourth Avenue
Diamond Street, East From Sixth Avenue, North, to Seventh
Avenue, North
Kersey Street Entire length
New Street Entire length
§ 218-47 TOWING SERVICES § 218-49
210:861
Street Location
Pine Street From New Street to Oak Street
West Chestnut Street
[Added 4-28-2008 by
Ord. No. 1303-2008]
Entire length
D. Twelve miles per hour.
Street Location
Lumber
Street
From Third Avenue, North, to Fourth Avenue, North
§ 218-49 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-49
210:862
ARTICLE XVI
Parking Meters
§ 218-50. On-street parking meter zones established.
On-street parking meter zones are hereby established as follows:
A. Zone 1 limit: one hour; rate: $0.25 per 10 minutes. [Amended
11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1394-2012; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No.
1453-2015]
Street Sides Location
(Reserved)
B. Zone 2 limit: two hours; rate: $0.25 per 10 minutes. [Amended
11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1394-2012; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No.
1453-2015]
Street Sides Location
(Reserved)
C. Zone 3 limit: one hour; rate: $0.25 per 10 minutes. [Amended
11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1394-2012; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No.
1453-2015]
Street Sides Location
Lincoln Highway Both From First Avenue to Third Avenue
Third Avenue, North Both From Lincoln Highway to Chestnut
Street
D. Zone 4 limit: 90 minutes; rate: $0.25 per 10 minutes. [Amended
11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1394-2012; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No.
1453-2015]
Street Sides Location
Harmony Street North From Reading Railroad to First
Avenue
Harmony Street South From First Avenue east to the gray
stone driveway
Lincoln Highway Both From Third Avenue to Fifth Avenue
Lincoln Highway Both From Sixth Avenue to Eighth Avenue
E. Zone 5 limit: four hours; rate: $0.25 per 10 minutes. [Amended
11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1394-2012; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No.
1453-2015]
§ 218-50 TOWING SERVICES § 218-50
210:863
§ 218-51. Sunday and holiday parking.
Parking in all parking meter zones on Sundays and the following holidays
is hereby specifically excluded from the provisions of this article: the first
day of January, commonly called "New Year's Day"; the 15th day of January,
known as "Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day"; the third Monday of February,
known as "Presidents' Day"; Good Friday; the last Monday in May, known as
"Memorial Day"; the 14th day of June, known as "Flag Day"; the fourth of
July, called "Independence Day"; the first Monday of September, known as
"Labor Day"; the second Monday in October, known as "Columbus Day"; the
first Tuesday after the first Monday of November, Election Day; the 11th day
of November, known as "Veterans Day"; the fourth Thursday in November,
known as "Thanksgiving Day"; and the 25th day of December, known as
"Christmas Day."
§ 218-52. Days and hours of operation.
On all days other than those set forth in § 218-50 hereof, on-street parking
meter zones shall be in operation between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., except Fridays during which the hours shall be from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
Street Sides Location
Fourth Avenue, North East From Diamond Street to Chestnut
Street
Fourth Avenue, North West From Lincoln Highway to
Diamond Street
F. Zone 6 limit: five hours; rate: $0.25 per 10 minutes. [Amended
11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1394-2012; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No.
1453-2015]
Street Sides Location
(Reserved)
G. Zone 7 limit: 10 hours; rate: $0.25 per 10 minutes. [Amended
11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1394-2012; 6-8-2015 by Ord. No.
1453-2015]
Street Sides Location
Lincoln Highway, East North In front of 657 Lincoln
H. Zone 8 limit: fifteen-minute parking.
Street Sides Location
(Reserved)
§ 218-50 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-53
210:864
§ 218-53. Parking meter zones: time limits and rates. [Amended
6-8-2015 by Ord. No. 1453-2015]
For each on-street parking meter zone, parking is limited to the period of
time listed in the second column in the schedule below at the rate listed in
the third column of said schedule:
On-Street Parking
Meter Zone Time Limit Rate
Zone 1 1 hour $0.25 per 10 minutes
Zone 2 2 hours $0.25 per 10 minutes
Zone 3 1 hour $0.25 per 10 minutes
Zone 4 90 minutes $0.25 per 10 minutes
Zone 5 4 hours $0.25 per 10 minutes
Zone 6 5 hours $0.25 per 10 minutes
Zone 7 10 hours $0.25 per 10 minutes
§ 218-54. Metered, permit and unrestricted off-street parking lots.
The Schedule of Off-Street Parking Lots and the rates and time restrictions
applicable to the use of said lots shall be as follows:
A. City Hall Place Parking Lot.
(1) Location: southeast corner of City Hall Place and Harmony Street.
(2) Days of operation: Monday through Saturday.
(3) Hours: 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(4) Parking limit: two hours, except for vehicles with a valid parking
permit issued by the City and publicly displayed. [Amended
4-11-2011 by Ord. No. 1349-2011]
(5) Rate:
(a) Meter: nonmetered.
(b) Permit: $25 per month. [Amended 4-11-2011 by Ord. No.
1349-2011]
(6) Visitor parking: Five spaces are reserved for visitors with business
at City Hall, and such parking space use is limited to two hours of
parking. [Added 4-11-2011 by Ord. No. 1349-2011]
(7) Employee parking: All parking spaces at the far west of the parking
lot are reserved for employee-only parking. [Added 4-11-2011 by
Ord. No. 1349-2011]
B. Unity Park Parking Lot. [Added 10-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1052-97]
§ 218-53 TOWING SERVICES § 218-54
210:865
(1) Location: north side, 50 feet west of North Third Avenue and East
Lincoln Highway.
(2) Days of operation: Monday through Saturday.
(3) Hours: 8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m.
(4) Parking limit: two-hour limit without permit.
(5) Permit fee: $20 per month.
C. Harmony Street Parking Lot No. 1.
(1) Location: southwest corner of City Hall Place and Harmony Street.
(2) Days of operation: Monday through Saturday.
(3) Hours: 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(4) Parking limit: two hours, except for vehicles with a valid parking
permit issued by the City and publicly displayed. [Amended
4-11-2011 by Ord. No. 1349-2011]
(5) Rate:
(a) Meter: nonmetered.
(b) Permit: $25 per month. [Amended 4-11-2011 by Ord. No.
1349-2011]
D. Second Avenue Parking Lot.
(1) Location: northwest corner of Second Avenue and Diamond Street,
East.
(2) Days of operation: Monday through Saturday.
(3) Hours: 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(4) Parking limit: two hours or by permit.
(5) Permit rate: $15 per month.
E. Kersey Street Parking Lot.
(1) Location: northwest corner of Kersey Street and Third Avenue.
(2) Days of operation: Monday through Friday.
(3) Hours: 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(4) Parking limit: none.
(5) Permit rate: free.
(6) City Hall business only.
§ 218-54 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-54
210:866
F. Seventh Avenue Parking Lots. [Added 1-22-2001 by Ord. No.
1154-2001; amended 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 1385-2012]
(1) Location: This is the property identified as 701-711 East Lincoln
Highway including the leased properties consisting of 707 East
Lincoln Highway, 716 East Diamond Street and 701 East Lincoln
Highway.
(2) Days of operation: to be established by resolution of City Council.
(3) Hours: to be established by resolution of City Council.
(4) Parking limit: hours or permit periods to be established by
resolution of City Council.
(5) Hourly fee/permit rate: to be established by resolution of City
Council.
G. Chester Avenue Parking Lot. [Added 1-22-2001 by Ord. No.
1154-2001]
(1) Location: 20 Chester Avenue.
(2) Days of operation: Monday through Saturday.
(3) Hours: 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
(4) Parking limit: two-hour parking or by permit.
(5) Permit rate: $15 per month.
H. Third Avenue and Diamond Street Parking Lot. [Added 9-27-2010 by
Ord. No. 1336-2010]
(1) Location: 251 East Lincoln Highway.
(2) Days of operation: to be established by resolution of City Council.
(3) Hours: to be established by resolution of City Council.
(4) Parking limit: hours or permit periods to be established by
resolution of City Council.
(5) Hourly fee/permit rate: to be established by resolution of City
Council.
I. Third Avenue and Lincoln Highway Parking Lot. [Added 6-11-2012 by
Ord. No. 1385-2012]
(1) Location: 300 East Lincoln Highway.
(2) Days of operation: to be established by resolution of City Council.
(3) Hours: to be established by resolution of City Council.
§ 218-54 TOWING SERVICES § 218-54
210:867
§ 218-55. Deposit of coin required.
§ 218-56. Designation of parking spaces.
In all parking meter zones a parking meter shall be installed for each
parking space. All parking spaces shall be plainly designated by lines or
markings on the highway or on off-street parking spaces and may be placed
either parallel or diagonal to the curb.
§ 218-57. Placement of meters.
Parking meters shall be placed upon the sidewalk or curb immediately
adjacent or next to each designated parking space and in such manner as
to show or display by a signal that the parking space controlled by such
meter is not legally occupied. Further, each parking meter shall indicate by
a proper legend the established legal parking time and, when in operation,
shall also indicate on or by its dial or pointer the duration of the period of
legal parking and illegal or over parking.
(4) Parking limit: hours or permit periods to be established by
resolution of City Council.
(5) Hourly fee/permit rate: to be established by resolution of City
Council.
A. Upon parking any vehicle in a parking meter zone at any time during
which the provisions of this article are in effect, the operator of the
vehicle shall, upon entering the designated space, immediately deposit
or cause to be deposited in the parking meter controlling such parking
space, such coin or coins as designated by the official sign and/or the
hours and regulations shown on each parking meter. Failure to do so
shall constitute a violation of this article.
B. Individual parking spaces on the public streets may be reserved by the
Police Department for special purposes on request not less than 24
hours in advance and approval by the Chief of Police. Such reservations
shall not exceed one day of operation and shall be designated only by
the use of approved bags placed on the meters by the Police
Department. Unauthorized use of parking meter bags or placement of a
parking meter bag on a meter by other than the Police Department shall
constitute a violation and the violator shall be subject to the penalty
provided in § 218-65. No parking spaces on the public streets shall
otherwise be reserved, leased or limited to exclusive use by any person
or business or use other than the general public, except that loading
zones may be established for a limited number of parking spaces at
convenient locations between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
§ 218-54 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-58
210:868
§ 218-58. Parking within designated spaces required.
Every vehicle parked in any parking meter zone shall be entirely within the
lines of the designated parking space with the front end of such parked
vehicle adjacent to the parking meter controlling such parking space.
§ 218-59. Fees levied to cover expenses.
The coin or coins required by this article to be deposited in the parking
meters are hereby levied and assessed as to provide for the proper
regulation and control of traffic upon the highways and off-street parking
areas the cost of supervising and regulating the parking of vehicles in
the parking meter zone created and the purchase, supervision, protection,
inspection, installation, maintenance, control and use of the said parking
meters. The coins mentioned in this article shall be collected from said
parking meters under the direction of the Director of Finance and deposited
with the Director of Finance.
§ 218-60. Overtime parking.
No owner or operator of any vehicle shall cause, allow, permit or suffer such
vehicle to be parked overtime or beyond the period of the legal parking time
established.
§ 218-60.1. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-27-1997 by Ord. No.
1056-97; amended 8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 1077-98; 12-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 1266-2005; 11-13-2012 by Ord. No. 1394-2012; 6-8-2015
by Ord. No. 1453-2015]
§ 218-61. Deposit of slugs.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter
any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States
or a parking token approved and authorized for such use by the City of
Coatesville.
A. Any person violating the provisions of § 218-60 shall be subject to a fine
of $25 to be paid within 10 days.
B. Any person violating the provisions of § 218-60 shall be subject to a fine
of $50 to be paid after 10 days but within 20 days.
C. Any violation of the provisions of § 218-60 shall be subject to a fine of
$75 to be paid after 20 days, but before citation.
D. Failure to respond by the payment of the fines as aforesaid shall, after
28 days, result in the issuance of a citation to the defendant. Thereafter,
the prosecution shall proceed in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure, and, upon conviction for the offense, the
defendant shall be ordered to pay the maximum fine prescribed by law,
together with the costs of prosecution, and/or to be incarcerated in the
county prison for not more than five days.
§ 218-58 TOWING SERVICES § 218-62
210:869
§ 218-62. Defacing or damaging meters.
No person shall deface, injure, tamper with or willfully break, destroy or
impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of
this article.
§ 218-63. Enforcement in an emergency.
The duty of enforcing the provisions of this article shall be upon the City
Manager, acting through the Bureau of Police. In an emergency, any of
the provisions of this article may be temporarily suspended by such City
Manager, who shall then have authority to adopt and enforce such other
temporary rules and regulations as traffic conditions during such
emergency may demand or require.
§ 218-64. Duty of police officers.
§ 218-65. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1997 by Ord.
No. 1056-97]
Any person violating the provisions of §§ 218-61 and 218-62 shall, upon
conviction in summary proceedings, be sentenced to a fine of up to $300,
restitution and cost of prosecution.
A. It shall be the duty of police officers of the City of Coatesville, acting in
accordance with instructions issued by the Chief of Police, to deposit
duplicates of violation tickets in a receptacle in the police station. Said
duplicates shall contain:
(1) The address of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(2) The state license number of such vehicle.
(3) The day and hour at which such vehicle is parked in violation of any
of the provisions of this article at the time of his inspection.
(4) Any other facts, knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
B. Each such police officer shall also place on such vehicle a notice to the
owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the
provisions of this article and instructing such owner to report at police
headquarters of the City in regard to such violation.
§ 218-62 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-65
210:870
ARTICLE XVII
Traffic Signs and Signals
§ 218-66. Erection of signs.
All traffic signs or signals regulating or prohibiting traffic on any street
or highway including parking meter installations and public utility poles,
lines and equipment, shall be located and placed under the direction of
City Council and, in emergencies, under the direction of the Director of the
Department of Streets and Public Improvements.
§ 218-67. Unlawful erection or removal of signs.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than as provided in § 218-66, to
erect or remove any traffic sign, signal or public utility pole or equipment
without first obtaining authority to do so from Council.
§ 218-68. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1997 by Ord.
No. 1056-97]
Any person violating the provisions of § 218-67 shall, upon conviction in
summary proceedings, be sentenced to a fine of up to $300, restitution and
cost of prosecution.
§ 218-66 TOWING SERVICES § 218-68
210:871

ARTICLE XVIII
Volunteer Firefighter Parking Zones
§ 218-69. Designation of parking spaces.
Designated parking spaces shall be installed for any volunteer firefighter
living in the City of Coatesville. Parking spaces shall be plainly designated
by lines painted in red or markings on the highway.
§ 218-70. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, as used in this article, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER — A member of a volunteer fire company
recognized by the City Council, who participates as a volunteer in the
position of fire officer, firefighter, fire police officer, apparatus driver,
medical first responder or ambulance attendant.
§ 218-71. Conditions required.
A volunteer firefighter living in the City of Coatesville may secure a
designated parking space under the following conditions:
§ 218-72. Loss of parking space.
A volunteer firefighter who violates any of the designated conditions set
forth in this article must forfeit the designated parking space, including all
costs associated with the removal.
A. Must live or own property where the parking space is being requested.
B. Must be listed on the active crew roster for the Coatesville Fire
Department and have served for a minimum of two years.
C. Must be listed on the active crew roster for the Coatesville Fire
Department as presented by the Chief of the Fire Department and
maintain a minimum of 25% of all emergencies either as a firefighter or
medical first responder.
D. Must absorb all costs of the sign, including installation.
E. Must identify the vehicle with a Fire Department identification plate
and submit all information referencing the vehicle to the Police
Department.
§ 218-69 TOWING SERVICES § 218-72
210:873

ARTICLE XVIIIA
Truck Traffic on Certain Streets
§ 218-72.1. Authority to designate truck routes; signage;
prohibited use.
§ 218-72.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRUCK — Any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of
property and whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight
exceeds three tons.
TRUCK ROUTE — A way over certain streets, as designated herein, over
and along which trucks coming into and going out of the City must operate.
§ 218-72.3. Exceptions.
This article shall not prohibit the following:
§ 218-72.4. Truck routes designated.
There are hereby established within the City of Coatesville the following
truck routes:
A. The City Council may designate by ordinance and describe any street or
portion thereof as a street the use of which is prohibited by any truck or
commercial vehicle of the rated capacity of three tons or more. The City
Manager shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on such streets.
B. No person shall operate a truck or commercial vehicle of the rated
capacity of three tons or more on a street designated and posted as
established in this section.
A. Operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to conduct
business at a destination point, provided that streets upon which such
traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the
destination point.
B. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the City.
C. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the City, public utilities or
any contractor or material man while engaged in the repair,
maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street
utilities within the City.
D. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any
case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for
which such detour is established.
§ 218-72.1 TOWING SERVICES § 218-72.4
210:875
Route 30 - Lincoln Highway
Route 82
Eighth Avenue
Blackhorse Hill Road
Coates Street between Blackhorse Hill and Third Avenue to Chestnut
Street
Valley Road from Strode Avenue westward to City line
§ 218-72.5. State highways.
In addition to those streets in the City constituting a part of a truck route
as established herein, all Commonwealth of Pennsylvania marked highways,
and no other streets, shall be used for truck traffic.
§ 218-72.6. Schedule of Streets Restricting Through Truck Traffic.
There is hereby established within the City of Coatesville the following
Schedule of Streets Restricting Through Truck Traffic:
Street
Charles Street
Church Street
Eighth Avenue, West
Fifth Avenue, West
Harmony Street, West
Hope Avenue
Lemon Street
Lime Street
Madison Street
Ninth Avenue, West
Seventh Avenue, West
Sixth Avenue, West
Union Street
§ 218-72.7. Origin of truck traffic; destination points.
A. Outside origin.
(1) One inside destination point. All trucks entering the City for a
destination point in the City shall proceed only over an established
truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the
street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the
§ 218-72.4 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-72.7
210:876
§ 218-72.8. Enforcement.
§ 218-72.9. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction in summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $300.
destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating
truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible
route.
(2) Multiple inside destination points. All trucks entering the City for
multiple destination points shall proceed only over established
truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the
street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the first
destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point, a
deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the
shortest direction. Upon leaving the last destination point, a
deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest
permissible route.
B. Inside origin.
(1) Outside destination point. All trucks, on a trip originating in the
City, traveling in the City for a destination point outside the City
shall proceed by the shortest direction over streets on which such
traffic is permitted to a truck route as herein established.
(2) Inside destination points. All trucks, on a trip originating in the
City, traveling in the City for destination points in the City shall
proceed only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted.
A. The City Manager and Chief of Police shall keep and maintain accurate
maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which truck traffic is
permitted; the maps shall be kept on file in the Manager's office and
police station and shall be available to the public.
B. The City Manager of the City shall cause all truck routes (and those
streets upon which truck traffic is prohibited) to be clearly sign-posted
to give notice that this article is in effect.
C. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to require any person
driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a
truck route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to
any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and
determining whether this article has been complied with.
§ 218-72.7 TOWING SERVICES § 218-72.9
210:877

Part 2
Residential Permit Parking
ARTICLE XIX
Procedures and Regulations
§ 218-73. Intent and purpose.
The City Council of Coatesville finds and declares that the provisions of this
Part 2 are enacted for the following reasons:
§ 218-74. Definitions.
As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CURBSIDE PARKING SPACE — Twenty linear feet of curb, exclusive of
those portions of the curb where parking, apart from the provisions of this
Part 2, is not presently permitted.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — A contiguous or nearly contiguous area
containing public highways or parts thereof primarily abutted by residential
A. To reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of streets
within residential districts for vehicles parked by persons not residing
within the residential districts.
B. To protect these residential districts from polluted air, excessive noise
and refuse caused by the entry of such vehicles.
C. To protect the residents of these residential districts from unreasonable
burdens in gaining access to their residences.
D. To preserve the character of these districts as residential districts.
E. To encourage use of public transportation.
F. To promote efficiency in the maintenance of streets in these residential
districts in a clean and safe condition.
G. To preserve the value of the property in these residential districts.
H. To promote traffic safety and the safety of children and other
pedestrians in these residential districts.
I. To forestall dangers arising from the blocking of fire lanes, hydrants
and other facilities required by emergency vehicles, both in reaching
victims and in transporting them to hospitals.
J. To facilitate the movement of traffic in the event of accidents and other
disasters.
K. To promote the peace, comfort, convenience and welfare of the City.
§ 218-73 TOWING SERVICES § 218-74
210:879
property or residential and nonbusiness property (such as schools, parks,
churches, hospitals and nursing homes).
RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMIT AREA — A residential district where
curbside parking on public highways is limited to not more than two
consecutive hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except
holidays, unless the vehicle properly displays a parking permit authorized
by this Part 2.
§ 218-75. Designation of residential parking permit area.
All areas where curbside parking on public highways is limited to not more
than two consecutive hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays,
except holidays, are hereby declared to be residential permit areas.
§ 218-76. Posting of signs.
§ 218-77. Eligibility.
Residential parking stickers, which exempt a motor vehicle on which the
sticker is properly displayed from the time limits for parking within a
residential parking district, may be obtained for an annual fee as provided
in Chapter 108, Fees, per vehicle by bona fide residents of those special
residential parking districts designated by the City Council.
§ 218-78. Permit application.
A. Following the City Council's affirmative vote to designate a residential
parking permit area, parking signs shall be erected in the designated
area.
B. The signs shall be of such character as to inform readily an ordinarily
observant person that curbside parking on public highways in the
designated area is limited to not more than two consecutive hours
between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except holidays, unless
the vehicle properly displays a parking permit authorized by this Part
2.
A. To obtain a residential parking sticker, the applicant must file an
application with the City's Finance Department, providing the following
information:
(1) The name of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle.
(2) The applicant's residential address.
(3) The make, model and registration number of the motor vehicle.
(4) The driver's license number.
B. In addition, the motor vehicle's registration card and the operator's
license of the applicant must be presented in person at the time of filing
the application. Additional documentation and/or information, as
§ 218-74 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-78
210:880
§ 218-79. Issuance of permit.
§ 218-80. Renewal of permit.
deemed necessary by the Director of the Finance Department, may be
required for verification purposes.
C. Upon approval of the application, a residential parking sticker will be
issued to the applicant. The same application and documentation
procedures outlined above will be followed at the time of the renewal of
a parking sticker and at the time that the applicant moves to a different
residential parking district.
A. Upon the applicant's payment of the residential parking permit fee as
provided in Chapter 108, Fees, his or her submission of a completed
and validated residential parking permit application and his or her
fulfillment of all applicable provisions of this Part 2 controlling
issuance, renewal or transfer of residential parking permits, the
applicant shall receive one residential parking permit for the vehicle
described in the application. Such residential parking permit shall be
securely affixed to the right bumper of the vehicle and shall display the
following information:
(1) The license plate number and registration number of the vehicle.
(2) The numerical designation of the residential parking permit area.
(3) The expiration date of the residential parking permit, which shall
be one year following the date or the most recent anniversary of the
date, whichever is later, of the City Council's designation of the
residential parking permit area.
B. No residential parking permit shall be issued to a vehicle whose owner
and principal operator do not reside within the designated residential
parking permit area.
C. The applicant for and holder of the residential parking permit shall be
the owner or principal operator of the vehicle receiving the parking
permit.
D. A vehicle shall be issued a residential parking permit only if it displays
valid Pennsylvania license plates, unless the vehicle is not required to
have them.
A. Upon the holder's payment of the residential parking permit renewal
fee as provided in Chapter 108, Fees, his or her submission of a
completed and validated residential parking permit application, his or
her fulfillment of all applicable provisions of this Part 2 controlling
issuance, renewal or transfer of residential parking permits, on or
before the expiration date of the existing residential parking permit, the
holder shall receive a new residential parking permit.
§ 218-78 TOWING SERVICES § 218-80
210:881
§ 218-81. Temporary stickers.
§ 218-82. Transfer of permit.
Upon the holder's payment of the residential parking permit transfer fee
as provided in Chapter 108, Fees, his or her submission of a completed
and validated residential parking permit application, his or her fulfillment
of all applicable provisions of this Part 2 controlling issuance, renewal or
transfer of residential parking permits and his or her surrender of his
or her existing residential parking permit, the holder shall receive a new
residential parking permit to be transferred to another qualifying vehicle.
§ 218-83. Display of sticker.
Residential parking stickers must be displayed on the right side of the
rear bumper of your vehicle. The sticker must have the motor vehicle
registration number and sticker expiration date plainly visible.
§ 218-84. Parking sticker expiration and renewal.
B. The expiration date to be displayed on the new residential parking
permit shall be one year following the expiration date of the existing
residential parking permit.
A. An owner or operator of a motor vehicle, who has a temporary motor
vehicle registration card, yet meets all other requirements, may apply
for a temporary residential parking sticker. This temporary sticker will
become invalid upon the expiration date of the temporary motor vehicle
registration card or as soon as a permanent motor vehicle registration
card is obtained, whichever occurs first.
B. Once the permanent registration is received, the owner/operator must
notify the Finance Department and apply for a permanent residential
parking permit according to the regular procedures outlined above.
C. All other rules and regulations denoted herein must be observed during
the time for which the temporary residential parking sticker was
issued.
A. Parking stickers will be subject to expiration but eligible for renewal
upon their expiration date, as indicated on the sticker, or in those
situations where the recipient moves from one residential area to
another within the City. If the resident moves to another residential
parking district, he must obtain a parking sticker for that district. If he
or she moves to an area that is not a residential parking district, the
parking sticker will cease to be valid and will not be renewed.
B. Renewal is not automatic. Recipients are responsible for reapplying for
stickers according to the regular application procedure described
above.
§ 218-80 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-85
210:882
§ 218-85. Visitors permits.
§ 218-86. Limitations.
§ 218-87. Additional documentation.
Any applicant for a residential parking sticker whose permanent address or
the address at which his or her motor vehicle is registered is outside of the
residential parking district for which the applicant seeks a parking sticker
(whether such permanent address or registration address is out-of-state,
in Pennsylvania but outside of Coatesville or within Coatesville but outside
the district) and any applicant who operates a motor vehicle owned by and
registered in the name of another person not a resident of the district must
file with the application a copy of his deed or lease or electric and gas
utility bill for his or her residence within the parking district or, in the
absence of these, he or she must sign an affidavit on a form supplied by
the Finance Department affirming that he or she does in fact reside at the
stated residential district address. Any applicant filing a falsified affidavit or
a falsified application will be subject to criminal penalties for violation of 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, relating to unsworn falsification to authorities.
A. Upon application of any resident of a residential parking permit area,
the City Manager or his or her designee shall issue a visitor parking
permit to the resident for the visitor's vehicle to be limited to that
particular parking permit area and for a period not exceeding 30 days.
No more than two visitor parking permits shall be issued to any one
resident at any one time. For the purposes of this Part 2, the resident
shall be the holder of and responsible for the use and misuse of the
visitor parking permits issued to him.
B. Upon application by the principal of Benner Elementary School to the
City Manager, a residential parking permit may be issued to the vehicle
of any teacher or administrative personnel who is transient and works
at different schools throughout the Coatesville Area School District.
This permit is not transferable. [Added 5-22-2000 by Ord. No.
1129-2000]
A. Unexpired residential parking stickers are no longer valid once the
recipient moves from the residential district designated on the sticker.
B. The owner/operator of a motor vehicle bearing a residential parking
sticker is exempt only from the posted time restrictions on parking and
from the otherwise required deposit of coins in parking meters located
within the district. All other parking and motor vehicle regulations
within the residential parking district must be observed.
C. A residential parking sticker is issued for the specific geographic area
in which the recipient lives and authorizes exemption from the posted
limited parking regulations in that area only. Issuance of a residential
parking sticker does not guarantee the recipient a parking space.
§ 218-85 TOWING SERVICES § 218-88
210:883
§ 218-88. Exemptions.
§ 218-89. Withdrawal of designation.
§ 218-90. Establishment of regulations.
The City Manager or his or her designee is authorized to establish, after
due notice and opportunity for interested parties to be heard, all written
regulations necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this Part
2.
§ 218-91. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this Part 2 shall, upon conviction
thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction, be fined not more than $50 for
each violation and, in default of any fine so imposed, shall be imprisoned for
a period not to exceed 30 days for each violation.
§ 218-92. Schedule of Districts.
The following areas shall be designated as residential parking permit
districts:
Street Location
Chestnut Street Between First Avenue and Fourth Avenue
Fourth Avenue, North Between Lincoln Highway and Chestnut
Street
Third Avenue, North Between Chestnut Street and Fleetwood
Street
A. Whenever metered parking is in effect in any portion of a residential
parking permit area, the parking spaces controlled by meters shall be
excepted from the provisions of this Part 2 so long as the control by
meters continues.
B. A petition requesting the exemption of a particular street segment of a
residential parking permit area, signed by a majority of the residents of
that street segment, will automatically exempt that particular street
segment from designation as a residential parking permit area.
A. Following the City Council's affirmative vote to withdraw the
designation of an existing residential parking permit area, the City
Manager or his designee shall mail to every residence within the
existing residential parking permit area a notice of the Council's
withdrawal of the designation. Said notice shall specify the effective
date of the withdrawal of the designation.
B. The effective date of the withdrawal of the designation of an existing
residential parking permit area shall be 30 days following the date of
the City Council's affirmative vote to withdraw the designations.
§ 218-88 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-92
210:884
ARTICLE XX
Contractors Permit Parking
§ 218-93. Issuance of permit for contractors vehicles.
§ 218-94. Display of parking permit.
A contractor's parking permit must be displayed through the front
windshield of the vehicle(s) and must have the permit number displayed on
it along with the name of the contractor and location of the project.
A. Upon a contractor's application for a building permit for work being
performed in the City of Coatesville, the Codes Department will issue,
upon request, a parking permit for any vehicle(s) that would be affected
by a parking meter or regulated time parking restriction. This permit
will allow a contractor's vehicle(s) to be parked in a designated parking
zone while the performance of contractor's work is being completed.
The parking permit will be for the time period listed on the building
permit and will be good for the designated building permit location
only.
B. In no event shall a parking permit issued to a contractor pursuant to
this article permit parking where parking is not otherwise legal subject
to restrictions.
§ 218-93 TOWING SERVICES § 218-94
210:885
Chapter 224
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Historical Commission — See Ch. 27.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 41.
Animals — See Ch. 72.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 79.
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Licensing of building contractors — See Ch.
84.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 86.
Electrical standards — See Ch. 102.
Fees — See Ch. 108.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 115.
Improvement policies — See Ch. 142.
Lifesafety standards — See Ch. 151.
Mechanical standards — See Ch. 156.
Noise — See Ch. 161.
Nuisances — See Ch. 164.
Plumbing — See Ch. 176.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 180.
Sewers — See Ch. 185.
Solid waste — See Ch. 190.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 193.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
197.
Use registration — See Ch. 214.
§ 218-94 COATESVILLE CODE § 218-94
210:886
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 224-1. Purpose.
This Zoning Chapter has been enacted to:
§ 224-2. Community development objectives.
To achieve the purpose set forth in § 224-1 above, the City of Coatesville has
established a set of community development objectives. The provisions of
this Zoning Chapter are based on these objectives, which are listed below,
as well as the goals of the City of Coatesville Comprehensive Plan (1986)
and the Open Space, Recreation and Environmental Resources Plan (1993).
The objectives are to:
A. Promote, protect and facilitate any or all of the following: the public
health, safety, morals and the general welfare; coordinated and
practical community development and proper density of population;
emergency management preparedness and operations; the provisions
of adequate light and air; access to incident solar energy; police
protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, recreational facilities, public grounds, the provision
of safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial,
agricultural or industrial use and other public requirements; as well as
preservation of the natural, scenic and historic values in the
environment and preservation of forests, wetlands, aquifers and
floodplains.
B. Prevent overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in travel
and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire, flood, panic
or other dangers.
C. Provide for the use of land within the City for residential housing of
various dwelling types encompassing all basic forms of housing,
including single-family and two-family dwellings and a reasonable
range of multifamily dwellings, in various arrangements.
D. Accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for development
of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
A. Provide for the orderly growth and development of the City by
regulating the intensity and location of development in accordance with
environmental and land use compatibility and the availability of existing
and planned utilities and services.
B. Encourage the maintenance, enhancement and rehabilitation of
existing buildings, neighborhoods and dwellings, especially within the
Coatesville Historic District.
§ 224-1 TOWING SERVICES § 224-2
210:887
§ 224-3. Construal of provisions.
§ 224-4. Scope.
C. Provide a variety of housing types and intensities, compatible and
harmonious with available road access and utilities.
D. Promote retail commercial uses in the central business areas.
E. Maintain existing institutional uses for various educational, cultural
and recreational pursuits.
F. Maintain a safe and efficient street system and encourage the
improvement of streets, circulation and parking areas.
G. Promote the maintenance, development and restoration of the
circulation systems for walking and hiking.
H. Protect physical and biological resources associated with streams,
floodplain areas, steep slopes, woodlands and other related resources.
I. Encourage the maintenance of existing community facilities and
services to address mass transit, education, safety, health and leisure
needs and promote the provision of services to meet recreational, fire,
police and other safety and emergency protection needs.
J. Encourage the maintenance and conservation of existing utility systems
to service present users and the development of additional supplies and
capacities to serve future users.
K. Promote energy conservation and the effective utilization of renewable
energy sources by recycling of discarded materials.
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than
those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of
this chapter shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute,
other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this
chapter, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance or regulation
shall be controlling.
C. The goals of the City of Coatesville Comprehensive Plan and the Open
Space, Recreation and Environmental Resources Plan as well as the
community development objectives in § 224-2 shall guide the
interpretation, administration and application of this chapter.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all land and
every building or portion of a building erected, altered with respect to
height or area, added to or relocated and every use hereafter
§ 224-2 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-4
210:888
§ 224-5. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Coatesville Zoning
Ordinance of 1995."
§ 224-6. Exemption.
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building, or
extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility corporation, if,
upon petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Utility Commission shall,
after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the
building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare
of the public.
established within a building or use accessory thereto, in the City of
Coatesville, shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any building or structure and any use of building or land existing on the
effective date of this chapter which is not in conformity herewith may
be continued, extended or changed only in accordance with the
regulations herein contained relating to nonconforming buildings and
uses.
§ 224-4 TOWING SERVICES § 224-6
210:889

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 224-7. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein indicated:
§ 224-8. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated in this
article. The present tense includes the future, the singular number includes
the plural and the plural the singular, and the masculine gender includes
the feminine and neuter.
ABANDONED VEHICLE — A vehicle that is unregistered and unlicensed in
this commonwealth or any other state.
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property or a cessation of the
use of the property by the owner or lessee without any intention of
transferring rights to the property to another owner or of resuming use
of the property. In regard to nonconforming uses, such use shall only be
considered "abandoned" when known to be intentional and voluntary on the
part of the owner and lessee.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit which is accessory to
another dwelling unit or principal use of land.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit
subordinate to and within or on the same lot as the principal residential
dwelling.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the principal
permitted building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to
those of such principal building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — See "structure."
ACCESSORY USE — See "use."
A. The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular.
B. The word "used" shall include the words "arranged," "designed" or
"intended to be used."
C. The present tense shall include the future tense.
D. The word "person" shall include the words "individual," "organization,"
"partnership" or "corporation."
E. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
§ 224-7 TOWING SERVICES § 224-8
210:891
ADAPTIVE REUSE — The conversion of an existing building, structure,
or use into some other form of permitted use in accordance with
§ 224-61.[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES — Uses regulated in §§ 224-60C(7) and
224-18.1G.[Added 4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97228]
ALLEY — Land over which there is a right-of-way, municipally or privately
owned, typically serving as a secondary means of access to two or more
lots.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement of the supporting members
of an existing structure or use, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders, joists or rafters or enclosure walls, as well as change in doors or
windows, or any enlargement or diminution of a structure or use, whether
horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a structure or use from one
location to another, not including normal repairs or replacement of
elements of a building; or, any change which would substantially alter an
existing sewage system, traffic condition or other infrastructure element.
AMUSEMENT HALL/ARCADE — A facility operated as a gainful business
within a building or structure providing three or more automatic
amusement devices or games, including pool or billiard rooms, but shall
not involve the sale of food and beverages except for vending
machines.[Amended 4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
ANCILLARY ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — See "structure."
ANCILLARY ACCESSORY USE — See "use."
ANTIQUE SHOP — A retail establishment where goods of an antiquarian
nature are sold. Such shop typically offers items for sale that are considered
to be of collectible, heirloom or heritage value due to their age, scarcity,
significance, or artistic quality. Antique shops are typically owned and
operated by persons who are members of the state or local antique dealers'
association.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
AUTO SERVICE — A commercial establishment involving the retail sales of
vehicular fuel, automotive repair or service or a car wash facility.
BASEMENT — A space having 1/2 or more of its floor-to-ceiling height
above the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling
height of not less than 6 1/2 feet.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — A building or group of buildings occupied
by a resident innkeeper containing guest rooms for the temporary lodging
of guests for compensation and providing to the occupants such lodging
services as maid service and accessory eating and drinking facilities limited
to the serving of breakfast.
BUILDING — Any combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having enclosing walls and a roof, whether assembled on the premises or
not.
228. Editor's Note: This ordinance repeals the former definition of “adult commercial use.”
§ 224-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-8
210:892
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of the aggregate building area of all
buildings on a lot to the gross acreage of that lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The height of a building measured from the average
grade at the base of the building to the top of a parapet of a building with
a flat roof, or to the midpoint of any building with a sloped roof.[Added
4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
BUILD-TO LINE — The line which defines the placement of the building
from the sidewalk or street on which the building fronts. The build-to line of
the building typically forms the street wall line. On a corner lot, the build-to
line is located on each side of a lot abutting a street.[Added 4-11-2005 by
Ord. No. 1247-2005]
CAFE — A commercial establishment like a coffee shop or tearoom at
which food and beverages are sold. Such facility is typically smaller than a
restaurant and has seating for less than 40 persons.[Added 4-11-2005 by
Ord. No. 1247-2005]
CELLAR — A space with less than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above
the average finished grade of the adjoining ground or with a floor-to-ceiling
height of less than 6 1/2 feet.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
deceased, including columbariums, crematoria, mausoleums and
mortuaries when operated in conjunction with the cemetery and within the
boundaries.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A document, issued by the City
Council, which assures that the reconstruction, alteration or restoration
proposed for a historic resource meets the design criteria set forth in Article
X of this chapter and authorizes the Zoning Officer to issue a building
permit.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued and enforced by the
Zoning Officer upon completion of the construction of a new building or
upon a change or conversion of the structure or use of a building, which
certifies that all requirements and regulations as provided herein and within
all other applicable requirements have been complied with.
CERTIFIED REHABILITATION — Rehabilitation/construction plans and
work which has been approved by the National Park Service in order to
qualify for federal historic preservation tax incentives.
CHURCH/RELIGIOUS USE — A building or structure used for public
worship by a congregation, including buildings used for associated
purposes, such as rectories, convents, retreats or schools when located on
the same property as the church or place of worship.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A place, structure, area or other facility used for
providing religious, fraternal, social and/or recreational programs generally
open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant
segments of the community.
§ 224-8 TOWING SERVICES § 224-8
210:893
COMMUNITY UTILITY — A building, structure or use or extension thereof
which is operated, owned or maintained by a public utility corporation,
municipality or municipal authority or which is privately owned and
approved by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission for the purpose
of providing public sewage disposal and/or treatment; public water supply,
storage and/or treatment; or the transmission of energy or telephone
service.
CONDITIONAL USE — See "use."
CONDOMINIUM — Any dwelling unit, regardless of dwelling type, which
has all of the following characteristics:
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail activity designed to serve a regional
market, defined by trip-generation rates for convenience stores according
to the Institute of Traffic Engineers (average annual daily trips).
(Convenience stores typical to Coatesville include such stores as Turkey Hill
or could include such stores as Wawa, 7-11 or like-type stores.)[Amended
4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
CORNER STORE — A small commercial building that is typically located
on the corner of two intersecting streets, which is less than 1,500 square
feet in gross floor area but typically in the range of 600 to 800 square
feet, in which the sale of retail items is offered for the convenience of the
neighborhood. The corner store typically serves persons within a ten-minute
walk of the facility.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
CUSTOMARY STRUCTURE — See "structure."
CUSTOMARY USE — See "use."
DAY-CARE FACILITIES —
The unit (the interior and associated exterior areas designated for
private use in the development plan) is owned by the occupant.
A.
All or a portion of the exterior open space and any community interior
spaces are owned and maintained in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Uniform Condominium Act of 1980, as amended,229 and in accordance
with the provisions of open space, streets or other development
features in this chapter and other applicable ordinances.
B.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility which, on a daily basis, exclusively
provides supplemental parental care and supervision and/or instruction
to children who are not related to the caregiver or operator, where
tuition, fees or other forms of compensation are charged, whether
governmentally subsidized or not, and which is licensed or approved
to dispense child care by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
whether operated for profit or not for profit.
A.
GROUP DAY CARE — A facility in which care, protection and
supervision is provided for more than six but less than 12 children at
B.
229. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 224-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-8
210:894
DEMOLITION — The dismantling or tearing down, entirely or partially, of a
structure or use.
DEPARTMENT STORE — A retail establishment of 5,000 square feet or
more in gross floor area. [Added 4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
DESIGN HANDBOOK — A document that is intended to guide the design of
a land development and related buildings and structures in the Traditional
Neighborhood Development (TND) Overlay District.[Added 4-11-2005 by
Ord. No. 1247-2005]
DOWNTOWN — The area in the City within the TND Overlay District
comprised of the C-1 and C-2 Zoning Districts.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 1247-2005]
DWELLING — A building designed or used as the living quarters for one or
more families.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or rooms within a building connected together,
constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for one
family only, for owner occupancy or for rental, lease or other occupancy
on a weekly or longer basis, physically separated from any other rooms or
dwelling units and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
DWELLING TYPES —
any one time, where the child-care areas are being used as a family
residence.
FAMILY DAY CARE — A private residence where care, protection and
supervision are provided, for profit or not for profit, at least twice
a week to no more than six children at any one time, including any
children of the adult provider living within the residence.
C.
MULTI- OR MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING (APARTMENTS) — Three
or more dwellings each accommodating one family with one or more
families living wholly or partly over another or other units.
A.
MULTIPLEX DWELLING (OVER AND UNDER DWELLING UNITS) —
An attached single-family dwelling on a lot consisting of first- and
second-floor dwelling units in an over and under arrangement and
forming at least six but not more than 16 total dwelling units.
B.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED (ROWHOUSE or TOWNHOUSE) — Three
but not more than eight dwelling units each accommodating one family,
which are attached side by side through the use of common party walls
and which shall have side yards adjacent to each end unit.
C.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling unit accommodating a
single family and having two side yards.
D.
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED (TWIN) — Two dwelling units each
accommodating one family which are attached through the use of a
party wall.
E.
§ 224-8 TOWING SERVICES § 224-8
210:895
EDUCATIONAL USE — Land and/or buildings specifically designed,
arranged and intended for the primary purpose of instruction and learning,
including preschool, elementary schools and secondary schools owned and
operated by the local school district or other public education authority.
ELEMENT OF SPECIAL CONCERN — A natural feature identified in the
Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory which is of particular interest
because it is exemplary, unique, rare or endangered on a global or statewide
basis. Such elements may include plants, animals, geologic landmarks,
natural communities and other natural features.
FAMILY —
FARMERS MARKET — A retail establishment at which fruits, vegetables,
breads, eggs, milk, cheese, meat, flowers, and the like are sold by persons
who typically grow, harvest, or process such items from their farm or
agricultural operation.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — Any building wherein the primary occupation
or use is concerned with such government regulated businesses as banking,
savings and loans, loan companies, mortgage companies or investment
companies.
FIRST FLOOR/GROUND FLOOR — The place where a building is accessed
at grade, typically constituting the first story. In the C-1 and C-2 Districts in
the City of Coatesville, the first floor/ground floor is typically where patrons
enter a store or shop from the sidewalk frontage.[Added 4-11-2005 by
Ord. No. 1247-2005]
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete flooding from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; or any area subject to the unusual accumulation of surface
waters from any source. For the purpose of this chapter, the "floodplain"
shall include, but is not limited to, the area included in the Floodplain
Conservation Overlay District as defined in Article VIII of this chapter.
FLOODPLAIN SOILS — Areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the
Soil Survey of Chester and Delaware Counties, Pennsylvania, United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, May 1963, as being
on the floodplain or subject to flooding. "Floodplain soils" include, but are
not limited to, the following soil types:
A. A single person occupying a dwelling unit;
Two or more persons related by blood or marriage occupying a dwelling
unit, including not more than one boarder, roomer or lodger;
B.
C. A group home; or
Not more than three unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit, living
together, excluding a rooming/boarding house or group quarters.
D.
A. Chewacla.
B. Wehadkee.
§ 224-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-8
210:896
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building for the storage of one or more
automobiles and/or other vehicles accessory and incidental to the primary
use of the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building where motor vehicles are stored for
compensation or as a community facility.
GOVERNMENT BUILDING/FACILITY — A use, structure or activity carried
out or maintained by any county, commonwealth or federal agency.
GREEN AREA — A plaza, square, courtyard, pocket park, walkway,
promenade, riverwalk, alley, or other outdoor space in which features such
as pavers, benches, gazebos, pergolas, trellises, planters, plantings,
lighting, sculpture, and the like are installed and maintained, and in which
public seating, outdoor dining, and the like take place.[Added 4-11-2005
by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA) — The total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and upper
floors, if any, expressed in square feet.
GROUP HOME — A licensed, community-based living arrangement,
functioning as a single household and providing habilitative services, in
accordance with Chapter 5310, Community Residential Rehabilitative
Services for the Mentally Ill, as defined in the Pennsylvania Code or any
other state or federal program pertaining to housing for developmentally
disabled individuals as regulated by the Federal Fair Housing Amendments
Act. Group homes shall also include alcoholism or drug treatment centers,
provided that those involved in such programs, as a condition of
participation, are not using alcohol or drugs. Group homes shall not include
work-release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts or other housing facilities
serving as an alternative to incarceration. Also included in the definition
of "group homes" shall be any use determined to comply with the
nondiscriminatory requirements of the latest interpretation of the Fair
Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq., by the United States Supreme Court
or other controlling jurisdiction.[Amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
1444-2015]
GROUP QUARTERS — A living arrangement for any group of up to five
individuals that do not meet the definition of "family" but reside together
as a household. This may include a licensed community-based facility which
provides lodging, habilitative services or meals to clients where supervision
is provided seven days a week, 24 hours a day, or is staffed continuously by
the provider whenever the structure is occupied.
HEALTH/RECREATION SPA — A health and recreation facility which may
include uses such as game courts, exercise equipment, locker facilities and
gymnasiums but shall not involve the sale of food and beverages except for
vending machines.[Amended 4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
HISTORIC AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD (HARB) — A Board of
the City that reviews applications for a certificate of appropriateness for
Class I, II and III resources in the Historic Overlay District.
§ 224-8 TOWING SERVICES § 224-8
210:897
HISTORICAL COMMISSION — The Historical Commission of the City of
Coatesville.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — The area within the City of Coatesville which
contains Class I, Class II and Class III historic resources, in accordance with
§ 224-34 of this chapter.
HISTORIC DISTRICT, CITY OF COATESVILLE — The Historic District
placed on the National Register of Historic Places on May 14, 1987,
bounded roughly by Chestnut Street on the north; Sixth Avenue on the
east; and Oak Street between Sixth Avenue and Fifth Avenue, Fifth Avenue
between Oak Street and Harmony Street and Harmony Street between Fifth
Avenue and First Avenue on the south and First Avenue between Maple
Avenue and Chestnut Street on the west.
HISTORIC DISTRICT MAP — A map, adopted as part of this chapter, which
identifies the City of Coatesville Historic District.230
HISTORIC RESOURCE(S) — All structures and uses which are designated
as Class I, Class II or Class III, in accordance with § 224-34 of this chapter.
HISTORIC RESOURCE, CLASS I — Any structure or use on the list of
National Landmarks or the National Register of Historic Places.
HISTORIC RESOURCE, CLASS II — Any structure or use which is within a
historic district listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
HISTORIC RESOURCE, CLASS III — Any structure or use which is not
on the National Register of Historic Places but is determined to be of
significance to the City of Coatesville and appropriately documented to that
effect by the Historical Commission.
HOSPITAL — An accredited general medical facility or institution within
which the diagnosis, treatment and care of human ailments is performed
primarily on an inpatient basis.
HOTEL — An establishment which is open to transient guests and in which
lodging with or without meals is offered for compensation and in which
there are sleeping accommodations for more than 10 individuals.
HYDRIC SOILS — A soil that is saturated, flooded or ponded, long enough
during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions that favor the
growth and regeneration of wetlands vegetation. Wetlands vegetation are
those plant species that have adapted to saturated soils and periodic
inundations occurring in wetlands. "Hydric soils" or soils containing
portions of hydric soils include but are not limited to the following soils, as
classified by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service for Delaware and Chester Counties:
A. Chewacla.
B. Wehadkee.
230. Editor's Note: The Historic District Map is on file and available for inspection in the City
offices and is also include at the end of Ch. 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 224-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-8
210:898
INDOOR COMMERCIAL RECREATION — A use which may involve a health/
recreation spa or may involve indoor tennis, racquetball, handball,
basketball, batting cages and rides and play areas for children. [Added
4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
INDUSTRIAL CENTER — A structure or building which contains two or
more industrial uses that share common facilities, such as parking, signs or
entryways.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A grouping of two or more industrial establishments
in separate buildings, developed according to a single, unified plan,
involving the layout of several lots, buildings, access streets, utilities,
landscaping and other improvements.
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, used for the
storage of used or discarded materials, including but not limited to
wastepaper, rags, metal, building materials, house furnishings, machinery,
vehicles or parts thereof, with or without the dismantling, processing,
salvage, sale or other use or disposition of the same.
LAKES and PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain
water year-round. Artificial "ponds" may be created by dams, or result from
excavation. "Lakes" are bodies of water two or more acres in extent. "Ponds"
are bodies of water less than two acres in extent.
LAKE AND POND SHORELINES — The landside edges of lakes and ponds
from the established shoreline to an upland boundary. "Lake and pond
shorelines" shall be measured 100 feet from the spillway crest elevation.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Includes any of the following activities:
LIFE-CARE FACILITY — A facility for the transitional residency of elderly
and/or disabled persons, progressing from independent living in singlefamily
units to congregate apartment living where residents share common
meals and culminating in a full health and continuing care nursing home
facility.
LINER SHOPS — A small shop, typically less than 600 square feet in gross
floor area, which is in front of or wraps around a larger store or building.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants, by means or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
A subdivision of land as defined in Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land
Development.
B.
§ 224-8 TOWING SERVICES § 224-8
210:899
Liner shops are typically specialty shops, incubator businesses, or small
kiosks that are supplemental to a larger business found beyond the front
line.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
LIVE-WORK UNIT — A shop, studio, office, or other place of business in
combination with a dwelling unit located above such place of business. A
person or persons other than the proprietor of the business may occupy a
live-work unit.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
LOT — A contiguous area of land held or to be held in one ownership
separately described by metes and bounds and not divided by a street, not
including any land within the limits of a street right-of-way upon which said
lot abuts, even if such right-of-way is maintained by the owner of the lot; a
designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise
as permitted by law and recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Chester County by deed description.
MANUAL OF DESIGN GUIDELINES — A document, similar to the Design
Handbook for the TND Overlay District, that applies to the HND, SMD, and
FRD Overlay Districts.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
MASS TRANSIT STATION — An area and supporting structures and
facilities where formal public mass transit opportunities are provided.
LOT AREA — The area enclosed by the property lines of a lot as herein
defined, exclusive of rights-of-way of dedicated streets, fire lanes,
rights-of-way or easements proposed for dedication or public utility
easements other than those directly servicing the lot; provided,
however, that the area of land comprised by any additional road rightsof-
way which the City Council may require shall not be subtracted when
computing a minimum "lot area."
A.
LOT COVERAGE — The ratio of the total building area, plus any
impervious surfaces and pervious surfaces used for parking, to the
gross acreage of that lot.
B.
LOT, MOBILE HOME — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home.
C.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot held in single and separate ownership
which does not conform to one or more of the applicable area
regulations in the district in which it is located.
D.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines at the
building setback line and measured parallel to the street line. Where
the street line is curved or angled, the "lot width" shall be measured as
a straight line. When there is only one side lot line, as in the case of
two-family or single-family attached dwellings, the "lot width" shall be
measured between the side lot line and the center line of the party wall
of the end dwelling unit. In the case of a corner lot, the "lot width" shall
be measured between the side lot line and the front lot line opposite.
E.
§ 224-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-8
210:900
Facilities provided generally include a parking area, a ticket booth or
counter and a loading and unloading area. A "mass transit station" could
involve a bus depot, a train station, a park and ride facility or other similar
transit facilities.
MEDICAL CLINIC — A building and lot for the practice of medical or dental
arts or similar examination and treatment of persons as outpatients by
three or more physicians or licensed medical specialists practicing medicine
as a group during normal office hours. Medical practices with two or
fewer physicians are considered offices. Clinics providing twenty-four-hour
emergency services or overnight lodging of patients shall be considered
hospitals.
MICROWAVE SATELLITE DISH — A roof- or ground-mounted structure
used to receive satellite transmissions and which is greater than 24 inches
in diameter. [Added 4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
MINIMUM BUILDABLE AREA — That area of a lot that has no development
restrictions. The "minimum buildable area" shall not include the area of any
required setbacks (except driveways which cross yards), buffered yards,
natural features with one-hundred-percent protection standards and the
portion of those natural features that may not be developed or intruded
upon as specified in § 224-30, Natural resource protection standards.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support or the removal
or change of any required means of egress or rearrangement of parts of
a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall "minor repairs"
include addition to, alteration of, replacement of or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
MINIWAREHOUSES/PUBLIC WAREHOUSES — Storage units provided for
lease to the public for the purpose of storage of personal property generally
stored in residential structures.
MIXED-USE — A combination of two or more uses in a building on a
lot.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two units, each having
separate and individual sets of axles, designed to be joined into one integral
unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing which arrives at
a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it may be used
without a permanent foundation, i.e., a double-wide "mobile home" not a
modular home.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
§ 224-8 TOWING SERVICES § 224-8
210:901
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile home lots.
MOTEL — A hotel primarily for transients traveling by motor vehicles with
a parking space for each guest facility and access directly from the outside.
MOVIE THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing
of moving pictures on a paid-admission or nonprofit basis.
MUNICIPAL USE — A use, structure or activity carried out or maintained
by the City of Coatesville.
MUSEUM/GALLERY — Any establishment that displays art or artifacts for
public exhibition. Retail sales are limited to accessory use only.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES — A list maintained by the
Secretary of the Interior composed of buildings, sites, structures, objects
and districts of national, state or local significance in American history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture.
NATURAL RESOURCE AREAS — Those areas of land for which disturbance
would contribute significantly to the degradation of environmental
conditions or amenities. Environmentally sensitive areas shall include, but
are not limited to, floodplains, floodplain soils, lakes or ponds, lake or pond
shorelines, Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory sites, steep slopes,
tree protection zones, watercourses, wetlands, wetland margins and
woodlands.
NIGHTCLUB — A commercial establishment dispensing alcoholic or
nonalcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and in which
dancing or other entertainment is provided on a regular basis.[Amended
4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
NONCONFORMING LOT — See "lot."
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign which does not conform to one or more
of the applicable regulations in the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — See "structure."
NONCONFORMING USE — See "use."
OFFICE — A building or portion of a building wherein services are
performed involving predominantly administrative, professional or clerical
operations. Retail services from an "office" are limited to the provision of
medical, legal or social services.
OFFICE CENTER — A structure or building which contains two or more
offices that shares common facilities, such as parking, signs or entryways.
OFFICE PARK — A tract of land designed and developed from a single,
unified plan involving the layout of several lots, buildings, access streets,
landscaping and other improvements typically in a campuslike setting.
§ 224-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-8
210:902
ON-STREET PARKING — Parking that is adjoining the curbline of a street
and that is either parallel to or at an angle from the curbline.[Added
4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
PARKING LOT — An off-street area designed solely for the parking of five or
more vehicles in accordance with Article XIII.
PENNSYLVANIA NATURAL DIVERSITY INVENTORY (PNDI) SITE — A site
listed on the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory (PNDI) due to its
biological resource value. PNDI is a comprehensive computerized inventory
of Pennsylvania's most significant natural areas. The database, which is
maintained by the Department of Environmental Resources, contains the
status and location of plants, animals, geologic landmarks, natural
communities and other natural features which are considered exemplary,
unique, rare or endangered in the state.
PERMITTED (BY-RIGHT) USE — See "use."
PLAYHOUSE — A building or portion of a structure devoted to the
performance of theatrical productions on a paid-admission or nonprofit
basis, excluding motion-picture productions.
PRIMARY FACADE — The facade of a building where the front entrance
door is located. On a corner lot, there shall be two primary facades.[Added
4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
PRINCIPAL USE — See "use."
PRIVATE CLUB — A use related to a social or fraternal organization where
the facilities and services, including restaurant and bar facilities, for the
use of members and guests exclusively.[Amended 4-28-1997 by Ord. No.
1047-97]
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
City Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain public
comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), Act 247, as amended.231
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once a week for two successive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. Such notice shall state the
time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be
considered. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the
second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
PUBLIC STREET OR WAY — Any land dedicated to public use or passage,
including, but not limited to, streets, avenues, boulevards, highways,
sidewalks, alleys, parks or pedestrian rights-of-way, whether constructed,
dedicated or proposed, and which is controlled by a governmental entity.
RAZING — The destruction or tearing down, entirely or partially, of a
structure or use.
231. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 224-8 TOWING SERVICES § 224-8
210:903
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION — Such accommodations that are
necessary to afford persons or groups of persons with disabilities, as defined
by the Fair Housing Act, an equal opportunity to use and enjoy housing.
Accommodations which impose an undue financial or administrative burden
on a local government and create a fundamental alteration in a local
government's zoning scheme shall not constitute "reasonable
accommodation."[Added 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 1444-2015]
REASONABLE MODIFICATION — Such modification of rules or policies as
is necessary to afford persons or groups of persons with disabilities, as
defined by the Fair Housing Act, an equal opportunity to use and enjoy
housing. Modifications which impose an undue financial or administrative
burden on a local government and create a fundamental alteration in a local
government's zoning scheme are not "reasonable modification."[Added
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 1444-2015]
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Outdoor recreation activities which are intensive
in nature, both in terms of participation and in use of the land or facility
where such activities take place. "Active recreation" usually involves a
group or groups of participants and requires some knowledge or skill for
adequate participation.
RECREATION AREA — A place designed and equipped for the conduct
of sports, leisure activities and other customary and usual recreation
activities, excluding facilities which customarily charge a fee for use such as
an indoor commercial recreational facility.[Amended 4-28-1997 by Ord.
No. 1047-97]
RECREATION, INDOOR — Activities which are or can be performed within
a structure and may be either active or passive in nature.
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Outdoor low-intensity activities for individuals
or small groups which are usually performed in natural or seminatural
surroundings. Minimal site preparation and little, if any, structural facilities
are required to accommodate most passive activities.
RECYCLING CENTER — A business that accumulates material, such as
paper, glass, aluminum and plastic that is no longer useful for its intended
purpose. The materials are then used or sold to another business as a raw
material which can be used to manufacture a new product.
REHABILITATION — The process of returning a property to a state of utility
through repair or alteration, which provides for a contemporary use while
preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant
to its historical, architectural and cultural values.
REPAIR — The replacement of existing construction with the same material
for the purpose of maintenance only, but not including any addition, removal
or modification in construction.232
RESTAURANT — A commercial establishment whose principal business is
the selling of unpackaged food ready for consumption by the customer,
232. Editor's Note: The former definition of "residential conversion," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 1350-2011.
§ 224-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-8
210:904
in individual servings or in nondisposable containers, where the customer
consumes these foods while seated at tables or counters within the building.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — A commercial establishment which
delivers prepared food and/or beverages to customers in motor vehicles,
regardless of whether or not it also serves prepared food and/or beverages
to customers who are not in motor vehicles, for consumption on or off the
premises.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A commercial establishment that offers quick
food service, which is accomplished through a limited menu of items
prepared and held for service or prepared quickly or heated exclusively in
a device, such as a microwave oven. Orders are not generally taken at the
customer's table, and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or
containers.
RESTAURANT-SIDEWALK CAFE — An eating and drinking establishment
that is an accessory use located outdoors in the TND Overlay District and
regulated in Article XVIII.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
RESTORATION — The act of bringing a structure or use back to its original
state.
RETAIL CENTER — Two or more retail or service uses located in one
building.
RETAIL COMPLEX — Two or more retail or service uses located in two or
more buildings.
RETAIL SERVICE — A building or portion of a building in which the services
of a person permitted to practice a specific profession are offered to the
general public. Examples of such uses include agents, barbers, beauticians,
cleaners, photographers, appliance repair persons, tailors and caterers.
RETAIL STORE — Any commercial establishment involved with the sale
of commodities or products directly to the customer on the premises,
excluding convenience stores, variety stores and department
stores.[Amended 4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
ROOMING/BOARDING HOUSE — A private dwelling which provides
sleeping accommodations for valuable consideration for four or more
roomers and/or boarders on a weekly or monthly basis, whether or not the
serving of meals is included.
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS FOR REHABILITATION —
Standards used by the Secretary of the Interior, as administered by the
National Park Service, when determining if a rehabilitation project qualifies
as a certified rehabilitation pursuant to the Tax Reform Act of 1986.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof or any
device attached, painted or represented, directly or indirectly, on a
structure or other outdoor surface that shall display or include any letter,
word, insignia, flag or representation used as or which is in the nature
of an advertisement, announcement, visual communication or direction or
which is designed to attract the eye or bring the subject to the attention
§ 224-8 TOWING SERVICES § 224-8
210:905
of the public. (See Article XIV for definitions of individual sign types and
classification.)
SLOPE — The deviation of a surface from the horizontal, expressed as a
percent. "Slope" percent is computed by dividing the vertical distance by
the horizontal distance and, for purposes of this chapter, shall be measured
over three or more two-foot contour intervals (six cumulative vertical feet
of slope).
SOLID WASTE LANDFILL — A land site on which engineering principles are
used to bury deposits of solid waste without creating public health or safety
hazards, nuisances, pollution or environmental degradation.
STEEP SLOPES — Those areas of land where the slope is 15% or greater
and which, because of this slope, are subject to high rates of stormwater
runoff and susceptible to erosion.
STREETSCAPE — The space formed by buildings located close to the street,
which is embellished with sidewalks, street trees, streetlights, curbs, onstreet
parking, and cartways. The streetscape is framed by buildings which
create the "outdoor room" character of a traditional neighborhood. In
Coatesville, the traditional streetscape dimension, from street wall to street
wall, is in the range of 60 to 80 feet in width.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 1247-2005]
STREET WALL — The wall of a building adjoining a sidewalk at the edge
of the street right-of-way; or architectural and landscape architectural
elements such as walls, pillars, colonnades, and street trees in lieu of a
building wall when an existing building is already set back from the street
wall line.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A building subordinate to the principal
building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those
of the principal building.
A.
ANCILLARY ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A noncustomary
supplemental building or structure which, provided that there is
approval of a subdivision plan, may be permitted as an accessory
structure.
B.
CUSTOMARY STRUCTURE — A building commonly used, required or
provided in relation to a specific and established land use.
C.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use provisions in
the zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted,
where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such
ordinance or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment
to its location by reason of annexation.
D.
§ 224-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-8
210:906
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land,
by any means, into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for lot development,
transfer of ownership or building lot development; provided, however, that
the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement or access or
any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
TAVERN — An establishment which primarily serves alcoholic beverages for
on-premises consumption and which is licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor
Control Board, where at least 75% of the total gross receipts is directly from
the sale of such beverages.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — See "structure."
TEMPORARY USE — See "use."
TOWER — Any single- or multipurpose, nonresidential and uninhabitable,
private or commercial structure terminating over 35 feet from the original
grade (height to include any apparatus mounted thereon), whether secured
to another structure or mounted on its own in-ground foundation. "Towers"
or structures specifically designed to receive or transmit satellite television
or other transmissions are included in this definition even if they do not
exceed 35 feet in height.
TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT — A form of land
development in accordance with Article XVIII.[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 1247-2005]
TRANSFER STATION — A facility where municipal solid waste is delivered
for the purpose of compacting the material into larger vehicles for transport
to a final disposal site or processing facility.
TREE DRIPLINE — The line marking the outer edges of the branches of the
tree.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE — An area that is radial to the trunk of a tree in
which no construction activity shall occur. The "tree protection zone" shall
be 15 feet from the trunk of the tree to be retained or the distance from
the trunk to the dripline, whichever is greater. Where there is a group of
trees or woodlands, the "tree protection zone" shall be the aggregate of the
protection zones for the individual trees.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure without any foundation or
footings and which is removed when the designated time period,
activity or use for which the temporary structure was erected has
ceased.
E.
MAJOR — A major subdivision shall be as defined in § 197-10 of Chapter
197, Subdivision and Land Development.
A.
MINOR — A minor subdivision shall be as defined in § 197-10 of
Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
B.
§ 224-8 TOWING SERVICES § 224-8
210:907
UNDERTAKER/MORTUARY — A building or part thereof used exclusively
for human burial services. Such building may contain space and facilities
for embalming and the performance of other services used in preparation
of the dead for burial, the performance of autopsies and other surgical
procedures, the storage of caskets, funeral urns and other related funeral
supplies and the storage of funeral vehicles but shall not include facilities
for cremation.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is proposed
to be subdivided and/or developed or is otherwise designed, arranged,
intended or for which it is proposed or may be occupied, maintained, or
converted.[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
ACCESSORY USE — A use conducted on the same lot as and
subordinate to a principal permitted use to which it is related and
which is located either within the same structure(s) or in an accessory
building or structure; a use which is clearly incidental to and
customarily found in connection with a particular principal permitted
use.
A.
B. ADAPTIVE REUSE — See "adaptive reuse."
ANCILLARY ACCESSORY USE — A noncustomary supplemental use
which, provided that there is approval of a subdivision plan, may be
permitted as an accessory use.
C.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which may not be appropriate to a
particular zoning district as a whole, but which may be suitable on
certain lots only when specific standards and criteria are met. The
applicant shall have the burden of proving the standards and criteria
can be met. Conditional uses are allowed or denied by the City Council
after recommendations by the Planning Commission in accordance with
§ 224-79B(3).
D.
CUSTOMARY USE — A use typically or commonly associated with the
function of a specific and established land use.
E.
F. MIXED-USE — See "mixed-use."
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in the Zoning
Ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance
or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation.
G.
PERMITTED (BY-RIGHT) USE — A use generally judged to be most
compatible within a particular zoning district as a whole.
H.
I. PRINCIPAL USE — The dominant use or main use on a lot.
§ 224-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-8
210:908
VARIETY STORE — A retail establishment of less than 5,000 square feet
in gross floor area in which dry goods are sold, as would be the case in
what traditionally has been or is known as a general store or five and dime
store.[Added 4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
VETERINARY/ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A medical facility specializing in the
treatment of injury and disease afflicting animals, especially domestic
animals and household pets.
WAGERING AND GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial use which
provides facilities or at which persons assemble for the purpose of any
activity which involves lawful gambling or wagering, including, without
limitation, those facilities and activities for par-mutual wagering or
thoroughbred and/or harness horse races remote from the Race Horse
Industry Reform Act, the Act of December 17, 1981, P.L. 435, as it shall be
from time to time amended, 4 P.S. § 325.101 et seq. Gambling and wagering
shall include any activity, game or device at which money or other valuable
things may be played for or staked or betted upon and in which, by the
rules of the activity, game or device, a consideration is paid by the player or
participant and a reward is paid to players or participants as a consequence
of some element of chance. A commercial use otherwise permitted shall not
constitute a gambling or wagering use solely on account of the installation
of facilities and devices pursuant to the State Lottery, the Act of August 26,
1971, P.L. 351, as amended, 72 P.S. § 3761-1 et seq.
WATERCOURSE — A stream, such as a creek, run or other body of running
water; any stream in which water flows in a definite direction or course,
either continuously or intermittently.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface
or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and
that, under normal circumstances, do support a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas, such areas being regulated by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers and/or the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.[Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
WETLANDS MARGIN — The transitional area extending from the outer
limit of the wetland. For the purposes of this chapter, the "wetlands margin"
shall extend 100 feet from the wetland boundary or to the limit of the hydric
soils, whichever is less. The limit of the hydric soils shall be as defined in
this chapter unless reclassified by a certified soil scientist.
WOODLANDS — One-fourth acre or more of contiguous wooded land where
the largest trees measure at least six inches diameter at 4 1/2 feet above the
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USE — A use of potentially greater impact than
a by-right use and requiring the review and approval of the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with Article XVI.
J.
TEMPORARY USE — A use established for a fixed period of time with
the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time
period.
K.
§ 224-8 TOWING SERVICES § 224-8
210:909
average grade at the base of the tree. The "woodland" shall be measured
from the dripline of the outer trees. "Woodlands" are also a grove of trees
forming one canopy where 10 or more trees measure at least six inches at 4
1/2 feet above the average grade at the base of the tree.
YARD — The unobstructed open space around a building or structure on the
same lot.
ZONING — The designation of specified districts within a community or
township, reserving them for certain uses, together with limitations on lot
size, heights of structures and other stipulated requirements.
ZONING PERMIT — A permit stating that the purpose for which a building
or land is to be used is in conformity with the uses permitted and all other
requirements under this chapter for the zone in which it is located or is to
be located.
ZONING OFFICER — The duly constituted municipal official designated to
administer and enforce this chapter in accordance with its literal terms.
YARD, FRONT — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with
a building or structure, extending the full width of the building or
structure projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the "front
yard" shall be measured from the street right-of-way line to the nearest
portion of the building or structure; the required setback line from a
street right-of-way or street center line.
A.
YARD, REAR — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building or structure, extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building or
structure projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the "rear
yard" shall be measured from the rear lot line to the nearest portion of
the building or structure. A building or structure shall not extend into
the required "rear yard."
B.
YARD, SIDE — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the
building or structures situated from the nearest portion of the building
or structure to the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard
to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be
deemed a side line. A building or structure shall not extend into the
required "side yards."
C.
§ 224-8 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-8
210:910
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Districts
§ 224-9. Classes of districts.
A. Base districts.
(1) For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Coatesville is hereby
divided into the following classes of districts:
RN Residential neighborhood
districts (RN-1, RN-2, RN-3,
RN-4, RN-5)
(§ 224-15)
RC Residential Conservation
District
(§ 224-16)
PS Public Service District (§ 224-17)
POS Public Open Space District (§ 224-18)
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial
District
(§ 224-19)
C-2 Central Business District (§ 224-20)
C-3 Highway Commercial
District
(§ 224-21)
I-1 Light Industry District (§ 224-22)
I-2 Heavy Industry District (§ 224-23)
(2) The boundaries of such districts shall be as shown on the map
attached hereto and made part of this chapter, and which shall be
known as the "Zoning Map of the City of Coatesville." Said map and
all notations, references and other data shown thereon shall be as
much a part of this chapter as if all were fully described herein.
B. Overlay districts.
(1) In addition to the above base districts, the following overlay
districts shall be established:
FC Floodplain Conservation
Overlay District
(Article VIII)
NRP Natural Resource
Protection Overlay District
(Article IX)
HR Historic Resources Overlay
District
(Article X)
MU Mixed Use Development
Overlay District
(Article XXIII)
(2) The overlay districts are defined by physical conditions of the site.
§ 224-9 TOWING SERVICES § 224-9
210:911
§ 224-10. District boundaries.
The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, the
center lines of streets, lanes or watercourses, property lines or the rightsof-
way of power lines or other public utilities or such lines extended or
lines parallel thereto. Where the boundaries of a single district are indicated
as including directly opposite sides of a street, lane, lake or watercourse
or right-of-way of a power line or other public utility or any portion of its
length, the district so indicated shall be construed to apply to the entire bed
of such street, lane, lake or watercourse or right-of-way of such power line,
railroad or other public utility lying within such portion of its length. Where
uncertainty exists as to the location of any said boundaries as shown on the
Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(3) In addition to the above-cited overlay districts, the following
additional overlay districts shall be established: [Added
4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
TND Traditional Neighborhood
Development Overlay
District
(Article XVIII)
HND Hilltop Neighborhood
Development Overlay
District
(Article XIX)
SMD Steel Museum District
Overlay District
(Article XX)
SPD Specially Planned District
(SPD) Overlay District
(Article XXI)
FRD Flats Redevelopment
District (FRD) Overlay
District
(Article XXII)
(4) The TND, HND, SMD, SPD, and FRD Overlay Districts are as shown
on the Zoning Overlay District Map, Exhibit A, dated January 11,
2005. The TND Overlay District pertains to Article VII-A of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), and the HND,
SMD, SPD, and FRD Districts pertain to Section 605 of the MPC.
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
A. Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following the
center lines of a street, lane, lake or public utility right-of-way, such
center line shall be construed to be such boundary.
B. Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following a lot
or other property line, such lot or property line shall be construed to be
such boundary.
C. Where a district boundary divides a lot or runs through undivided
property, the location of such boundary, unless otherwise specified by
§ 224-9 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-10
210:912
§ 224-11. Application of overlay districts.
Overlay districts, defined in § 224-9B, shall be considered supplements to
the underlying base zoning districts shown on the Zoning Map of the City of
Coatesville.
the Zoning Map, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing
on said Map.
D. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a street and a
district boundary, they shall indicate that the district boundary runs
parallel to the street line at a distance equivalent to the number of feet
so indicated, unless otherwise specified. Where scaled distances do not
agree with such figures, the figures shall control.
E. Boundary interpretation and appeals procedure.
(1) Where the exact location of a boundary in relation to a given parcel
is in question, an applicant may, as they deem pertinent, submit
documentation of such to the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer
shall evaluate all such material and shall make a written report to
the applicant on the results of his determination, a copy of which
shall be provided to City Council.
(2) Any party aggrieved by any such determination of the Zoning
Officer may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. The party
contesting the location of the district boundary shall have the
burden of proof in the case of any such appeal.
A. Purpose. Floodplain Conservation (FC), Steep Slope (SS) and Historic
Resources (HR) Overlay Districts have been established to help protect
the health, safety and welfare of the City of Coatesville as well as the
environmental and cultural features of the community. The TND, HND,
SMD, SPD, and FRD Districts have been established to promote
neighborhood and special overlay districts in keeping with the City of
Coatesville revitalization plans. [Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No.
1247-2005]
B. Application of overlay districts.
(1) The districts described in Subsection A above shall overlay the base
zoning districts. The provisions of the overlay districts, set forth in
this article, shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district
provisions, unless otherwise provided in Articles XVIII to XXII.
[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
(2) Where there is any conflict between the provisions of an overlay
district and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive
provision shall apply except as provided otherwise by this chapter
for the MU Overlay District. [Amended 6-13-2016 by Ord. No.
1476-2016]
§ 224-10 TOWING SERVICES § 224-11
210:913
C. Zoning Map. Boundaries of the overlay districts are defined by the
physical conditions of the site. The extent of the boundaries for each
overlay district is described in the applicable section of this chapter.
The TND, HND, SMD, SPD, and FRD Districts are as shown on the
Zoning Overlay Districts Map, Exhibit A, dated January 11, 2005.
[Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
D. District boundary changes.
(1) Any identified boundaries of an overlay district may be revised or
modified by the City Council where studies or information provided
by a qualified agency or person document the need for such
revision. Prior to any such change to the Floodplain Conservation
Overlay District (FC); however, approval must be obtained from the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Should the boundaries of an overlay district be revised as a result
of legislative, administrative actions or judicial decisions, the
zoning requirements applicable to the area in question shall revert
to the expanded provisions, as amended, or revert to the
requirements of the underlying district, if applicable.
E. Interpretation of overlay district boundaries. Initial interpretation of
the boundaries of the overlay districts shall be made by the Zoning
Officer. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the
districts, the Zoning Hearing Board shall make the necessary
determination. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 224-11 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-11
210:914
ARTICLE IV
Residential Districts
§ 224-12. Residential neighborhood (RN) districts.
A. Purpose. Provisions for the residential neighborhood districts have
been enacted to:
(1) Protect existing neighborhood character and allow development of
residential land uses in various neighborhood settings.
(2) Designate sufficient undeveloped areas where a variety of housing
types are permitted and ensure that the City meets its fair-share
multifamily housing obligations.
(3) Provide opportunities for complementary nonresidential land uses
within residential neighborhoods.
(4) Further the community development objectives of the City of
Coatesville Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
B. Description of residential neighborhood districts.
(1) RN-1 Residential Neighborhood District. The RN-1 District includes
existing neighborhoods dominated by single-family detached
dwellings on relatively large lots. Provisions of this district
reinforce the detached dwelling character of these neighborhoods
while allowing for single-family semidetached dwellings and
certain civic uses under defined guidelines. The controls of this
district correspond to the conditions and criteria of Planning
Districts Nos. 1 and 9 from the City of Coatesville Comprehensive
Plan.
(2) RN-2 Residential Neighborhood District. The RN-2 District covers
existing neighborhoods that contain a mix of semidetached and
detached dwellings. Lot sizes are smaller than are found in the
RN-1 District. Provisions of this district reflect the presence of
single-family detached and semidetached dwellings that
characterize these neighborhoods and their smaller lot sizes.
Certain civic uses are also permitted under defined guidelines. The
provisions of this district correspond to the conditions and criteria
of Planning Districts Nos. 7 and 9 from the City of Coatesville
Comprehensive Plan.
(3) RN-3 Residential Neighborhood District. The RN-3 District includes
residential neighborhoods containing mostly single-family
semidetached dwellings with some detached dwellings. Lot sizes
for the dwellings are smaller than those found in the RN-1 or RN-2
District. The controls of this district are designed to maintain the
residential character of these neighborhoods on smaller lots.
Certain civic uses are also permitted under defined guidelines. The
provisions of this district correspond to the conditions and criteria
§ 224-12 TOWING SERVICES § 224-12
210:915
of Planning District No. 7 from the City of Coatesville
Comprehensive Plan.
(4) RN-4 Residential Neighborhood District. The RN-4 District includes
the neighborhoods that contain a mix of dwelling types, including
single-family detached, semidetached (twins) and attached
(rowhouse). These neighborhoods also contain multifamily
dwellings consisting of residential conversions and apartment
buildings. Provisions of this district are designed to provide for a
variety of housing types while maintaining the existing character of
the neighborhoods. Certain nonresidential uses are also permitted
under defined guidelines. The provisions of this district correspond
to the criteria for Planning Districts Nos. 2, 6, 8, 12 and 20 from the
City of Coatesville Comprehensive Plan.
(5) RN-5 Residential Neighborhood District. The RN-5 District
primarily consists of undeveloped parcels in the northwest section
of the City where future residential development is deemed
appropriate. Provisions of the district allow for new construction of
a variety of housing types, including single-family detached,
semidetached (twins), attached (rowhouses), multiplex units and
multifamily dwellings in the form of apartments. The provisions of
this district are consistent with the court-ordered settlement
agreement dated April 7, 1992, and with the previous provisions of
the R-6 District which implemented that settlement agreement.
C. Uses permitted in residential neighborhood districts. A building or lot
may be used for any of the principal uses and associated accessory uses
listed in the Table of Residential Neighborhood Districts Uses233 and no
others. The uses are permitted under three processes: by right (BR), by
special exception (SE) or by conditional use (CU) according to the
following requirements:
(1) Uses permitted by right. Uses permitted by right include any one of
the uses listed as by right (BR) in the Table of Residential
Neighborhood Districts Uses.234 Uses permitted by right are
subject to supplemental use regulations, where applicable, in
addition to other provisions of this chapter. Proposals are limited to
one principal use and any associated accessory uses and structures
as permitted by § 224-59, Accessory uses and structures.
(a) Group homes shall be permitted in detached and semidetached
buildings in all RN Zoning Districts, i.e., RN-1 — RN-5, and
including RC. [Added 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 1090-98;
amended 8-14-2000; 2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 1444-2015]
(2) Uses permitted by special exception. Permitted special exception
uses include any listed by (SE) in the Table of Residential
233. Editor's Note: The table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
234. Editor's Note: The table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 224-12 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-12
210:916
Neighborhood Districts Uses.235 Uses permitted by special
exception are subject to supplemental use regulations, if so
designated, and are required to obtain special exception approval
according to Article XVI and other provisions of this chapter. Any
combination of the permitted uses (BR or SE) will be permitted
according to the provisions of § 224-62, Unified land development
process.
(3) Uses permitted by conditional use. Permitted conditional uses
include any listed by (CU) in the Table of Residential Neighborhood
Districts Uses.236 Uses permitted by conditional use are subject to
supplemental use regulations, if so designated and are required to
obtain a conditional use permit according to § 224-79B(3) and
other provisions of this chapter. Any combination of the permitted
uses (BR, SE or CU) will be permitted according to the provisions of
§ 224-62, Unified land development process.
(4) Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures are
permitted in the RN Districts in accordance with the provisions of
§ 224-59, Accessory uses and structures.
D. Lot area, bulk and coverage requirements for the RN-1, RN-2, RN-3 and
RN-4 Districts.
(1) Residential uses. The Table of Residential Neighborhood District
Lot Area, Bulk and Coverage Requirements237 contains the lot area,
bulk and coverage requirements for all residential uses in the
residential neighborhood districts. The maximum permitted density
for multifamily developments in the RN-4 Residential
Neighborhood District shall be 24 units per acre.
(2) Nonresidential or institutional uses.
(a) Lot area and coverage requirements for nonresidential or
institutional structures and uses permitted within the
residential neighborhood districts shall meet the standards set
forth in Article XII, Supplemental Use Regulations. Permitted
nonresidential uses and structures in the RN Districts shall
maintain the same yard area requirements as single-family
detached dwellings in the same district. Building height is
limited to 36 feet in the RN Districts unless specifically
exempted by provisions in § 224-48D or Article XII.
(b) Additionally, permitted commercial uses in the RN-4 or RN-5
District shall be located no closer than 500 feet to another
commercial use in the RN-4 or RN-5 District. This separationdistance
requirement shall not apply to commercial uses in the
RN-4 or RN-5 District if such use is located on a state route or
235. Editor's Note: The table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
236. Editor's Note: The table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
237. Editor's Note: This table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 224-12 TOWING SERVICES § 224-12
210:917
highway and shall not apply to group homes or any housing
condition protected by the Fair Housing Act and its
amendments. [Amended 9-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1085-98;
2-23-2015 by Ord. No. 1444-2015]
E. Special provisions applicable to the RN-5 District.
(1) Permitted uses. A building or lot may be used for any of the
principal uses and associated accessory uses listed in the Table of
Residential Neighborhood District Uses and no others.
(2) Residential lot area, bulk and coverage requirements.
(a) Lot area and width.
[1] Every lot for a single-family detached building or dwelling
shall have an area of not less than 1,800 square feet, and
such lot shall be not less than 18 feet in width at the
building and curbline.
[2] Every lot for a single-family semidetached (twin) building
or dwelling shall have an area of not less than 3,600
square feet [one thousand eight hundred (1,800 square
feet per unit) and any such lot shall be not less than 36 feet
in width (18 feet per unit) at the building and curbline.
[3] For a single-family attached dwelling (rowhouse) which is
not on a conventional lot but is to be a condominium or
rental unit, the building footprint shall be at least 900
square feet on the first floor and at least 1,800 square feet
in total. The building width shall be at least 18 feet. When
a single-family attached unit is proposed on a fee-simple
lot, the minimum lot size shall be 1,800 square feet and
have a minimum lot width of 18 feet at the building and
curbline.
[4] For a multiplex (with over and under units), which is not on
a conventional lot but is to be a condominium or rental
unit, each unit shall be at least 900 square feet in area.
The building width shall be at least 18 feet.
[5] The tract for multifamily development (apartments) shall
be at least 10 acres in size.
(b) Building coverage.
[1] Not more than 40% of the area of the lot for single-family
detached or single-family semidetached (twin) buildings or
dwellings may be occupied by such buildings or dwellings.
[2] For building coverage for a single-family attached
(rowhouse) or a multiplex (with over and under units),
which is to be conveyed as a footprint deed, the dwelling
§ 224-12 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-12
210:918
unit may occupy 100% of the footprint area of the building.
When proposed on a fee-simple lot, the building coverage
of a single-family attached (rowhouse) shall not exceed
40% of the lot.
[3] The building coverage for multifamily development
(apartments) shall not be greater than 40% of the total
tract area.
(c) Building height. No building shall exceed 40 feet in height
unless the owner-occupant has petitioned the Zoning Hearing
Board for a special exception and said special exception has
been granted after consultation with the Fire Marshal.
(d) Front yard. [Amended 9-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1085-98]
[1] There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot for
a single-family detached or single-family semidetached
(twin) building or dwelling abuts, which shall be not less
than 10 feet in depth nor more than 18 feet in depth.
[2] In the case of a single-family attached (rowhouse) or a
multiplex (with over and under units), the facade of any
such building shall be no closer than 10 feet to any street
or common parking area nor more than 18 feet in depth.
(e) Rear yards.
[1] There shall be a rear yard on each lot for single-family
detached or single-family semidetached (twin) buildings or
dwellings, which shall be not less than 30 feet in depth. A
private garage is permitted with a rear yard depth of not
less than 10 feet.
[2] In the case of a single-family attached (rowhouse) unit or a
multiplex (with over and under units), no building wall
shall be closer than 10 feet to any street or parking area.
(f) The regulations applicable to front and rear yards shall also
apply to private garages and accessory buildings, except as
otherwise noted above.
(g) Building-separation distances for single-family attached
(rowhouses) and multiplexes (with over and under units).
[1] No such buildings shall be closer to each other than 30
feet when such buildings are positioned back to back.
[2] When such buildings are positioned side to side, the
building-separation distance shall be at least 25 feet.
§ 224-12 TOWING SERVICES § 224-12
210:919
(h) Gross density. The maximum gross density for any
development in the RN-5 District shall be 14 dwelling units per
acre.
(i) Minimum open space. The minimum open space for any
development in the RN-5 District shall be 1/3 (33 1/3%) of the
total tract area.
(j) Perimeter setback. In the case of an apartment building,
single-family attached (rowhouse) or multiplex (with over and
under units), no building shall be placed closer than 30 feet to
any perimeter property lines.
(k) Commercial development. Retail store and/or retail service
uses shall be developed, provided that: [Added 9-28-1998 by
Ord. No. 1085-98]
[1] At least 100 dwelling units are built to support such use.
[2] All lots, bulk and coverage requirements for residential
development shall apply.
[3] At least 1% and no more than 2% of the net tract area shall
be devoted to retail store and /or service uses, such as
corner store, convenience store and delicatessen. Such
uses shall be open on a year-round basis for at least eight
hours per day.
(3) Special development standards and criteria.
(a) The following provisions shall apply only to the RN-5 District.
When conflicting with other provisions of this chapter, the
provisions of this section shall take precedence.
[1] The proposed use shall not adversely affect neighboring
properties relative to vehicular traffic, stormwater runoff,
sedimentation, soil erosion, noise, dust, vibration or
lighting.
[2] Existing perimeter trees and vegetation shall be
preserved, except for necessary streets and accessways
which provide ingress or egress to the site. At least 25 feet
of the existing vegetation along the perimeter of a
property shall be preserved.
[3] The proposed use shall be screened and buffered at the
property line whenever it adjoins existing residential
buildings or lands zoned for residential use. A landscape
plan, consistent with the requirements of § 197-50 of
Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development, shall be
submitted, which shall depict proposed evergreen and
deciduous plantings in any area where existing trees
within 25 feet of the perimeter property lines are not
§ 224-12 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-12
210:920
proposed to be preserved (except in areas of proposed
streets or accessways which provide ingress or egress to
the site). Such areas shall meet the buffering requirements
of § 224-51 of this chapter.
[4] The proposed buildings, parking areas, walks and
recreational areas shall be landscaped with trees and
shrubs. A landscape plan consistent with the requirements
of § 197-50 of Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall be submitted to indicate proposed
plantings.
[5] Grading shall be minimized. A grading plan depicting
existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals shall
be submitted. In order to minimize grading in areas of
existing woodland or trees, the applicant shall use
retaining walls, tree wells or tree walls to preserve
existing vegetation to the maximum extent possible. The
proposed development shall be consistent with the
requirements for stormwater management and soil
erosion and sedimentation control of Chapter 197,
Subdivision and Land Development.
[6] Recreational facilities and amenities shall be provided in
the form of such features as tot lots, playgrounds,
playfields, pedestrian pathways and tennis courts. These
shall be in accordance with the Coatesville Open Space,
Recreation and Environmental Resources Plan, dated
December 13, 1993. Recreational-facility plans shall be
submitted to depict the specific types of facilities
proposed. A plan shall be submitted to depict the location
of the required open space of 1/3 (33 1/3%).
[7] The architectural design of the proposed residential
development shall be in harmony with residential
dwellings on surrounding/neighboring properties in the
City. The traditional design of buildings shall emulate
those existing in the City with front porches and rear yard
garages accessible from the alley. Architectural plans and
elevations, prepared by the architect, shall be submitted.
[Amended 9-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1085-98]
[8] All parking areas, parking lots, pathways and walkways
shall be adequately illuminated, and all lighting shall be
shielded from adjoining properties. A lighting plan shall be
submitted.
[9] Private streets; off-street parking. [Amended 9-28-1998
by Ord. No. 1085-98]
§ 224-12 TOWING SERVICES § 224-12
210:921
[a] All proposed private streets shall have a minimum
cartway width and a minimum right-of-way width as
follows:
[b] For streets with no on-street parking, the minimum
width shall be 22 feet.
[c] For streets with two travel lanes and one on-street
parking lane, the minimum width shall be 30 feet.
[d] For streets with two travel lanes and on-street parking
on both sides, the minimum width shall be 38 feet.
[e] All off-street parking spaces shall be a minimum of
nine by 18 feet in size.
[10] All plans submitted, as required above, shall evidence a
minimum-site-impact approach to the development by
minimizing the proposed grading and tree removal. All
potential adverse impacts shall be mitigated, and all
proposed mitigation measures shall be depicted on the
proposed plans. Tree removal shall be considered as an
example of an adverse impact, and replacement trees shall
be installed to offset the impact of tree removal.
[11] All proposed engineering, grading, landscape,
recreational and architectural plans and proposals shall be
sealed by the registered/certified design professionals who
prepared the plans.
[12] All engineering, grading, landscape, recreational and
architectural plans and proposals shall be presented by
the respective applicable design professionals at the
preliminary and final plan approval meetings.
[13]No more than 20% of all dwellings shall be accessed from
driveways which have a curb cut along the frontage street,
in which case all garages shall be located in the side yard
or in the rear yard. Whenever the garage is located in the
side yard, it shall be set back at least 18 feet from the
facade of the building toward the rear yard. At least 80% of
the total number of dwellings shall be assessed from rear
alleys. [Added 9-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1085-98]
(b) The following procedures shall apply only to proposals in the
RN-5 District:
[1] It shall be the applicant's burden to persuade City Council
by plans, documents and other submissions that the
proposed use, when located on the property at issue,
having all the characteristics as proposed and when
considering the present (or proposed) development and
§ 224-12 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-12
210:922
§ 224-13. Residential Conservation (RC) District.
use of neighboring lands and the particular characteristics
of the supporting public infrastructure, will not cause
negative impacts of a type or to a degree greater than
that which could result from other uses permitted in the
district.
[2] The applicant shall submit a report, supplemented by
plans, diagrams and other exhibits, to demonstrate
compliance with Subsection E(3)(a) and (b)[1] above.
(4) Nonresidential or institutional lot area, bulk and coverage
requirements in the RN-5 District. Lot area and coverage
requirements for nonresidential or institutional structures and uses
permitted in the RN-5 District shall meet the standards set forth in
Article XII, Supplemental Use Regulations. Such uses shall
maintain the same yard area requirements as required for a singlefamily
detached dwelling in the RN-5 District. Building height is
limited to 36 feet in the RN-5 District unless specifically exempted
by provisions in § 224-48D or Article XII.
A. Purpose. Provisions for the Residential Conservation District have been
enacted to:
(1) Provide opportunities for development of residential land uses in
various neighborhood settings.
(2) Promote lot configurations that are responsive to the
characteristics of the site enabling new development to occur
without undue negative impacts to the landscape.
(3) Enable the City to pursue goals identified in the Open Space,
Recreation and Environmental Resources Plan, such as protecting
distinctive site resources, without interfering with the property
rights of private landowners.
(4) Retain meaningful open space in the City to improve land use
design, to protect local resources and to provide for various
recreational or leisure activities.
(5) Further the community development objectives of the City of
Coatesville Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
B. Description of the Residential Conservation District. The Residential
Conservation (RC) District includes large remaining portions of the City
which remain undeveloped or are sparsely developed and contain areas
defined as sensitive natural features in adopted plans. The district also
includes areas of Coatesville which contain residential neighborhoods
or structures on tracts or lots with sensitive natural features. The
controls of this district correspond to the conditions and criteria for
Planning District Nos 3, 4, 8, 13, 14, 20 and 26.
§ 224-12 TOWING SERVICES § 224-13
210:923
C. Uses permitted in the Residential Conservation District. A building or
lot may be used for any of the principal uses and associated accessory
uses described below and no others. The uses are permitted under
three processes: by right, by special exception or by conditional use
according to the following requirements:
(1) Uses permitted by right. Uses permitted by right include any one of
the following, subject to the supplemental use regulations of Article
XII, if so designated. Proposals are limited to one principal use and
any associated accessory uses and structures.
(a) Single-family detached dwellings in accordance with the
provisions for conventional lot design requirements of
Subsection D(1)(a).
(b) Group home.
(c) Government building/facility.
(d) Passive recreation.
(e) Active recreation.
(f) Cemetery.
(g) Agriculture and horticulture.
(h) Residential conversion (two or less units). (Refer to § 224-61A.)
(2) Uses permitted by special exception. The following uses are
permitted by special exception subject to the supplemental use
regulations of Article XII, if so designated, and are required to
obtain special exception approval according to Article XVI. Any
combination of uses permitted by right or special exception is
permissible in accordance with the provisions of § 224-62, Unified
land development process.
(a) Single-family detached dwellings in accordance with the
provisions for cluster lot design requirements of Subsection
D(1)(b).
(b) Church/religious.
(c) Residential conversion (three or more units). (Refer to
§ 224-61A.)
(d) Community utility. [Refer to § 224-60B(8).]
(e) Life-care facility. [Refer to § 224-60B(5).]
(f) Campground.
(3) Uses permitted by conditional use. The following uses are
permitted by conditional use subject to the supplemental use
§ 224-13 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-13
210:924
regulations of Article XII, if so designated, and are required to
obtain conditional use approval according to § 224-79B(3).
(a) Radio, television or microwave transmitter. [Refer to
§ 224-60B(9).]
(4) Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures are
permitted in the RC District in accordance with the provisions of
§ 224-59, Accessory uses and structures.
D. Lot area and coverage requirements. Lot area and coverage
requirements of not less than the dimensions stated shall be provided
for each dwelling unit and/or nonresidential building or use thereafter
erected, established or altered in this district.
(1) Residential uses and structures.
(a) Conventional lot design in accordance with the lot area
requirements of the Table of Residential Conservation District
Lot Area, Bulk and Coverage Requirements.238
(b) Cluster lot design in accordance with the lot area requirements
of the Table of Residential Conservation District Lot Area, Bulk
and Coverage Requirements239 and the following
requirements:
[1] Land within the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District
or Natural Resource Protection Overlay District cannot be
used to satisfy the minimum lot area requirements and
may not comprise more than 10% of any residential lot
using the cluster lot design option.
[2] Required open space shall be designed in accordance with
§ 224-54, Open space.
[3] The tract of land for which the cluster design option is
proposed shall be at least two acres and held in single and
separate ownership; or, in the case of multiple ownership,
the tract shall be developed according to a single plan with
common authority and common responsibility.
[4] A cluster development shall be designed to reduce
disturbance to water, land, biotic and scenic resources on
the site identified in the City Open Space, Recreation and
Environmental Resources Plan (see Map 2 in the Plan240)
to the greatest extent possible.
[5] No more than eight contiguous lots or dwelling units shall
be located within a single cluster. Such clusters of lots or
238. Editor's Note: This table is included at the end of this chapter.
239. Editor's Note: This table is included at the end of this chapter.
240. Editor's Note: This map is on file in the City offices.
§ 224-13 TOWING SERVICES § 224-13
210:925
dwelling units shall be defined and separated by common
open space in order to allow direct access to open space
and to provide privacy to individual yards. The Zoning
Hearing Board may approve a change in the number of
lots or dwelling units permitted within a single cluster,
where such a change will better assure the protection of
important visual attributes and environmentally sensitive
areas. The applicant shall have the burden of
demonstrating how the protection of these features will
contribute to satisfactory screening and buffering between
clusters.
[6] Any cluster lot yard area that is at the perimeter of the
tract shall use the yard area setbacks of adjacent existing
dwellings if they are greater than minimum requirements.
(2) Nonresidential and institutional uses and structures. Lot area and
coverage requirements for nonresidential and institutional
structures and uses permitted within the Residential Conservation
District shall meet the following standards:
(a) Agriculture, horticulture or campground uses must maintain a
minimum lot size of five acres. Bulk and coverage
requirements for single-family detached dwellings in the RC
District shall be maintained for any structures associated with
these uses.
(b) Lot area and coverage requirements for other nonresidential
and institutional uses in the RC District are contained in Article
XII, Supplemental Use Regulations.
E. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the RC District shall
maintain the front yard requirements specified by use in the
Table of Residential Conservation District Lot Area, Bulk and
Coverage Requirements.241
(b) Nonresidential uses and structures are required to provide a
front yard of 20 feet.
(2) Side yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the RC District shall
maintain the side yard requirements specified by use in the
Table of Residential Conservation District Lot Area, Bulk and
Coverage Requirements.242
241. Editor's Note: This table is included at the end of this chapter.
242. Editor's Note: This table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 224-13 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-13
210:926
(b) Nonresidential uses or structures shall maintain two side yards
which shall not be less than 15 feet.
(3) Rear yard.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the RC District shall
maintain the rear yard requirements of the RN-4 District
specified by use in the Table of Residential Neighborhood
District Lot Area, Bulk and Coverage Requirements.243
(b) Nonresidential uses or structures in the RC District shall
maintain a rear yard of 40 feet in depth.
F. Building height. Structures in the RC District cannot exceed the height
limitations of the Table of Residential Conservation District Lot Area,
Bulk and Coverage Requirements,244 unless specifically exempted by
provisions in § 224-48D or Article XII. Nonresidential uses and
structures in the RC District cannot exceed 36 feet in height.
243. Editor's Note: This table is included at the end of this chapter.
244. Editor's Note: This table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 224-13 TOWING SERVICES § 224-13
210:927

ARTICLE V
Institutional Districts
§ 224-14. Public Service (PS) District. [Amended 4-28-1997 by Ord.
No. 1047-97]
A. Purpose. The Public Service (PS) District has been established to:
(1) Locate institutional and community facilities where they are
accessible to residents and central businesses.
(2) Create a focal point for community interaction and activities.
(3) Provide a transition between the structures and uses in the central
business area and the residential neighborhoods.
(4) Provide additional opportunities for limited office uses and retail
activity outside of the commercial districts.
B. Permitted uses and structures.
(1) Uses permitted by right. The following uses and structures are
permitted by right within this district, subject to the supplemental
use regulations of Article XII, if applicable:
(a) All uses permitted in the RN-4 District.
(b) Government building/facility.
(c) Hotel.
(d) Museum/gallery.
(e) Restaurant.
(f) Financial institution. [Refer to § 224-60C(4).]
(g) Office center. [Refer to § 224-60C(8).]
(h) Playhouse.
(i) Life-care facility. [Refer to § 224-60B(5).]
(j) Nursing home. [Refer to § 224-60B(6).]
(k) Medical clinic.
(l) Group quarters. [Refer to § 224-60B(4).]
(m) Day-care center. [Refer to § 224-60B(4).]
(n) Institution.
(o) Commercial/trade school. [Refer to § 224-60B(2).]
(p) Residential conversion (two or less units). (Refer to § 224-61A.)
§ 224-14 TOWING SERVICES § 224-14
210:929
(2) Uses permitted by special exception. The following uses and
structures are permitted by special exception within this district,
subject to the supplemental use regulations of Article XII, if
applicable:
(a) Residential conversion (three or more units). (Refer to
§ 224-61A.)
(b) Rooming/boarding house. [Refer to § 224-60B(3).]
(c) Church/religious use. [Refer to § 224-14C(3).]
(3) Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures are
permitted in the PS District in accordance with the provisions of
§ 224-59, Accessory uses and structures.
C. Lot area, width and coverage requirements.
(1) Residential uses. Residential uses and structures in the PS District
maintain the lot area, width and coverage requirements as the
same uses in the RN-4 District.
(2) Nonresidential and institutional uses. Lot area, width and coverage
requirements for nonresidential and institutional uses in the PS
District are contained in § 224-60 of Article XII, Supplemental Use
Regulations.
(3) Church/religious uses.
(a) Lot area shall be 30,000 square feet minimum.
(b) Lot width shall be 70 feet minimum.
(c) Church building coverage shall be 30% maximum.
(d) Lot coverage shall be 60% maximum.
(e) Front, rear and side yard setbacks shall be 20 feet minimum.
D. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the PS District shall
maintain the front yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Nonresidential and institutional uses and structures are
required to provide a front yard setback to satisfy the required
sidewalk areas specified for such in the Chapter 197,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) Side yards.
§ 224-14 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-14
210:930
§ 224-15. Public Open Space (POS) District.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the PS District shall
maintain the side yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Any nonresidential or institutional use that contains a dwelling
unit or is adjacent to an existing residential property or
residential district shall maintain two side yards which shall
not be less than 30 feet in the aggregate width, and neither of
which shall be less than 10 feet.
(3) Rear yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the PS District shall
maintain the rear yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Nonresidential and institutional uses in the PS District shall
maintain a rear yard of 30 feet in depth.
E. Building height. Structures in the PS District cannot exceed 80 feet in
height unless specifically exempted by provisions in § 224-48D or
Article XII.
A. Purpose. The Public Open Space (POS) District has been established to:
(1) Recognize existing public parks and recreation areas within the
City and ensure their future availability.
(2) Offer a variety of parks and recreation activities to residents of all
ages and abilities.
(3) Provide opportunities for recreation in close proximity to
neighborhoods.
B. Permitted uses and structures. The following uses and structures are
permitted by right within this district:
(1) Active recreation.
(2) Passive recreation.
(3) Accessory uses and structures in accordance with the provisions of
§ 224-59, Accessory uses and structures.
C. Lot area and coverage requirements. Lot area and coverage
requirements for structures and uses permitted within this district shall
comply with the standards set forth in § 224-60 of Article XII,
Supplemental Use Regulations.
§ 224-14 TOWING SERVICES § 224-15
210:931

ARTICLE VI
Commercial Districts
§ 224-16. Neighborhood Commercial (C-1) District. [Amended
4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
A. Purpose. The provisions of this district have been enacted to:
(1) Establish neighborhood commercial centers within the City of
Coatesville, making convenience goods and services readily
accessible to residents.
(2) Ensure that permitted commercial uses are established at a scale
which is compatible with residential neighborhoods.
(3) Provide opportunities for small businesses.
B. Permitted uses and structures.
(1) Use permitted by right. The following uses and structures are
permitted by right within this district, subject to the supplemental
use regulations of Article XII, if applicable. Proposals are limited to
one principal use and any associated accessory uses and
structures.
(a) All uses permitted in the RN-4 District, excluding multifamily.
(b) Financial institution. [Refer to § 224-60C(4).]
(c) Health/recreation spa.
(d) Medical clinic.
(e) Playhouse.
(f) Restaurant.
(g) Restaurant, fast-food. [Refer to § 224-60C(2).]
(h) Residential conversion (two or less units). (Refer to § 224-61A.)
(2) Use permitted by special exception. The following uses and
structures are permitted by special exception within this district,
subject to the supplemental use regulations of Article XII, if
applicable:
(a) Day-care center. [Refer to § 224-60B(1).]
(b) Group quarters. [Refer to § 224-60B(4).]
(c) Life-care facility. [Refer to § 224-60B(5).]
(d) Residential conversion (three or more units). (Refer to
§ 224-61A.)
§ 224-16 TOWING SERVICES § 224-16
210:933
(e) Tavern.
(f) Any combination of uses permitted by right or special
exception, or both, in accordance with § 224-62, Unified land
development process.
(3) Use permitted by conditional use. The following uses and
structures are permitted by conditional use within this district,
subject to the supplemental use regulations of Article XII, if
applicable:
(a) Office center. [Refer to § 224-60C(8).]
(b) The combination of a conditional use and a use permitted by
right or special exception, in accordance with § 224-62, Unified
land development process.
(4) Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures are
permitted in the C-1 District in accordance with the provisions of
§ 224-59, Accessory uses and structures.
C. Lot area, width and coverage requirements.
(1) Residential uses. Residential uses and structures in the C-1 District
shall maintain the same lot area, width and coverage requirements
as in the RN-4 District.
(2) Nonresidential or institutional uses. Lot area, width and coverage
requirements for nonresidential and institutional uses in the C-1
District are contained in § 224-60 of Article XII, Supplemental Use
Regulations.
D. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the C-1 District shall
maintain the front yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Nonresidential or institutional uses and structures in the C-1
District are required to provide a front yard setback to satisfy
the required sidewalk areas defined in Chapter 197,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) Side yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the C-1 District shall
maintain the side yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Any nonresidential or institutional use that contains a dwelling
unit or is adjacent to an existing residential property or
residential district shall maintain two side yards, which shall
§ 224-16 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-16
210:934
§ 224-17. Central Business (C-2) District. [Amended 4-28-1997 by
Ord. No. 1047-97]
not be less than 20 feet in the aggregate width, and neither of
which shall be less than 10 feet.
(3) Rear yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the C-1 District shall
maintain the rear yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Any nonresidential or institutional use that contains a dwelling
unit or is adjacent to an existing residential property or
residential district shall maintain a rear yard of 30 feet in
depth. Other nonresidential uses and structures shall maintain
a rear yard of 20 feet in depth.
E. Building height. Structures in the C-1 District cannot exceed 36 feet in
height unless specifically exempted by provisions in § 224-48D or
Article XII.
A. Purpose. The provisions of this district have been enacted to:
(1) Establish the central business area within the City.
(2) Permit a variety of commercial uses.
(3) Make goods and services accessible to residents.
(4) Provide opportunities for small-scale businesses.
B. Permitted uses and structures.
(1) Uses permitted by right. The following uses and structures are
permitted by right within this district, subject to the supplemental
use regulations of Article XII, if applicable. Proposals are limited to
one principal use and any associated accessory uses and
structures.
(a) All uses permitted in the RN-4 District, excluding multifamily.
(b) Convenience store.
(c) Residential conversion (two or less units). (Refer to § 224-61A.)
(d) Day-care center. [Refer to § 224-60B(1).]
(e) Financial institution. [Refer to § 224-60C(4).]
(f) Group quarters. [Refer to § 224-60B(4).]
(g) Health/recreation spa.
(h) Hotel.
§ 224-16 TOWING SERVICES § 224-17
210:935
(i) Life-care facility. [Refer to § 224-60B(5).]
(j) Nursing home. [Refer to § 224-60B(6).]
(k) Medical clinic.
(l) Movie theater.
(m) Office center. [Refer to § 224-60C(8).]
(n) Playhouse.
(o) Restaurant.
(p) Restaurant, fast-food. [Refer to § 224-60C(2).]
(q) Retail center. [Refer to § 224-60C(1).]
(2) Uses permitted by special exception. The following uses and
structures are permitted by special exception within this district:
(a) Residential conversion (three or more units). (Refer to
§ 224-61A.)
(b) Tavern.
(c) Any combination of uses permitted by right or special
exception, or both, in accordance with § 224-62, Unified land
development process.
(3) Uses permitted by conditional use. The following uses and
structures are permitted by conditional use within this district:
(a) Retail complex. [Refer to § 224-60C(1).]
(b) The combination of a conditional use and a use permitted by
right or special exception, in accordance with § 224-62, Unified
land development process.
(4) Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures are
permitted in the C-2 District in accordance with the provisions of
§ 224-59, Accessory uses and structures.
C. Lot area, width and coverage requirements.
(1) Residential uses. Residential uses and structures in the C-2 District
use the same lot area, width and coverage requirements as the
same uses in the RN-4 District.
(2) Nonresidential or institutional uses. Lot area, width and coverage
requirements for nonresidential and institutional uses in the C-2
District are contained in § 224-60 of Article XII, Supplemental Use
Regulations.
D. Yard requirements.
§ 224-17 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-17
210:936
§ 224-18. Highway Commercial (C-3) District. [Amended 4-28-1997
by Ord. No. 1047-97]
(1) Front yards. Uses and structures in the C-2 District are required to
provide a front yard setback to satisfy the required sidewalk areas
specified in Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) Side yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the C-2 District shall
maintain the side yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Any nonresidential or institutional use that contains a dwelling
unit or is adjacent to an existing residential property or
residential district shall maintain two side yards, which shall
not be less than 15 feet in the aggregate width, and neither of
which shall be less than five feet.
(3) Rear yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the C-2 District shall
maintain the rear yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Any nonresidential or institutional use that contains a dwelling
unit or is adjacent to an existing residential property or
residential district shall maintain a rear yard of 20 feet in
depth. Other nonresidential uses and structures shall maintain
a rear yard of 15 feet in depth.
E. Building height. Structures in the C-2 District cannot exceed 80 feet in
height unless specifically exempted by provisions in § 224-48D or
Article XII.
A. Purpose. The provisions of this district have been enacted to:
(1) Accommodate automobile-oriented commercial uses which may not
be appropriate within residential neighborhoods or the downtown.
(2) Locate commercial uses with high parking, traffic and lighting
requirements within an appropriate area.
(3) Allow a wide variety of commercial uses.
(4) Provide opportunities for small- and large-scale businesses.
B. Permitted uses and structures.
(1) Uses permitted by right. The following uses and structures are
permitted by right within this district. Proposals are limited to one
principal use and any associated accessory uses and structures.
(a) All uses permitted in RN-4, excluding multifamily.
§ 224-17 TOWING SERVICES § 224-18
210:937
(b) Auto service. [Refer to § 224-60C(5).]
(c) Commercial/trade school. [Refer to § 224-60B(2).]
(d) Convenience store.
(e) Day-care center. [Refer to § 224-60B(1).]
(f) Financial institution. [Refer to § 224-60C(4).]
(g) Group quarters. [Refer to § 224-60B(4).]
(h) Health/recreation spa.
(i) Hotel.
(j) Indoor commercial recreation.
(k) Life-care facility. [Refer to § 224-60B(5).]
(l) Medical clinic.
(m) Motel.
(n) Movie theater.
(o) Nightclub.
(p) Office center. [Refer to § 224-60C(8).]
(q) Playhouse.
(r) Parking lot/garage.
(s) Restaurant.
(t) Retail center. [Refer to § 224-60C(1).]
(u) Retail complex. [Refer to § 224-60C(1).]
(v) Tavern.
(w) Residential conversion (two or less units). (Refer to
§ 224-61A.)245
(2) Uses permitted by special exception. The following uses and
structures are permitted by special exception within this district:
(a) Residential conversion (three or more units). (Refer to
§ 224-61A.)
(b) Any combination of uses permitted by right or special
exception, or both, in accordance with § 224-62, Unified land
development process.
245. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(1)(x), listing signs as a principal use, was repealed
7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 1511-2018.
§ 224-18 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-18
210:938
(3) Uses permitted by conditional use. The following uses and
structures are permitted by conditional use within this district:
(a) Amusement hall/arcade. [Refer to § 224-60C(6).]
(b) Restaurant, fast-food. [Refer to § 224-60C(2).]
(c) Restaurant, drive-through. [Refer to § 224-60C(3).]
(4) Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures are
permitted in the C-3 District in accordance with the provisions of
§ 224-59, Accessory uses and structures.
C. Lot area, width and coverage requirements.
(1) Residential uses. Residential uses and structures in the C-3 District
maintain the lot area, width and coverage requirements as the
same uses in the RN-4 District.
(2) Nonresidential or institutional uses. Lot area, width and coverage
requirements for nonresidential and institutional uses in the C-3
District are contained in § 224-60 of Article XII, Supplemental Use
Regulations.
D. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the C-3 District shall
maintain the side yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Nonresidential or institutional uses and structures in the C-3
District shall maintain a front yard of 20 feet.
(2) Side yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the C-3 District shall
maintain the side yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) All nonresidential or institutional uses shall maintain two side
yards, which shall not be less than 30 feet in the aggregate
width, and neither of which shall be less than 10 feet.
(3) Rear yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the C-3 District shall
maintain the rear yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Nonresidential or institutional uses in the C-3 District shall
maintain a rear yard of 30 feet in depth.
§ 224-18 TOWING SERVICES § 224-18
210:939
§ 224-18.1. Special Commercial Use (C-4) District. [Added
4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
E. Building height. Structures in the C-3 District cannot exceed 36 feet in
height unless specifically exempted by provisions in § 224-48D or
Article XII.
A. Purpose. The provisions of this district have been enacted to:
(1) Establish a district which provides for special uses of a commercial
type.
(2) Ensure that opportunities for larger lot areas and parking areas are
provided to adequately service special commercial uses.
B. Permitted uses and structures.
(1) Use permitted by right. The following uses and structures are
permitted by right within this district, subject to the supplemental
use regulations of Article XII, if applicable. Proposals are limited to
one principal use and any associated accessory uses and
structures.
(a) Commercial/trade school. [Refer to § 224-60B(2).]
(b) Convenience store.
(c) Health/recreation spa.
(d) Hospital. [Refer to § 224-60B(7).]
(e) Indoor commercial recreation.
(f) Mass transit terminal.
(g) Office.
(h) Office center. [Refer to § 224-60C(8).]
(i) Office park. [Refer to § 224-60C(8).]
(j) Parking lot/garage.
(k) Recreation, active.
(l) Recreation area.
(m) Recreation, passive.
(n) Restaurant.
(o) Restaurant, drive-through. [Refer to § 224-60C(3).]
(p) Restaurant, fast-food. [Refer to § 224-60C(2).]
(q) Retail center. [Refer to § 224-60C(1).]
§ 224-18 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-18.1
210:940
(r) Retail complex. [Refer to § 224-60C(1).]
(s) Retail store.
(t) Tavern.
(u) Veterinary/animal hospital.
(2) Uses permitted by special exception. The following uses and
structures are permitted by special exception within this district,
subject to the supplemental use regulations of Article XII, if
applicable:
(a) Auto sales.
(b) Auto service. [Refer to § 224-60C(5).]
(3) Uses permitted by conditional use. The following uses and
structures are permitted by conditional use within this district:
(a) Adult entertainment uses. [Refer to §§ 224-60C(7) and
224-18.1G.]
(b) Amusement hall/arcade. [Refer to § 224-60C(6).]
(c) Department store.
(d) Hotel.
(e) Motel.
(f) Nightclub.
(g) Private club.
(h) Variety store.
(i) Wagering and gambling establishment.
C. Lot area, width and coverage requirements.
(1) Nonresidential uses. Lot area, width and coverage requirements
for nonresidential uses in the C-4 District are contained in § 224-60
of Article XII, Supplemental Use Regulations, and in the Table of
Commercial Use Lot Area, Setback and Bulk Standards (Parts 1
through 4).246 [Amended 9-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1084-98]
D. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yards. A front yard of 20 feet shall be maintained.
(2) Side yards. Two side yards shall be maintained which shall not be
less than 40 feet in the aggregate width and neither of which shall
be less than 15 feet.
246. Editor's Note: Said table is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 224-18.1 TOWING SERVICES § 224-18.1
210:941
(3) Rear yards. A rear yard of 40 feet in depth shall be maintained.
E. Building height. Buildings and other structures in the C-4 District shall
not exceed 36 feet in height, unless specifically exempted by provisions
in § 224-48D of Article XII.
F. Special design standards.
(1) The landscaping and buffering regulations of Article XI, § 224-51,
shall apply, as well as the following:
(a) Any use in the C-4 District adjacent to any residential use or
district shall provide a Class C buffer.
(2) The off-street parking requirements of Article XIII, § 224-64, shall
apply, except for § 224-64D and E.
G. Definition of terms. For the purpose of this article, the following words,
terms and phrases have the meaning indicated herein:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or for any form of consideration,
or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still- or motionpicture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer
persons per machine at any one time and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO
STORE — A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one
or more of the following:
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides or other visual representations which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
(1)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities.
(2)
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity.
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
(2)
Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
(3)
§ 224-18.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-18.1
210:942
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE — Any of the following:
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATRE — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly
shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATRE — A theatre, concert hall, auditorium or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live performances which
are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who or which
furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its
primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
seminude, in a state of nudity or who displays specified anatomical
areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money
or any form of consideration. A nude model studio shall not include a
proprietary school licensed by the State of Pennsylvania or a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public
taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
a structure:
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business
as a new business.
(1)
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business.
(2)
The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business.
(3)
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is
available for viewing.
(1)
§ 224-18.1 TOWING SERVICES § 224-18.1
210:943
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or the showing of
the covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
SEMINUDE or SEMINUDE CONDITION — The state of dress in which
clothing partially or opaquely covers specified anatomical areas.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motionpicture
theatre, adult theatre, escort agency, nude model studio or
sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Human genitals, pubic region,
anus, buttocks, female breast(s) below a point immediately above the
top of the areola or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class.
(2)
Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the
premises at any one time.
(3)
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of the opposite sex.
(1)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
seminudity.
(2)
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts.
(1)
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy.
(2)
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsections (1) and (2) above.
(3)
§ 224-18.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-18.1
210:944
ARTICLE VII
Industrial Districts
§ 224-19. Light Industry (I-1) District.
A. Purpose. Provisions of the Light Industry (I-1) District have been
enacted to:
(1) Provide areas for offices and light industrial businesses, such as
assembly, research or fleet operations, within the City.
(2) Provide opportunities for revitalization by allowing for various uses
to occur through reuse of vacated industrial facilities.
(3) Further the community development objectives of the City of
Coatesville Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
B. Description of the Light Industry (I-1) District. The Light Industry (I-1)
District corresponds to the areas that contain industrial properties as
defined in Planning Districts Nos. 10, 11 and 24 from the City of
Coatesville Comprehensive Plan.
C. Permitted uses and structures.
(1) Uses permitted by right. The following uses and structures are
permitted by right within this district, subject to other applicable
standards of this chapter. Proposals are limited to one principal use
and any associated accessory uses and structures.
(a) Light industry/business.
(b) Light-industrial center. [Refer to § 224-60D(1).]
(c) Distribution/warehouse/storage.
(d) Miniwarehouse/public warehouse. [Refer to § 224-60D(3).]
(e) Office.
(f) Office center. [Refer to § 224-60C(8).]
(g) Commercial/trade school. [Refer to § 224-60B(2).]
(h) Community utility. [Refer to § 224-60B(8).]
(i) Mass transit terminal.
(j) Government building/facility.
(k) Hardware/lumberyard.
(l) Any of the uses listed below in accordance with the provisions
for adaptive reuse in § 224-61B:
[1] All uses permitted in the RN-4 District.
§ 224-19 TOWING SERVICES § 224-19
210:945
[2] Financial institution. [Refer to § 224-60C(4).]
[3] Restaurant.
[4] Restaurant, fast-food. [Refer to § 224-60C(2).]
[5] Auto service. [Refer to § 224-60C(5).]
[6] Medical clinic.
[7] Veterinary/animal hospital.
[8] Indoor public recreation.
[9] Health/recreation spa.
(m) Public parking lot/garage.
(2) Uses permitted by special exception. The following uses are
permitted by special exception subject to supplemental use
regulations of Article XII, if applicable, and approval in accordance
with Article XV:
(a) Manufacturing.
(b) Institution.
(c) Mobile home park. [Refer to § 224-60A(2).]
(d) Radio, television or microwave transmitter. [Refer to
§ 224-60B(9).]
(e) Any of the uses listed in § 224-19C(1), except residential, if
adaptive reuse is not feasible; or
(f) Any combination of uses permitted by right or special
exception in accordance with the provisions of § 224-62,
Unified land development process.
(3) Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures are
permitted in the I-1 District in accordance with the provisions of
§ 224-59, Accessory uses and structures.
D. Lot area, width and coverage requirements.
(1) Residential uses. Residential uses and structures in the I-1 District
shall maintain the lot area, width and coverage requirements as the
same uses in the RN-4 District. Mobile home park standards shall
be as stated in § 224-60A(2).
(2) Nonresidential or institutional uses. Lot area, width and coverage
requirements for nonresidential and institutional uses in the I-1
District are contained in Article XII, Supplemental Use Regulations.
(3) Notwithstanding the lot coverage required by § 224-19D(2) above,
lot coverage shall be permitted to exceed the maximum permitted
§ 224-19 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-19
210:946
lot coverage by conditional use approval of City Council provided
that the applicant can demonstrate to City Council the following:
[Added 8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 1478-2016]
(a) Allowing an increase in maximum permitted lot coverage for
an existing light industry use is necessary to allow a building
addition or expansion that is needed for the continued
operation of the industrial use;
(b) Adequate stormwater management controls shall be
implemented in accordance with the City's stormwater
management regulations; and
(c) The increase in impervious cover shall not cause adverse
impact to the surrounding environment.
E. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the I-1 District shall
maintain the front yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District. Mobile home park standards shall be as stated in
§ 224-60A(2).
(b) Nonresidential or institutional uses and structures are
required to provide a front yard of 15 feet.
(2) Side yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the I-1 District shall
maintain the side yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District. Mobile home park standards shall be as stated in
§ 224-60A(2).
(b) Any nonresidential or institutional use that contains a dwelling
unit or is adjacent to an existing residential property or
residential district shall maintain two side yards, which shall
not be less than 20 feet in the aggregate width, and neither of
which shall be less than 10 feet.
(3) Rear yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the I-1 District shall
maintain the rear yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District. Mobile home park standards shall be as stated in
§ 224-60A(2).
(b) Nonresidential or institutional uses in the I-1 District shall
maintain a rear yard of 30 feet in depth.
F. Building height. Structures in the I-1 District cannot exceed 36 feet in
height unless specifically exempted by provisions in § 224-48D or
Article XII.
§ 224-19 TOWING SERVICES § 224-19
210:947
§ 224-20. Heavy Industry (I-2) District.
G. Modification of required parking spaces. An applicant may request
through the conditional use process that the number of parking spaces
required by § 224-64C(6) for a light industry/business use may be
modified provided that applicant demonstrates the following: [Added
8-22-2016 by Ord. No. 1478-2016]
(1) That the proposed use does not warrant the number of parking
spaces required by this chapter; and
(2) The number of parking spaces will not be reduced to less than one
parking space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
A. Purpose. Provisions of the Heavy Industry (I-2) District have been
enacted to:
(1) Provide areas for various business and manufacturing activities,
such as raw materials processing, within the City.
(2) Provide opportunities for the continuation or reuse of industrial
areas to maintain the vitality of the City in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan.
(3) Further the community development objectives of the City of
Coatesville Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
B. Description of the Heavy Industry (I-2) District. The Heavy Industry
(I-2) District correspond to the areas that contain industrial properties
as defined in Planning District No. 23 from the City of Coatesville
Comprehensive Plan.
C. Permitted uses and structures.
(1) Uses permitted by right. The following uses and structures are
permitted by right within this district, subject to the supplemental
use regulations of Article XII, if applicable. Proposals are limited to
one principal use and any associated accessory uses and
structures.
(a) All uses permitted by right in the I-1 District, except residential
uses. (Adaptive reuse provisions must be maintained for
identified uses in I-1 District.)
(b) Manufacturing.
(2) Uses permitted by special exception. Any combination of uses
permitted by right may be permitted by special exception in
accordance with the provisions of § 224-62, Unified land
development process.
(3) Uses permitted by conditional use. The following uses are
permitted by conditional use subject to the supplemental design
§ 224-19 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-20
210:948
standards of Article XII, if so designated, and approval in
accordance with § 224-79B(3):
(a) Retail center. [Refer to § 224-60C(1).]
(b) Multifamily. [Refer to § 224-60A(1).]
(c) Industrial park. [Refer to § 224-60D(2).]
(d) Office park. [Refer to § 224-60C(8).]
(e) Radio, television or microwave transmitter. [Refer to
§ 224-60B(9).]
(f) Transfer station. [Refer to § 224-60D(6).]
(g) Solid waste incinerator. [Refer to § 224-60D(8).]
(h) Solid waste landfill. [Refer to § 224-60D(7).]
(i) Recycling center. [Refer to § 224-60D(4).]
(j) Junkyard. [Refer to § 224-60D(5).]
(k) Any combination of uses permitted by right, special exception
or conditional use in accordance with the provisions of
§ 224-62, Unified land development process.
(4) Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures are
permitted in the I-2 District in accordance with the provisions of
§ 224-59, Accessory uses and structures.
D. Lot area, width and coverage requirements.
(1) Residential uses. Residential uses and structures in the I-2 District
shall maintain the lot area, width and coverage requirements as the
same uses in the RN-4 District.
(2) Nonresidential or institutional uses. Lot area, width and coverage
requirements for nonresidential and institutional uses in the I-2
District are contained in § 224-60 of Article XII, Supplemental Use
Regulations.
E. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the I-2 District shall
maintain the front yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Nonresidential or institutional uses and structures are
required to provide a front yard of 15 feet.
(2) Side yards.
§ 224-20 TOWING SERVICES § 224-20
210:949
(a) Residential uses and structures in the I-2 District shall
maintain the side yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Any nonresidential or institutional use that contains a dwelling
unit or is adjacent to an existing residential property or
residential district shall maintain two side yards, which shall
not be less than 30 feet in the aggregate width, and neither of
which shall be less than 15 feet.
(3) Rear yards.
(a) Residential uses and structures in the I-2 District shall
maintain the rear yard requirements for the same uses in the
RN-4 District.
(b) Nonresidential or institutional uses in the I-2 District shall
maintain a rear yard of 30 feet in depth.
F. Building height. Structures in the I-2 District cannot exceed 80 feet in
height unless specifically exempted by provisions in § 224-48D or
Article XII.
§ 224-20 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-20
210:950
ARTICLE VIII
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District
[Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96; 10-23-2006 by Ord. No.
1278-2006; 8-28-2017 by Ord. No. 1496-2017]
§ 224-21. Intent.
The intent of the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) is to:
§ 224-21.1. Applicability.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or development
anywhere within the City of Coatesville unless a permit has been obtained
from the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 224-21.2. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
The Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) supersedes any other
conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain areas.
However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and
effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is
any conflict between any of the provisions of the Floodplain Conservation
Overlay District (FC), the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 224-21.3. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of the
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) shall be declared invalid
for any reason whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining
portions of the ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for
this purpose the provisions of the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District
(FC) are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 224-21.4. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
F. Protect individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
§ 224-21 TOWING SERVICES § 224-21.4
210:951
§ 224-22. Definitions and terminology.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in the Floodplain
Conservation Overlay District (FC) shall be interpreted so as to give the
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) its most reasonable
application.
§ 224-22.1. Specific definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
one-percent annual chance flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DECLARATION OF LAND RESTRICTION (NONCONVERSION
AGREEMENT) — A form signed by the property owner to agree not to
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of the
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on accepted engineering methods
of study. Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings
restricted by debris. The Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC)
does not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that
land uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
B. The Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) shall not create
liability on the part of the City of Coatesville or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on the
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 224-21.4 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-22.1
210:952
convert or modify in any manner that is inconsistent with the terms of the
permit and these regulations, certain enclosures below the lowest floor of
elevated buildings and certain accessory structures. The form requires the
owner to record it on the property deed to inform future owners of the
restrictions.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
§ 224-22.1 TOWING SERVICES § 224-22.1
210:953
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 224-24 and 224-24.1 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
of the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC).
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 224-22.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-22.1
210:954
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after September 29, 2017, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after May 17,
1982, and before September 29, 2017, is subject to the ordinance in effect
at the time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was
within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated May 17,
1982, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated May 17, 1982,
whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with
the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet. The freeboard safety factor also applies
to utilities and ductwork.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 224-22.1 TOWING SERVICES § 224-22.1
210:955
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
§ 224-22.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-22.1
210:956
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 224-23. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 224-23.1. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the City of Coatesville.
§ 224-23.2. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce the
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) and is referred to herein
as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may: (A)
Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations, (B)
Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to
qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other
employees, or (C) Enter into a written agreement or written contract
with another agency or private sector entity to administer specific
provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these
regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal
Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Building Code Official.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
§ 224-22.1 TOWING SERVICES § 224-23.2
210:957
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);247 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
proposed cost of improvements or repairs and the pre-improvement
market value of the structure, so that a substantial improvement/
substantial damage determination can be made, in accordance with
FEMA's Substantial Improvement/Substantial Damage Desk Reference.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC).
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity, or for the
lifetime of the structure, all records associated with the requirements of
the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program as requested.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
247. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
§ 224-23.2 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-23.2
210:958
§ 224-23.3. Application procedures and requirements.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision thereof
as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the City of Coatesville.
Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
§ 224-23.2 TOWING SERVICES § 224-23.3
210:959
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other access
ways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC, or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the effect of any proposed
development within a Floodway Area (see § 224-24.1A) will not
increase the base flood elevation at any point.
§ 224-23.3 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-23.3
210:960
§ 224-23.4. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g. planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
(d) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway (see
§ 224-24.1B), when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(e) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(f) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 224-25.2F, Storage, and § 224-25.3, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 224-25.2F and 224-25.3 which
are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
§ 224-25.3 during a base flood.
(g) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
(h) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 224-23.3 TOWING SERVICES § 224-23.5
210:961
§ 224-23.5. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 224-23.6. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard,
or similar document, which shall be displayed on the premises during
the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number
of the permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
§ 224-23.7. Start of construction.
§ 224-23.8. Enforcement.
Refer to Article XV, Administration and Enforcement, § 224-81.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
§ 224-23.5 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-23.9
210:962
§ 224-23.9. Appeals.
§ 224-24. Identification of floodplain areas.
§ 224-24.1. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of the
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) may appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days
after the decision, determination or action of the Floodplain
Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.248
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of City of Coatesville classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
September 29, 2017, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) or the most recent revision thereof,
including all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance
Study; and
(2) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by City of Coatesville and
declared to be a part of the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District
(FC).
A. The floodway area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
248. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 224-23.9 TOWING SERVICES § 224-24.1
210:963
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(3) Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(a) Agriculture and horticulture.
(b) Active recreation.
(c) Passive recreation.
(d) Customary residential accessories, in accordance with Article
XII.
(e) Ancillary residential accessories, in accordance with Article
XII.
(f) Customary nonresidential accessories, in accordance with
Article XII.
(g) Ancillary nonresidential accessories, in accordance with
Article XII.
(h) Temporary accessories, in accordance with Article XII.
(i) Accessory uses, in accordance with § 224-25.1E.
(4) Uses permitted by special exception.
(a) Nonhabitable structures accessory to the uses and activities in
Subsection A(3) above.
(b) Community utility.
(c) Extraction of sand, gravel and other materials.
(d) Temporary uses, such as circuses, carnivals and similar
activities.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
§ 224-24.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-24.1
210:964
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
(2) AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE
Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which
base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been
determined.
(a) No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted in an
AE Zone without floodway, unless it has been demonstrated
through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed development, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, would not result in an increase in
flood levels of more than one foot within the entire community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site.
(1) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality. In the
absence of any of the above data or documentation, the community
may require elevation of the lowest floor to be at least three feet
above the highest adjacent grade.
D. The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones
AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject to
inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where
average depths are between one and three feet. In Zones AO and AH,
drainage paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around and
away from structures on slopes.
§ 224-24.1 TOWING SERVICES § 224-24.1
210:965
§ 224-24.2. Changes in identification of area.
The Identified Floodplain Area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical
or scientific data. See § 224-25B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 224-24.3. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the City of Coatesville and any party
aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Council. The
burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 224-24.4. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 224-25. Technical provisions.
E. Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where
City of Coatesville has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas, as
delineated and adopted on a Local Flood Hazard Map using best
available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood
of record, historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
§ 224-24.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-25
210:966
§ 224-25.1. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When City of Coatesville proposes to permit the following
encroachments: any development that causes a rise in the base flood
elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones
A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a
rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing culverts
and bridges), the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the FEMA Administrator's conditional approval of
map change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments,
the applicant shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a City of
Coatesville or applicant shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA
will initiate a final map revision upon receipt of such certifications
in accordance with 44 CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in the Floodplain Conservation Overlay
District (FC) and any other applicable codes, ordinances and
regulations.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 224-24.1C of the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC).
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
§ 224-25 TOWING SERVICES § 224-25.1
210:967
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and ASCE
24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405 as amended) shall
be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 224-24.1C of the Floodplain
Conservation Overlay District (FC).
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards. There should be a statement submitted with
the permit application and a statement submitted with the as-built
floodproofing certificate prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
(5) Any nonresidential structure that will be floodproofed must submit
the following to the Floodplain Administrator along with the
nonresidential floodproofing certificate and prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy:
§ 224-25.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-25.1
210:968
(a) An inspection and maintenance plan detailing the annual
maintenance of floodproofed components ensuring that all
components will operate properly under flood conditions.
Components that must be inspected include at a minimum:
[1] Mechanical equipment such as sump pumps and
generators;
[2] Flood shields and closures;
[3] Walls and wall penetrations; and
[4] Levees and berms (as applicable).
(b) Flood emergency operation plan detailing the procedures to be
followed during a flooding event, and must include information
pertaining to how all components will operate properly under
all conditions, including power failures. The design
professional must produce the plan. An adequate plan must
include the following:
[1] An established chain of command and responsibility with
leadership responsibilities clearly defined for all aspects of
the plan.
[2] A procedure for notification of necessary parties when
flooding threatens and flood warnings are issued.
Personnel required to be at the building should have a
planned and safe means of ingress and should have no
other emergency response duties during a flood event.
Alternates should be assigned in the event that the
primary persons responsible are unable to complete their
assigned duties under the plan.
[3] A list of specific duties assigned to ensure that all
responsibilities are addressed expeditiously. The locations
of materials necessary to properly install all floodproofing
components must be included in the list.
[4] An evacuation plan for all personnel or occupants; those
without duties for the flood emergency as well as those
with duties for implementing the plan. All possible ingress
and egress routes must be identified.
[5] A periodic training and exercise program to keep
personnel and occupants aware of their duties and
responsibilities. Training drills should be held at least once
a year and should be coordinated with community officials.
(6) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
§ 224-25.1 TOWING SERVICES § 224-25.1
210:969
ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405 as amended)
shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Basements are prohibited.
(2) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(3) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space
installed on two separate walls.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) must
comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
§ 224-25.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-25.1
210:970
§ 224-25.2. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
(9) For accessory structures that are 200 square feet or larger in area
(footprint) and that are below the base flood elevation, a variance is
required as set forth in Article VIII. If a variance is granted, a
signed declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement)
shall be recorded on the property deed prior to issuance of the
certificate of occupancy.
(10) Prohibit the storage of hazardous materials in accessory
structures.
A. Fill.
(1) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
§ 224-25.1 TOWING SERVICES § 224-25.2
210:971
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to
and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA #
348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 224-25.3, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
§ 224-25.2 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-25.2
210:972
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating units, and
other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus shall
§ 224-25.2 TOWING SERVICES § 224-25.2
210:973
§ 224-25.3. Development which may endanger human life.
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, below, shall be prohibited.
not be located below the regulatory flood elevation and shall be
anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(2) Ductwork shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to remain water-resistant.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of the Floodplain
Conservation Overlay District (FC), to the extent that they are more
restrictive and supplement the requirements of the Floodplain
Conservation Overlay District (FC).
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest revision
thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania: Secs.
801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
revision thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
Secs. R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,249
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be
prohibited. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
249. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 224-25.2 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-25.3
210:974
§ 224-25.4. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) and letter of map revision
(LOMR). Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
§ 224-25.5. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
§ 224-25.6. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must:
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
§ 224-25.3 TOWING SERVICES § 224-25.6
210:975
§ 224-26. Prohibited activities.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,250 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
§ 224-27. Existing structures.
The provisions of the Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) do
not require any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing
structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing
structure, the provisions of § 224-27.1 shall apply.
§ 224-27.1. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes or other mass-care facilities.
(3) Jails or prisons.
(4) Police stations.
(5) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in
BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
250. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 224-25.6 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-27.1
210:976
§ 224-28. Variances and special exceptions and adoption.
If compliance with any of the requirements of the Floodplain Conservation
Overlay District (FC) would result in an exceptional hardship to a
prospective builder, developer or landowner, the City of Coatesville Zoning
Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief from the strict application of
the requirements.
§ 224-28.1. Variance procedures and conditions.
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of the
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC).
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa. Code,
as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or most recent
revision thereof as adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Within any Floodway Area/District (see § 224-24.1A), no new
construction or development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
F. Within any AE Area/District without floodway (see § 224-24.1B), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office.
G. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed in strict
compliance with the provisions contained in Chapter 82, Building
Construction, and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the City of Coatesville
Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures contained in
§ 224-23.9 and the following:
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause
any increase in the BFE.
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) No variances shall be granted for a proposed accessory structure
that exceeds 600 square feet in size. A signed nonconversion
agreement is required as a condition of receiving the variance.
§ 224-27.1 TOWING SERVICES § 224-28.1
210:977
(4) No variance shall be granted for prohibited activities (Article VI),
manufactured homes (§ 224-25.5), or to development which may
endanger human life (§ 224-25.3).
(5) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(6) In granting any variance, the City of Coatesville Zoning Hearing
Board shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards
it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety,
and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of the Floodplain
Conservation Overlay District (FC).
(7) Whenever a variance is granted, the City of Coatesville Zoning
Hearing Board shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(8) In reviewing any request for a variance, the City of Coatesville
Zoning Hearing Board shall consider, in addition to complying with
the provisions of Article XVI, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(9) The Zoning Hearing Board may refer any application and
accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a
special exception or variance to any engineer or other qualified
person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the
proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities and the
adequacy of the plans for protection and other related matters.
(10) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the City of Coatesville Zoning Hearing Board. In
addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be
included in the annual report to the FEMA.
§ 224-28.1 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-28.1
210:978
§ 224-28.2. Special exceptions.
Special exceptions shall only be issued after the Zoning Hearing Board
has determined that the granting of such will not result in unacceptable
or prohibited increases in flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, the creation of nuisances, any fraud or
victimization of the public or any conflict with any other applicable local or
state ordinances and regulations.
§ 224-28.3. Adoption.
The Floodplain Conservation Overlay District (FC) shall be effective
immediately upon enactment in accordance with 11 Pa.C.S.A. § 11050(b)
as expressly required by the general laws of the Commonwealth and shall
remain in force until modified, amended or rescinded by City of Coatesville,
Chester County, Pennsylvania.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
§ 224-28.1 TOWING SERVICES § 224-28.3
210:979

ARTICLE IX
Natural Resource Protection Overlay District
§ 224-29. Purpose.
This article has been established to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by minimizing adverse environmental impacts. This article is
intended to meet the following objectives:
§ 224-30. Natural resource protection standards.
A. Acknowledge natural resources within the City of Coatesville, as
identified in the City of Coatesville Comprehensive Plan (1986), the
Open Space, Recreation and Environmental Resources Plan (1993) and
the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Index and any subsequent
amendments to these documents.
B. Define and delineate selected natural resources within the City and
establish resource protection standards to mitigate potential public
hazards associated with land use activity.
C. Conserve valuable natural resources within the City of Coatesville in
accordance with the community development objective in § 224-2H of
this chapter and recommendations set forth in the Comprehensive Plan
and the Open Space, Recreation and Environmental Resources Plan.
A. General provisions.
(1) The provisions of this article shall overlay and supplement the
provisions of the underlying zoning district. In the event that the
provisions of the underlying zoning district and the provisions of
this article are in conflict, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
(2) In the event that two or more natural resource areas identified in
this article overlap, the resource with the most restrictive standard
(the least amount of alteration, regrading, clearing or building)
shall apply to the area of overlap.
(3) It shall be a violation of this chapter to regrade, fill, pipe, divert,
build upon or otherwise alter a natural resource protected by this
article prior to the submission of applications for zoning or building
permits or the submission of plans for subdivision or land
development.
B. Floodplain.
(1) Definition. A "floodplain" is a relatively flat or low land area which
is subject to partial or complete flooding from an adjoining or
nearby stream, river or watercourse; or any area subject to the
unusual accumulation of surface waters from any source. For the
purpose of this chapter, the floodplain shall include, but is not
§ 224-29 TOWING SERVICES § 224-30
210:981
limited to, the area included in the Floodplain Conservation
Overlay District as defined in Article VIII of this chapter.
(2) Resource protection standards.
(a) Areas identified as being within the boundaries of the onehundred-
year floodplain shall not be regraded, filled, built
upon or otherwise altered except in conformance with Article
VIII, Floodplain Conservation Overlay District, of this chapter.
(b) In addition, the following standards shall apply to the floodway
and flood-fringe areas as defined in Article VIII of this chapter:
[1] Floodways within the Floodway District and General
Floodplain District shall not be regraded, filled, piped,
diverted, built upon or otherwise altered except in
conformance with Article VIII.
[2] No more than 50% of flood-fringe areas within the Flood-
Fringe District and General Floodplain District shall be
regraded, filled, built upon or otherwise altered.
(3) Delineation. The applicant shall delineate floodplains which are on
the site, in accordance with § 224-31.
C. Lakes and ponds.
(1) Definition. "Lakes and ponds" are natural or artificial bodies of
water which retain water year-round. Artificial ponds may be
created by dams or result from excavation. Lakes are bodies of
water two or more acres in extent. Ponds are bodies of water less
than two acres in extent.
(2) Resource protection standards. Lakes and ponds shall not be
regraded, filled, piped, diverted, built upon or otherwise altered.
(3) Delineation. The applicant shall delineate lakes and ponds which
are on the site, in accordance with § 224-31.
D. Lake and pond shorelines.
(1) Definition. "Lake and pond shorelines" are the landside edges of
the water from the established shoreline to an upland boundary.
Lake and pond shorelines shall be measured 100 feet from the
spillway crest elevation.
(2) Resource protection standards. No more than 20% of the shoreline
of a lake or pond shall be regraded, filled, built upon or otherwise
altered.
(3) Delineation. The applicant shall delineate lake and pond shorelines
which are on the site, in accordance with § 224-31.
E. Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory sites (PNDI).
§ 224-30 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-30
210:982
(1) Definition. The "Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Index" is a
comprehensive computerized inventory of Pennsylvania's most
significant natural areas. The database, which is maintained by the
Department of Environmental Resources, contains the status and
location of plants, animals, geologic landmarks, natural
communities and other natural features which are considered
exemplary, unique, rare or endangered within the state.
(2) Resource protection standards. Areas containing endangered
species and species believed to be in danger of population decline
have been located within the City of Coatesville and documented in
the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory and the Chester
County Natural Areas Inventory. The applicant shall consult these
inventories to determine whether these species or any other
elements of special concern are located on the site. If a PNDI site is
located, the applicant shall contact the Nature Conservancy,
Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory - East, for assistance in
determining whether the proposed development will conflict with
species on the site as well as measures which may be taken to
mitigate potential damage to the identified species.
(3) Delineation. The applicant shall delineate PNDI sites, in
accordance with § 224-31.
F. Steep slopes.
(1) Definition. "Steep slopes" are those areas of land where the grade
is 15% or greater and which, because of this grade, are subject to
high rates of stormwater runoff and susceptible to erosion.
(2) Resource protection standards.
(a) Slope shall be measured as the change in elevation over the
horizontal distance between consecutive contour lines. For this
chapter, slope shall be measured over three or more two-foot
contour intervals (six cumulative vertical feet of slope). All
slope measurements shall be determined by a topographic
survey by a registered surveyor or engineer licensed to
practice in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Once
delineated, the mapping provided by the applicant shall be
reviewed by the City Engineer.
(b) In areas with fifteen-percent to twenty-five-percent slope, no
more than 30% of such areas shall be regraded, cleared, built
upon or otherwise altered.
(c) In areas with greater than twenty-five-percent slope, no more
than 15% of such areas shall be altered, regraded, cleared,
built upon or otherwise altered.
§ 224-30 TOWING SERVICES § 224-30
210:983
(d) Any disturbance of land shall be in compliance with the erosion
and sedimentation control standards of Chapter 197,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(e) Each building or structure shall be constructed in such a
manner as to provide the least alteration necessary of the
existing grade and natural soil condition.
(f) Finished slopes of all permitted cut and fill shall not exceed
33% unless the applicant can demonstrate the method by
which steeper slopes can be stabilized and maintained
adequately.
(g) Areas of steep slope that are 2,500 square feet or less shall be
exempted from the steep-slope standards set forth in this
subsection.
(3) Delineation. The applicant shall delineate the two categories of
steep slopes (15% to 25%; more than 25%) which are on the site, in
accordance with § 224-31.
G. Watercourses.
(1) Definition. A "watercourse" is a stream, such as a creek, run or
other body of running water; or any stream in which water flows in
a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently.
(2) Resource protection standards.
(a) Watercourses shall not be regraded, filled, piped, diverted,
built upon or otherwise altered except where design approval
is obtained from the City and, if required, the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. [Amended
3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
(b) No structure or use may be located within 50 feet of the bank
of a watercourse. The setback area shall not be cleared of
vegetation, regraded, filled, built upon or otherwise altered.
(3) Delineation. The applicant shall delineate watercourses which are
on the site, in accordance with § 224-31.
H. Wetlands.
(1) Definition. "Wetlands" are those areas that are inundated and
saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances do
support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas.
(2) Resource protection standards. Wetlands shall not be regraded,
filled, piped, diverted, built upon or otherwise altered except where
§ 224-30 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-30
210:984
state and federal permits have been obtained. Any applicant
proposing a use, activity or improvement which would entail the
regrading or placement of fill in wetlands shall provide the City
with proof that the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (Bureau of Dams and Waterway Safety and Bureau of
Water Quality Management) and the United States Army Corps of
Engineers have been contacted to determine the applicability of
state and federal wetland regulations. [Amended 3-25-1996 by
Ord. No. 1012-96]
(3) Delineation. A full wetland report conducted by a qualified wetland
biologist or others of demonstrated qualifications shall be
submitted to the City. Such a person shall certify that the methods
used correctly reflect technical concepts currently used and
accepted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, including
identification and analysis of wetland vegetation, hydric soils and/
or hydrologic indicators. The wetland report shall include a
determination of whether wetlands are present on site and a full
delineation, area measurement (in square feet) and description of
any wetlands determined to be present. The wetland definition and
analysis methodology accepted by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers shall be used. The study shall be approved by the City
Council on the recommendation of the City Engineer. In the event
that a wetlands delineation validated by the United States Army
Corps of Engineers is shown to vary from the wetlands boundary
derived from the wetland report described above, the Corps
delineation shall govern.
I. Wetland margins.
(1) Definition. A "wetland margin" is the transitional area extending
from the outer limit of the wetland. For the purposes of this
chapter, the wetland margin shall extend 100 feet from the wetland
boundary or to the limit of the hydric soils, whichever is less. The
limit of the hydric soils shall be as defined in this chapter unless
reclassified by a certified soil scientist.
(2) Resource protection standards. No more than 20% of a wetland
margin shall be regraded, filled, built upon or otherwise altered. In
addition, any Department of Environmental Protection regulations
under Chapter 105 concerning activities in wetland margins shall
be met. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
(3) Delineation. The applicant shall delineate wetland margins which
are on the site, in accordance with § 224-31.
J. Woodlands.
(1) Definitions.
(a) Woodlands. "Woodlands" consist of 1/4 acre or more of
continuous wooded land where the largest trees measure at
§ 224-30 TOWING SERVICES § 224-30
210:985
least six inches diameter at 4 1/2 feet above the average grade
at the base of the tree. The woodland shall be measured from
the dripline of the outer trees. Woodlands are also a grove of
trees forming one canopy where 10 or more trees measure at
least six inches at 4 1/2 feet above the average grade at the
base of the tree.
(b) Tree protection zone. The "tree protection zone" is an area that
is radial to the trunk of a tree in which no construction activity
shall occur. The tree protection zone shall be 15 feet from the
trunk of the tree to be retained or the distance from the trunk
to the dripline, whichever is greater. Where there is a group of
trees or woodlands, the tree protection zone shall be the
aggregate of the protection zones for the individual trees.
(2) Resource protection standards.
(a) Disturbance allowance.
[1] No more than 20% of woodlands which overlap other
natural resource areas, including floodplains, lakes or
ponds, lake or pond shorelines, PNDI sites, steep slopes,
watercourses, wetlands, wetland margins and woodlands,
shall be regraded, cleared, built upon or otherwise altered.
[2] No more than 50% of woodlands which do not overlap
other natural resource areas identified in this article shall
be regraded, cleared, built upon or otherwise altered.
(b) Areas of disturbance.
[1] Each building or structure shall be constructed in such a
manner as to provide the least alteration necessary of the
existing woodland. Where possible, the amount of clearcutting
shall be minimized and trees shall be selectively
removed.
[2] Trees which are retained shall be identified and protected
in accordance with the provisions of Subsection J(3), Tree
protection zone, below.
[3] Woodland alterations that would threaten the growth of
remaining trees shall be avoided.
(c) Remaining woodlands. Where possible, woodlands which
remain undisturbed shall interconnect with woodlands or
wooded areas of adjacent properties to preserve continuous
woodland corridors and allow for the normal movement,
dispersion and migration of wildlife.
(3) Tree protection zone. A tree protection zone shall be established
where trees or woodlands on the site are to be retained. In this
zone, the following standards shall apply:
§ 224-30 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-30
210:986
§ 224-31. Application of natural resource protection standards.
(a) Prior to construction, a wooden snow fence shall be installed
around the boundaries of the tree protection zone. The fencing
along the zone shall be maintained until all construction and
other work has been completed.
(b) Grade changes and excavations shall not encroach upon the
tree protection zone.
(c) Trees being removed shall not be felled, pushed or pulled into a
tree protection zone or into trees to be retained.
(d) No toxic materials shall be stored within 100 feet of a tree
protection zone, including petroleum-based and -derived
products.
(e) The area within the tree protection zone shall not be built
upon, nor shall any materials be stored there either
temporarily or permanently. Vehicles and equipment shall not
be parked in the tree protection zone.
(f) Sediment, retention and detention basins shall not discharge
into the tree protection zone.
(g) Sediment, retention and detention basins shall not be located
within the tree protection zone.
(4) Delineation. The applicant shall delineate woodlands which are on
the site, in accordance with § 224-31. In addition, where trees or
woodlots on the site are to be preserved, they shall be clearly
delineated on the plan as a tree protection zone.
A. Plan information. In order to meet the natural resource protection
standards of this article, the following information shall be submitted
by the applicant. Where applicable, such information shall be included
with a preliminary plan as required in Chapter 197, Subdivision and
Land Development, and shall be consistent with the informational
requirements of Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
(1) A site plan which identifies the limits of all natural resources on the
site, excluding PNDI sites and the proposed use of the site.
(2) All encroachments and disturbances necessary to establish the
proposed use on the site.
(3) Where applicable, a narrative description of all elements of special
concern identified in the Pennsylvania Natural Diversity Inventory
and Chester County Natural Areas Inventory and verification that
the Nature Conservancy has been contacted regarding the PNDI
site and the proposed structure or use.
(4) The minimum buildable area as described in Subsection B below.
§ 224-30 TOWING SERVICES § 224-31
210:987
(5) Calculations indicating the area of the site with natural resources
and the area of natural resources that would be disturbed or
encroached upon. The calculation shall be shown on the plan as
follows:
Resource
A Amount
of Land in
Resources
(square
feet)
B Percentage
of
Disturbance
Allowed
C
Maximum
Amount
of
Disturbance
Allowed
(square
feet)
(A x B)
D Proposed
Disturbance
(square
feet)1
Floodplain
Floodway 0
Floodfringe
50
Lakes and
ponds
0
Lake and
pond
Shorelines
20
Steep slopes
15% to
25%
30
Greater
than 25%
15
Watercourses 0
Wetlands 0
Wetlands
margin
20
Woodlands
When
overlapping
other
natural
resource
areas
20
Woodlands
only
50
NOTE:
§ 224-31 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-31
210:988
Resource
A Amount
of Land in
Resources
(square
feet)
B Percentage
of
Disturbance
Allowed
C
Maximum
Amount
of
Disturbance
Allowed
(square
feet)
(A x B)
D Proposed
Disturbance
(square
feet)1
1 As depicted on plan in accordance with Subsection A, Column D
shall be less than or equal to the result in Column C.
B. Minimum buildable area. The purpose of the identification of the
minimum buildable area is to ensure sufficient area is provided for the
general location of the building, driveway, patio, other improvements
and site alterations while meeting the natural resource protection
standards and minimum setback requirements of this chapter. The
applicant shall delineate on the plan a buildable area sufficient in size to
accommodate site improvements and which complies with the
maximum disturbance requirements of this article and any other
applicable ordinances and codes.
C. Continued protection of identified natural resources. To ensure the
continued protection of identified natural resources, the following
requirements shall apply:
(1) Individual lots. For natural resource protection areas on individual
lots, restrictions meeting city specifications shall be placed in the
deed for each site or lot that has natural resource protection areas
within its boundaries. It shall be clearly stated in the individual
deeds that the maintenance responsibility lies with the individual
property owner. The restrictions shall provide for the continuance
of the resource protection areas in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(2) Natural resource areas held in common. For natural resource
protection areas held in common, the provisions of § 224-54 shall
apply. In addition to the provisions of § 224-54, restrictions meeting
city specifications shall be placed on the natural area to be held in
common. The party or organization responsible for the
maintenance of the natural area shall be clearly identified in the
deed. The restrictions shall provide for the continuance of the
resource protection areas in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 224-31 TOWING SERVICES § 224-31
210:989

ARTICLE X
Historic Overlay District
§ 224-32. Legislative authority.
The Coatesville Historic Overlay District is hereby established in
accordance with the following legislative acts:
§ 224-33. Purpose.
The Historic Overlay District has been established to:
§ 224-34. Establishment.
The Historic Overlay District shall include the following historic resources,
as classified below:
A. Act No. 167 of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania dated June 13, 1961 (P.L. 282), as amended.251
B. Act No. 247, the Municipalities Planning Code, Sections 604(1) and
605(2)(vi), as amended.252
A. Recognize structures and uses within the City which reflect the
cultural, economic, social, political and architectural history of the City
of Coatesville, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United
States.
B. Protect historic resources listed on the National Register of Historic
Places as well as those identified locally which are of historic value to
the City of Coatesville.
C. Establish a procedure whereby the historic significance of resources
listed in Subsection B above is considered when they are targeted for
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or razing.
D. Mitigate negative effects associated with proposed changes to historic
resources and discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic
resources.
E. Encourage the continued use of historic resources and facilitate their
appropriate reuse.
F. Implement the recommendations of the City of Coatesville
Comprehensive Plan and Open Space, Recreation and Environmental
Resources Plan, as amended.
A. Class I. Any structure or use listed individually as a National Landmarks
or on the National Register of Historic Places, including but not limited
to the following:
251. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
252. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 10605(1) and (2)(vi).
§ 224-32 TOWING SERVICES § 224-34
210:991
§ 224-35. Applicability.
(1) High Bridge.
(2) Huston, Abram House and Carriage House.
(3) Lukens Main Office Building.
(4) National Bank of Coatesville Building.
(5) Terracina.
B. Class II. Any structure or use which is within a district listed on the
National Register of Historic Places, including but not limited to the
City of Coatesville Historic District.
C. Class III. Any structure or use which is not on the National Register of
Historic Places but is determined to be of significance to the City of
Coatesville and appropriately documented to that effect by the City of
Coatesville Historical Commission.
A. Class I. The provisions of this article shall apply when an applicant
proposes to reconstruct, alter, restore, demolish or raze, in whole or in
part, the exterior of a Class I historic resource which is visible from a
public street or way.
B. Class II.
(1) Reconstruction, alteration or restoration. The provisions of this
article shall apply when:
(a) An applicant proposes to reconstruct, alter or restore, in whole
or in part, the exterior of a Class II historic resource which is
visible from a public street or way; and
(b) The affected structure or use is permitted as a conditional use
in the underlying district or is required to obtain a certificate of
appropriateness by the supplemental regulations of Article X.
(2) Demolition or razing. The provisions of this article shall apply when
an applicant proposes to demolish or raze, in whole or in part, the
exterior of a Class II historic resource which is visible from a public
street or way.
C. Class III. The provisions of this article shall apply when:
(1) An applicant proposes to reconstruct, alter or restore, in whole or
in part, the exterior of a Class III historic resource which is visible
from a public street or way; and
(2) The affected structure or use is permitted as a conditional use in
the underlying district or is required to obtain a certificate of
appropriateness by the supplemental regulations of Article X.
§ 224-34 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-36
210:992
§ 224-36. Exemptions.
§ 224-37. General provisions.
A. Destruction of historic resource. A historic structure which is
involuntarily destroyed at least 75% by fire, explosion, flood or other
phenomena or legally condemned may be reconstructed without being
subject to the provisions of this article, provided that:
(1) The owner of the property had no prior knowledge or reason to
believe such destruction would occur;
(2) The destruction was not caused directly or through neglect by the
owner or his or her agent; and
(3) The owner provides a report to the Historical Commission
documenting the cause of the destruction.
B. Projects approved by Secretary of Interior.
(1) Projects that the Secretary of Interior, as administered by the
National Park Service, has approved as certified rehabilitation are
deemed approved and need not be reviewed according to the
provisions of this article, provided that:
(a) One copy of Part 1, Evaluation of Significance, and one copy of
Part 2, Description of Rehabilitation Work, along with evidence
of their approval from the National Park Service, are submitted
to the Zoning Officer; and
(b) The project is proposed to be completed as stated in Part 2 of
the application.
(2) The Zoning Officer is authorized to issue a permit for the
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition and razing of a
historic resource if evidence is presented that the project is an
approved certified rehabilitation according to the provisions of this
chapter.
A. Application of regulations. The provisions of this article shall overlay
and supplement the provisions of the underlying zoning district. In the
event that the provisions of the underlying zoning district and the
provisions of this article are in conflict, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
B. Issuance of permits.
(1) No Class I, Class II or Class III historic resource shall be
reconstructed, altered or restored, in whole or in part, before an
application for a building permit has been fully reviewed by the
Historical and Architectural Review Board (HARB), recommended
for a certificate of appropriateness by the HARB and approved by
the City Council.
§ 224-36 TOWING SERVICES § 224-37
210:993
§ 224-38. Historical Commission.
Chapter 27, Historical Commission, of the City of Coatesville Code contains
provisions regulating the membership and duties of the Historical
Commission. In addition to the duties prescribed by Chapter 27, Historical
Commission, the Historical Commission shall perform the following
functions attributed to it for the purposes of administering this chapter:
(2) No Class I or Class II historic resource shall be demolished or
razed, in whole or in part, before an application for a building
permit has been reviewed by the Historical Commission and
approved by the City Council.
C. Historic District Map. The City of Coatesville Historic District Map has
been adopted by reference as part of this chapter and declared to be
part of this article.253 The boundaries of the Historic Overlay District
Map shall be interpreted in accordance with Article III of this chapter.
The Historic District Map may be revised periodically by legislative
action of City Council after a public hearing. In considering any
revision, including additions, deletions or change of classification, to
the Historic District Map, the Council shall receive a written
recommendation from the Historical Commission.
D. Routine maintenance and repair. Nothing in this article shall be
construed so as to prevent the routine maintenance or repair of any
exterior elements of any structure or use.
E. Public safety. Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to prevent
the reconstruction, alteration, restoration, demolition or razing of any
historic resource which the Zoning Officer shall certify as required for
public safety.
A. The Historical Commission shall keep on file up-to-date maps of the
following:
(1) The location of historic resources, as defined in this article; and
(2) The Historic Overlay District, as defined in this article.
B. The Historical Commission shall make an annual report to the City
Council, which should include, but not be limited to, an accounting of
expenditures, justification for the appropriation of funds for the
upcoming year, a record of actions taken by the Historical Commission
in the preceding year and any recommendations for changes to this
chapter.
C. The Historical Commission shall petition the City Council that defects
or repairs of historic resources be undertaken for historic resources, in
accordance with § 224-43.
253. Editor's Note: The Historic District Map is included at the end of Ch. 197, Subdivision and
Land Development.
§ 224-37 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-38
210:994
§ 224-39. Historical and Architectural Review Board.
D. In addition, upon specific authorization by the City Council, the
Historical Commission may be empowered to:
(1) Conduct a survey of structures and uses for the purpose of
determining those of historic and architectural significance,
pertinent facts about the structures and uses and any action to be
undertaken in coordination with the Planning Commission,
Historical Commission and any other appropriate groups.
(2) Maintain and periodically revise the detailed listings of historic
resources and data pertaining to the resources, appropriately
classified with respect to national, state or local significance and to
period or field of interest.
(3) Propose revisions to the existing Historic Overlay District, as
defined in §§ 224-34 and 224-37C.
(4) Cooperate with and enlist assistance from the National Park
Service, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission, the Chester
County Historical Society, the Chester County Historic
Preservation Office and other agencies, public and private,
concerned with historic structures and uses.
(5) Prepare a design guide, describing colors and materials which are
appropriate within the Historic Overlay District, to assist property
owners or their agents who intend to reconstruct, alter or restore a
historic resource and to provide guidance to the HARB when
reviewing an application. The design guide is subject to approval
from the City Council.
A. Membership.
(1) The Historical and Architectural Review Board, hereinafter
referred to as the "HARB," shall be composed of seven members,
appointed by the City Council. The Council may designate the
Historical Commission or a subcommittee thereof as the Historical
and Architectural Review Board. Membership requirements for the
HARB shall be as follows: at least one member shall be a registered
architect; at least one member shall be a licensed real estate
broker; at least one member shall be a building inspector; and at
least one member shall be a member of the Planning Commission.
The remaining members shall have a knowledge of and an interest
in the preservation of the Historic Overlay District. A majority of
the members shall be residents of the City of Coatesville.
(2) The position of any member of the HARB appointed in his or her
capacity as a registered architect, licensed real estate broker,
building inspector or member of the Planning Commission who
ceases to be so engaged shall be automatically considered vacant.
§ 224-38 TOWING SERVICES § 224-39
210:995
This does not apply to professional career positions which have
been vacated for reasons of retirement.
(3) The initial terms of the members of the HARB shall be as follows:
one member shall be appointed to serve until the first day of
January following the date the HARB becomes effective; two
members shall be appointed to serve until the first day of the
second January thereafter; two members shall be appointed to
serve until the first day of the third January thereafter; and two
members shall be appointed to serve until the first day of the fourth
January thereafter.
(4) The City Council shall appoint their successors on the expiration of
their respective terms to serve for periods of three years. An
appointment to fill a vacancy shall be only for the unexpired portion
of the term.
(5) Any member may be removed from the HARB for cause, by a
majority vote of the City Council taken after the member has
received notice 15 days in advance of the intent to take such a vote.
A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member
shall request it in writing.
B. Officers. The HARB shall elect its own Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary
and create and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall
serve annual terms and may succeed themselves.
C. Rules and regulations. The HARB may make and alter bylaws and
regulations to govern its procedure consistent with the ordinances of
the City of Coatesville and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
D. Quorum. A majority of the HARB shall constitute a quorum, and action
taken at any meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a quorum.
E. Reimbursement. The members of the HARB shall serve without
compensation but may be reimbursed for direct expenses.
F. Powers and duties of the HARB.
(1) The HARB shall give counsel to the City Council regarding the
advisability of issuing a certificate of appropriateness for the
reconstruction, alteration or restoration of historic resources
within the Historic Overlay District. The HARB's recommendation
to the City Council shall be in the form of a written report, in
accordance with the provisions set forth in § 224-40B below.
(2) The HARB shall make an annual report to the City Council, which
should include, but not be limited to, an accounting of
expenditures, justification for the appropriation of funds for the
upcoming year, a record of actions taken by the HARB in the
§ 224-39 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-39
210:996
§ 224-40. Review procedures.
preceding year and any recommendations for changes to this
article.
(3) The HARB shall hold a regularly scheduled monthly public meeting,
provided that there is business to conduct and shall record minutes
and transmit them to the City Council.
(4) The HARB shall hold any additional public meetings and hearings
as necessary to execute its powers and duties as required by this
article or the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Demolition of historic resources. Applications for a building permit
required to demolish or raze a historic resource are reviewed by the
Historical Commission for its recommendation, which is submitted to
the City Council for its determination in accordance with § 224-40C.
(1) All applications for demolitions received by the Code Officer will be
reviewed against the Historic Overlay District Map. If the
application involves an historic resource, the Zoning Officer will
advise the applicant that they must comply with the procedures
and requirements of this section.
(2) Application requirements for the demolition of a Class I or II
historic resource. In addition to any other applicable requirements
under city codes, any applicant seeking a permit to demolish an
historic resource shall submit the following information in the form
of a written report and exhibits. The report shall be filed with the
Zoning Officer, who shall forward it to the Chairman of the
Historical Commission.
(a) Owner of record.
(b) Classification on Historic District Map.
(c) Site plan showing all buildings and structures on the property.
(d) Recent photographs of the resource proposed for demolition.
(e) Reasons for demolition.
(f) Method of demolition.
(g) Future uses of the site and of the materials from the
demolished resource.
(3) Permit review procedures.
(a) Upon determination by the Zoning Officer and the Chairman
that a complete application for a building permit for demolition
or razing of a historic resource has been filed, the Historical
Commission shall review the permit application at its regularly
scheduled public meeting or at a special hearing, to take place
§ 224-39 TOWING SERVICES § 224-40
210:997
within 30 days of the date of filing the complete application,
to consider the recommendation which it will give to the City
Council.
(b) The applicant shall be advised of the time and place of said
meeting or hearing and shall be invited to appear to explain his
or her reasons therefor. Additional hearings, if necessary, shall
be scheduled within 30 days of each other, unless mutually
agreed otherwise by the Historical Commission and the
applicant.
(c) Within 30 days of the final hearing, or before its next regularly
scheduled meeting, the Historical Commission shall submit a
report to the City Council and the applicant. The report shall
include:
[1] The exact location of the historic resource in question.
[2] A description of the proposed demolition involving the
historic resource.
[3] A list of adjacent structures or uses, documenting their
general exterior architectural characteristics.
[4] The extent to which the proposal meets the criteria set
forth in Subsection A(4) below.
[5] A recommendation to approve, approve with conditions or
disapprove the building permit. The reasons for the
recommendation shall be set forth and, in the event of a
conditional approval or disapproval, the changes in the
applicant's plans which are necessary for Historical
Commission approval.
(d) If the Historical Commission shall fail to transmit such report
within 30 days after the final hearing, the application shall be
deemed to be recommended for approval, except where mutual
agreement has been made for an extension of the time limit.
(e) If an applicant receives conditional approval and decides to
make the necessary changes, he or she shall so notify the
Historical Commission and the City Council, in writing, prior to
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council.
(f) If the applicant intends to refile revised plans to remedy the
defects which led to the recommendation for disapproval, the
same review period and procedure set forth above shall apply.
(g) Before the Historical Commission recommends approval or
denial of the demolition or razing of a historic resource, in
whole or in part, it may request the City Council to direct the
City Engineer, at the expense of the applicant, to provide it
§ 224-40 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-40
210:998
with a report on the state of repair and stability of the historic
resource under consideration.
(4) Historical Commission review standards. In making a
recommendation for the demolition or razing of a historic resource,
the Historical Commission shall consider:
(a) The extent to which the historic resource constitutes an
immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
(b) The significance of the historic resource to the historic and
architectural integrity and the economic vitality of the Historic
Overlay District.
(c) The extent to which the applicant demonstrates that the
property owner is not capable of earning an economic return,
as appraised by a qualified real estate appraiser.
(d) The extent to which the deterioration of the historic resource
and loss of economic use has been the result of the applicant's
actions.
(e) The efforts made by the applicant to successfully market the
historic resource.
(f) The proposed construction after demolition and its impact on
the integrity of the Historic Overlay District.
B. Reconstruction, alteration or restoration of historic resources.
Applications for certificates of appropriateness are reviewed by the
HARB for its recommendation, which is submitted to the City Council
for its determination in accordance with § 224-40C.
(1) HARB preapplication review procedure.
(a) Prior to the preparation of working drawings and
specifications or calling for proposals or bids from contractors
and developers, owners or agents may prepare preliminary
scale drawings and outline specifications for review and
informal discussion with the HARB. The purpose of this review
shall be to acquaint the developer, owner or agent with
standards of appropriateness of design that are required of his
or her proposed development.
(b) The preapplication review shall not require formal application
but does require notice to be given to the Zoning Officer and
subsequent notification to the Chair of the HARB at least seven
days before the date of the meeting at which the preliminary
drawings are to be discussed. Five copies of all documents
shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer, who shall forward one
copy to the Chairman of the HARB.
§ 224-40 TOWING SERVICES § 224-40
210:999
(c) In the case of minor repairs, the HARB may recommend
approval at one review session if the preliminary drawings and
other materials are sufficiently clear and explicit. Should said
material indicate that the proposed minor repairs will not
change the exterior appearance of the historic resource, the
HARB may exempt the application from provisions of this
article and recommend approval of a certificate of
appropriateness.
(2) HARB full review procedure.
(a) Application.
[1] If, upon the determination of the Zoning Officer, an
application for a land development or building permit
affects a Class I, Class II or Class III historic resource, the
Zoning Officer shall inform the applicant of the specific
requirements of this article.
[2] Five copies of all drawings and plans for reconstruction,
alteration or restoration shall be submitted. The drawings
and plans shall be prepared by a design professional and
shall include:
[a] Plans and exterior elevations, drawn to scale, with
sufficient detail to show, as it relates to exterior
appearances, the architectural design of the historic
resource, including proposed materials, textures and
colors and dimensions.
[b] Plot or site plans, drawn to scale not smaller than one
inch equals 50 feet, showing adjoining property lines
and adjacent streets from which the proposed activity
may be viewed and all improvements affecting
appearances, such as walls, walks, terraces,
landscaping, accessory buildings, parking, signs,
lights and other elements.
[c] A location map, using the City Zoning Map, drawn at a
not smaller than one inch equals 200 feet, indicating
the general location of the historic resource in relation
to nearby roads and properties.
[d] In cases where reconstruction, alteration or
restoration of a historic resource is proposed, the
application shall be accompanied by a set of legible
black-and-white or color photographs showing all
sides of the historic resource and photographs
showing the adjacent properties and the relationship
of the historic resource to them.
§ 224-40 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-40
210:1000
[e] In cases where demolition or razing of portions of an
historic resource is proposed, the application for a
permit to demolish shall be accompanied by a set of
legible black-and-white or color photographs showing
all sides of the historic resource under consideration
and any interiors which relate its state of disrepair or
substantiate the need for demolition and photographs
showing the contiguous properties and the
relationship of the historic structure to them.
[3] All of the above-mentioned materials shall be filed with the
Zoning Officer, who shall forward them to the Chairman of
the HARB. The Zoning Officer and the Chair of the HARB
shall determine if the application is complete.
(b) HARB review.
[1] Upon determination by the Zoning Officer and the HARB
that a complete application for a land development or
building permit for the reconstruction, alteration or
restoration of a historic resource has been filed, the HARB
shall review the permit application at its regularly
scheduled public meeting or at a special hearing, to take
place within 30 days of the date of the filing of the
complete application, to consider the recommendation
which it will give to the City Council.
[2] The applicant shall be advised of the time and place of said
hearing and shall be invited to appear to explain his or her
reasons therefor. Additional hearings, if necessary, shall be
scheduled within 30 days of each other, unless mutually
agreed otherwise by the HARB and the applicant.
[3] Within 30 days of the final hearing or before its next
regularly scheduled meeting, the HARB shall submit a
report to the City Council and the applicant. The report
shall include:
[a] The exact location of the historic resource in question.
[b] A description of the proposed reconstruction,
alteration or restoration affecting the historic
resource.
[c] A list of adjacent structures or uses, documenting
their general exterior architectural characteristics.
[d] Proposed improvements, including but not limited to
landscaping plans, grading, parking, sidewalks and
driveways.
§ 224-40 TOWING SERVICES § 224-40
210:1001
[e] The finished height and width of any proposed
construction or alterations.
[f] The extent to which the proposal meets the design
criteria set forth in Subsection B(3) below.
[g] A recommendation to approve, approve with
conditions or disapprove a certificate of
appropriateness or building permit. The reasons for
the recommendation shall be set forth, and in the
event of a conditional approval or disapproval, the
changes in the applicant's plans which are necessary
for HARB approval.
[4] If the HARB shall fail to transmit such report within 30
days after the final hearing, the application shall be
deemed to be approved, except where mutual agreement
has been made for an extension of the time limit.
[5] If an applicant receives conditional approval and decides
to make the necessary changes, he or she shall so notify
the HARB and the City Council, in writing, prior to the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council.
[6] If the applicant intends to refile revised plans to remedy
the defects which led to the recommendation for
disapproval, the same review period and procedure set
forth above shall apply.
[7] Before the HARB approves or denies demolition or razing
of portions of a historic resource, it may call upon the City
Engineer, at the expense of the applicant, to provide it with
a report on the state of repair and stability of the historic
resource under consideration.
(3) HARB review standards. The HARB shall use the criteria
established in this section when formulating its recommendation
regarding the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness.
(a) The HARB shall consider the appropriateness of exterior
architectural features which can be seen from a public street
or way only and shall consider the general design,
arrangement, texture, material and color of the historic
resource and the relation of such factors to similar features of
structures and uses within the Historic Overlay District. This
includes, but is not limited to, cleaning methods, such as
sandblasting or solvent washdown; the application of
nonstructural surface texture or veneers, such as stucco or
siding; replacement of similar types of windows, doors and
other minor building elements; and the alteration of decorative
elements, such as cornices or trim. The HARB shall not
§ 224-40 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-40
210:1002
consider any matters not pertinent to the preservation of the
historic aspect and nature of the Historic Overlay District.
(b) The HARB may recommend against the issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness for the reconstruction, alteration
or restoration of any historic resource within the Historic
Overlay District which, in the HARB's opinion, would be
detrimental to the district and against the public interests of
the City.
(c) In determining the counsel to be presented to the City Council
concerning the issuing of a certificate of appropriateness
authorizing a permit for the reconstruction, alteration or
restoration of a historic resource, in whole or in part, within
the Historic Overlay District, the HARB shall consider the
following relative to existing structures and uses:
[1] The significance of the historic resource to the historic and
architectural integrity of the Historic Overlay District.
[2] The development history of the historic resource and its
components and the historic period most represented in its
existing condition.
[3] The historic period or periods the applicant proposes to
use as the exterior appearance objective.
[4] The quality of the documentation used by the applicant to
substantiate the proposed exterior appearance objective.
(d) Compliance with Department of Interior's standards for
rehabilitation. When making its decision relative to the
appropriateness of the proposal, the HARB shall consider the
most current version of the guidelines for rehabilitating
historic resources of the United States Department of the
Interior and the degree to which the proposed work complies
with such standards. At the minimum, the following general
standards shall be used:
[1] Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a
compatible use for a property which requires minimal
alteration of the historic resource or site and its
environment or to use a property for its originally intended
purpose.
[2] The distinguishing original qualities or character of a
historic resource and its environment shall not be
destroyed. The removal or alteration of any historic
material or distinctive architectural features should be
avoided when possible.
§ 224-40 TOWING SERVICES § 224-40
210:1003
[3] All historic resources shall be recognized as products of
their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis
and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be
discouraged.
[4] Changes which may have taken place in the course of time
are evidence of the history and development of a historic
resource and its environment. These changes may have
acquired significance in their own right, and this
significance shall be recognized and respected.
[5] Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled
craftsmanship which characterize a historic resource shall
be treated with sensitivity.
[6] Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired,
rather than replaced, wherever possible. In the event that
replacement is necessary, the new material should match
the material being replaced in composition, design, color,
texture and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement
of missing architectural features should be based on
accurate duplications of features, substantiated by
historic, physical or pictorial evidence, rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different
architectural elements from other structures or uses.
[7] The surface cleaning of historic resources shall be
undertaken with the gentlest means possible.
Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will damage
the historic building materials shall not be undertaken.
[8] Contemporary design for alterations and additions to
existing historic resources shall not be discouraged when
such alterations and additions do not destroy significant
historical, architectural or cultural material and such
design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material
and character of the property, neighborhood or
environment.
[9] Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to historic
resources shall be done in such a manner that, if such
additions or alterations were to be removed in the future,
the essential form and integrity of the historic resource
would not be impaired.
(e) Historical Commission design guide. When making its decision
relative to the appropriateness of the proposal, guidelines
published by the Historical Commission and approved by the
City Council shall be considered.
§ 224-40 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-40
210:1004
§ 224-41. Procedure for approved demolition or razing.
When the City Council has delayed issuance of a building permit for
demolition or razing of a historic resource, as prescribed in § 224-40C(5)
above, the applicant shall take the following steps during the required sixtyday
delay period:
C. City Council review. The City Council makes the final determination on
issuing a building permit to demolish a historic resource or a certificate
of appropriateness to reconstruct, alter or restore an historic resource.
(1) Upon receipt of the report from the Historical Commission or
HARB, the City Council, at its next regularly scheduled meeting,
shall consider whether to grant the applicant a certificate of
appropriateness or building permit, as the case may be.
(2) The applicant shall be advised by the Codes Administrator of the
time and place of the meeting at which his or her application shall
be considered. The applicant shall have the right to attend this
meeting and comment on his or her application.
(3) In making its determination, the City Council shall consider the
Historical Commission or HARB report and the same criteria used
by the Historical Commission or HARB as set forth in this article.
(4) If the City Council approves an application for the reconstruction,
alteration or restoration of a historic resource, it shall issue a
certificate of appropriateness, authorizing the Zoning Officer to
issue a building permit for the work proposed in the application.
(5) If the City Council approves an application for demolition or razing
of a historic resource, it shall authorize the Zoning Officer to issue
a building permit. In an effort to seek alternatives to demolition,
the City Council may delay the issuance of a building permit for up
to 60 days, provided that the conditions set forth in § 224-41 are
met.
(6) If the City Council disapproves the application, it shall do so in
writing, and copies shall be given to the applicant, Zoning Officer
and Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission. The
disapproval shall set forth the reasons therefor and shall indicate
the reasons for disapproval and changes in the applicant's plans
which are necessary to meet the City Council approval.
(7) The City Council shall notify the applicant of its decision within 10
days of its meeting at which the application was considered, unless
mutually agreed otherwise.
A. Give notice of the approved demolition or razing in the same manner
prescribed in § 224-86A.
§ 224-40 TOWING SERVICES § 224-41
210:1005
§ 224-42. Hardships.
§ 224-43. Maintenance of historic resources.
B. Make a bona fide offer to sell the historic resource at a price reasonably
related to its fair market value to any person, firm, corporation,
government or agency, which gives reasonable assurance that it is
willing to preserve and restore the historic resource. Prior to making
such offer to sell, an owner shall first file a statement with the Historical
Commission, identifying the property, the offering price and the date
the offer to sell shall begin. The sixty-day delay period shall not begin
until such statement has been filed.
C. Demonstrate to the City Council that the requirements of this section
have been met.
A. The City Council, upon recommendation from the HARB or Historical
Commission, may issue a certificate of appropriateness or building
permit where the standards otherwise set forth in this chapter are not
met, but where the Council determines that failure to issue the
certificate or building permit would result in undue hardship to the
owner of the property. Before the City Council issues a certificate or
permit, the records must show that:
(1) The property cannot yield a reasonable economic return or that the
owner cannot make any reasonable use of the property.
(2) The plight of the owner is due to exceptional or unique
circumstances and not to the general applicability of this chapter.
(3) The conditions or circumstances which constitute the hardship
were not caused or created by the property owner subsequent to
the effective date of this chapter.
B. For the purpose of Subsection A(1) above, "reasonable economic
return" shall not be construed to mean a maximum return, and
"reasonable use" shall not be construed to mean highest and best use.
A. All historic resources should be preserved against decay and
deterioration and maintained free from structural defects by the owner
or such other person who may have the legal custody and control
thereof. Said owner or other person having legal custody and control
thereof should repair and thereafter maintain said historic resource in a
manner consistent with the Building Code and other pertinent
regulations of the City of Coatesville. The provisions of this article shall
not be construed to require a level of maintenance greater than that
required under provisions of other pertinent city regulations.
B. The Historical Commission, on its own initiative, may file a petition with
the City Council requesting that the owner or such other person who
may have the legal custody and control thereof proceed under Chapter
82, Building Construction, of the Code of the City of Coatesville to
§ 224-41 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-43
210:1006
§ 224-44. Appeals.
The applicant may appeal the denial of the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness or building permit in accordance with the appeals
provisions of Article XVI of this chapter and the Municipalities Planning
Code.254
§ 224-45. Inspection.
When a certificate of appropriateness has been issued, a copy thereof shall
be transmitted to the Zoning Officer, who shall from time to time, inspect
the work approved by such certificate.
§ 224-46. Unlawful acts.
require correction of defects or repairs to any historic resource so that
it shall be preserved and protected in consonance with the purpose of
this article and the public safety.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter to reconstruct, alter or restore a
Class I, Class II or Class III historic resource, in whole or in part, before
an application for a building permit has been fully reviewed by the
Historical and Architectural Review Board (HARB), recommended for a
certificate of appropriateness by the HARB and approved by the City
Council.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter to demolish or raze, in whole or in
part, a Class I or Class II historic resource before an application for a
building permit has been reviewed by the Historical Commission and
approved by the City Council.
C. It shall be a violation of this chapter to perform any reconstruction,
alteration or restoration of a historic resource which is not in
accordance with an approved certificate of appropriateness.
254. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 224-43 TOWING SERVICES § 224-46
210:1007

ARTICLE XI
Regulations Applicable to All Districts
§ 224-47. Applicability of common regulations.
The provisions of this article represent regulations and standards which are
common to all zoning districts. Unless exempted by applicable provisions or
specified limitations, the following common regulations shall apply to all byright
uses and all uses permitted by special exception or conditional use.
§ 224-48. Lot area and yard requirements.
A. Reduction of lot and yard area. No lot shall be reduced so that the area
of the lot or the dimensions of the required yards and open spaces shall
be less than herein specified.
B. Space regulations. No required yard area or other space provided about
any building or structure for the purpose of complying with this chapter
shall be considered as a yard or other open space for another building
or structure.
C. Yard requirements.
(1) Corner lots. A front yard as provided for in the lot area, bulk and
coverage requirements for the various districts shall be required on
each street on which a corner lot abuts.
(2) Structures and uses. No structures or uses shall be permitted
within required front yard areas except for driveways, sidewalks
and any accessory uses or signs expressly permitted by this
chapter. Where a minimum side yard is specified, no building or
other structure shall be permitted within such width, except for
permitted projections or accessory uses according to the following
conditions:
(a) A projection from a building, using such building for support
but not being enclosed or part of the living area of such
structure, may extend into the required yard not more than 15
feet, provided that no projection shall extend closer than five
feet to any lot line. Such projections may include overhanging
eaves, gutters, cornices, chimneys or patios on grade.
(b) Accessory uses or structures within side yards shall be placed
beyond the plane of the building which orients toward the rear
yard or in any rear yard, provided that no structure, except for
permitted fences or walls, is within five feet of any lot line.
(3) Yard requirements exceptions. The yard of a proposed building in
any district may be decreased in depth to the average alignment or
setback of existing buildings within 100 feet on each side of the
proposed building, provided that such calculation is limited to the
same block. Such reduction may occur when the alignment or
§ 224-47 TOWING SERVICES § 224-48
210:1009
§ 224-49. Nuisance standards.
In order to determine whether a use conforms to the requirements of this
section, the City Council may obtain a qualified consultant, whose cost for
services shall be borne by the owner or lessee of the property. When a new
use is proposed, the City Council may also hire, at the cost of the applicant,
a qualified consultant to testify as to whether the proposed use conforms
with the requirements of this section.
setback of existing buildings is less than the yard requirements for
the applicable district.
D. Height requirements exceptions. When granted by the City Council and
the Fire Marshal, the maximum building height limitations established
by this chapter may be exceeded by one foot for each foot of depth
added to each side and rear yard beyond the minimum requirement.
Building or structure height limitations within this chapter shall not
apply to spires, agricultural uses, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments,
poles, chimneys, flagpoles, bulkheads, tanks and other necessary
mechanical appurtenances, windmills, solar panels and other similar
structures built above the roof and not devoted to human occupancy,
provided that the minimum setback for each structure from any lot line
is a distance equal to or greater than the proposed height.
A. Noise.
(1) Terminology. All technical terminology not defined below shall be
defined in accordance with applicable publications of the American
National Standard Institute, Acoustical Terminology, ANSI
[S1.1-1960] (R1971) with its latest approved revisions.
CONTINUOUS SOUND — Any sound which is steady state,
fluctuating or intermittent with a recurrence greater than one time
in any one-hour interval.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Sound of short duration, with an abrupt
onset and rapid decay and an occurrence of not more than one time
in any one-hour interval.
NORMAL RESIDENTIAL ACTIVITIES — Any sound which is
generated as a result of an owner or occupier of a residence
exercising his normal and usual right to enjoy, maintain, repair
or improve said residence or the real property upon which the
residence is located.
LAND USE — The actual real use of land and buildings regardless
of the zoning or other classification attributed to such land and
buildings.
(2) Standards. For the purpose of measuring sound in accordance with
the applicable provisions of these regulations, test equipment
methods and procedures shall conform to the standards as
published by the American National Standard Institute (ANSI,
§ 224-48 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-49
210:1010
Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters, S1.4-1971 and
ANSI S1.13-1971, Standard Methods for the Measurement of
Sound Pressure Levels) with its latest revisions.
(3) Sound levels by receiving land use.
(a) No person shall operate or cause to be operated within the City
any source of continuous sound in such a manner as to create a
sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving
land use when measured at or beyond the property boundary
of the receiving land use, during the times specified in the
Table of Continuous Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use
below.
(b) Continuous sound levels by receiving land use shall be as
follows:
Continuous Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use
Receiving Land
Use Category Time
Sound Level Limit
(dBA)
Residential, public
space, open space
or institutional
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
55
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. plus Sundays
and legal holidays
50
Commercial or
business
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
65
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. plus Sundays
and legal holidays
60
Industrial At all times 70
(4) Impulsive sounds.
(a) For any source of sound which emits an impulsive sound, the
excursions of sound-pressure level shall not exceed 20 dBA
over the maximum sound level limits set forth in the Table of
Continuous Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., and in no case shall they
exceed 80 dBA, regardless of receiving land use, using the fast
meter characteristics of a Type II meter, meeting the American
National Standard Institute specification S1.4-1971.
(b) In no case shall impulsive sounds exceed the sound-level limits
established in the Table of Continuous Sound Levels by
Receiving Land Use between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
§ 224-49 TOWING SERVICES § 224-49
210:1011
(5) Exceptions. The maximum permissible sound levels by receiving
land use established in Subsection A(3) above shall not apply to the
following noise sources:
(a) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency.
(b) Work to provide electricity, water or other public utilities when
public health or safety are involved.
(c) Normal residential activities.
(d) Motor vehicle operations on public streets (regulated by
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regulations, Title
67, Chapter 450, governing established sound levels).
(e) Public celebrations specifically authorized by the City.
B. Odors.
(1) There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous
matter in such quantities as to be offensive at lot boundary lines.
(2) Any process which involves the creation or emission of any odors
shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system so that
control shall be maintained if the primary safeguard system should
fail.
(3) In case of doubt concerning the character of odors emitted, the
fifty-percent response level of Table I (Odor Thresholds in Air),
Research on Chemical Odors: Part I — Odor Thresholds for 53
Commercial Chemicals, October 1968, or as amended,
Manufacturing Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., shall
be the maximum odor permitted.
C. Glare or heat.
(1) Any operation producing an intense glare or heat shall be
performed within an enclosed building or behind a solid fence in
such manner as to be completely imperceptible from any point
along the lot lines.
(2) In general, lighting fixtures that shield the reflector or lens or any
high-brightness surface from viewing angles above 60º from
horizontal shall be utilized.
D. Vibration. No vibration shall be produced which is transmitted through
the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at or at any
point beyond the lot lines; nor shall any vibration produced exceed
0.002g peak measured at or beyond the lot line using either seismic or
electronic vibration-measuring equipment.
E. Radioactivity. There shall be no activities which emit dangerous
radioactivity at any point. No operation involving radiation hazards
§ 224-49 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-49
210:1012
shall be conducted which violates the regulations and standards
established in Title 10, Part 20, Code of Federal Regulations, Standards
for Protection Against Radiation, in its latest revised form.
F. Electrical and electromagnetic interference.
(1) There shall be no electrical disturbance affecting the operation at
any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such
disturbance.
(2) No use, activity or process shall be conducted which produces
electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television
reception from off the premises where the activity is conducted.
G. Air pollution: smoke, particulate matter, fumes, vapor and gases. All
uses shall comply with the standards of the Air Pollution Control Act, 35
P.S. §§ 4001 through 4015, as amended, and the following standards:
(1) Hazardous air emission. All emissions shall comply with National
Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants, promulgated by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the
Federal Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7412) as promulgated in 40 CFR
61 or its most recent update.
(2) Particulate, vaporous and gaseous emissions.
(a) No person shall cause, suffer or permit the emission of escaped
particulate, vaporous or gaseous matter from any source in
such a manner that the emission is visible or detectable outside
the property of the person where the source is being
generated.
(b) No emission shall be made which can cause any damage to
health, to animals or vegetation or other forms of property or
which can cause any excessive soiling at any point.
(3) Visible smoke emissions. Visible air contaminants shall not be
emitted in such a manner that the opacity of the emissions is equal
or greater than 20% for a period or periods aggregating more than
three minutes in any one hour or equal to or greater than 60% at
any one time and shall comply with 25 Pa. Code § 127A(7) or its
most recent update.
H. Safety and construction requirements for electrical, diesel, gas or other
power installations. Every use requiring power shall be so operated that
the service lines, substation, etc., shall conform to the most acceptable
safety standards recognized by the Pennsylvania Bureau of Labor and
Industry and shall be constructed, installed, etc., so as to be an integral
part of the architectural features of the plant or, if visible from abutting
residential properties, shall be screened in accordance with § 224-51 of
this chapter.
§ 224-49 TOWING SERVICES § 224-49
210:1013
§ 224-50. Outdoor lighting.
I. Fire and explosive hazards. All activities and all storage of flammable
and explosive materials at any point shall be provided with adequate
safety and fire-fighting devices and shall meet the applicable fire and
safety codes of the City of Coatesville.
J. Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
(1) No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in
bulk above the ground; provided, however, that tanks or drums of
fuel directly connecting with energy devices or heating appliances
located on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded
from this provision.
(2) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transported off the lot by natural causes
or forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream
or watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or which will
destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
(3) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products
stored outdoors shall be enclosed by an approved safety fence
adequate to conceal the facilities from any adjacent public highway
and residential or recreational use.
(4) All materials or wastes which might constitute a fire hazard or
which may be edible or attractive to rodents or insects shall be
stored outdoors only if enclosed in containers adequate to
eliminate such hazards.
K. Industrial waste or sewage. No use shall be conducted in such a way as
to discharge any untreated sewage or industrial waste into any stream.
All methods of sewage or industrial waste treatment and disposal shall
be approved by the Chester County Department of Health and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. [Amended
3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
L. Provision and use of water. All water requirements shall be reviewed
and approved by the City of Coatesville Water Authority. All industrial
requirements shall be filled by the municipal water system.
A. Purpose. The outdoor lighting provisions of this section serve the
following purposes:
(1) The provision of adequate lighting of outdoor public places where
safety and security are needed.
(2) The protection of drivers and pedestrians from nonvehicular light
sources that shine directly into their eyes, creating disabling glare.
§ 224-49 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-50
210:1014
(3) The protection of neighbors from improperly directed light sources
that create a nuisance glare.
B. Applicability.
(1) Outdoor lighting shall be required for safety and personal security
in areas of public assembly, public walkways and streets, parking
facilities with five or more spaces, multiple-family residences and
commercial, industrial, institutional and municipal uses when in
operation during hours of darkness.
(2) The City Council may require lighting for other uses or locations as
deemed necessary for public safety and security.
(3) The glare-control requirements of this chapter shall apply to all
uses, including residential.
C. Criteria.
(1) Illumination levels. Illumination, where required by this chapter,
shall have intensities and uniformity ratios in accordance with the
Table of Illumination Intensity and Uniformity Requirements below
or the most current recommended practices of the Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America:
Illumination Intensity and Uniformity Requirements
Activity
Average Maintained
Footcandles
Uniformity Ratio
(avg:min)
Roadways
Residential 0.4 6:1
Commercial 0.9 6:1
Parking lots
Residential
Vehicular
traffic
0.5 4:1
Pedestrian
safety and
security
0.8 4:1
Commercial
Mediumactivity
lots
Vehicular
traffic
1.0 3:1
Pedestrian
safety and
security
2.4 3:1
§ 224-50 TOWING SERVICES § 224-50
210:1015
Activity
Average Maintained
Footcandles
Uniformity Ratio
(avg:min)
Highactivity
lots
Vehicular
traffic
2.0 3:1
Pedestrian
safety and
security
3.6 3:1
Walkways and
bikeways
0.5 5:1
Building
entrances and
exits
5.0 N/A
Material
storage areas
Active 20.0 N/A
Inactive 1.0 N/A
SOURCE: Illuminating Engineering Society Publication, RR-89.
(2) Fixture design. Lighting fixtures shall be of a type and design
appropriate to the application in terms of height and placement.
Where lighting fixtures are proposed for a Class I, II or III historic
resource, as defined by § 224-34 of this chapter, they shall be
acceptable to the HARB and City Council in terms of the historic
setting in which the fixtures are to be placed.
(3) Control of nuisance and disabling glare.
(a) Nuisance glare is glare which creates an annoyance to
adjacent property owners through the unwanted illumination
of their properties or structures, either internally or externally.
Disabling glare is output from a light source which impairs
visibility for pedestrians or drivers, creating a potential
hazard.
(b) Outdoor lighting, whether on public or private property, shall
be designed, installed and maintained in a manner which does
not present a disabling glare hazard to drivers or pedestrians;
and all reasonable means shall be taken to prevent the
projection of nuisance glare onto neighboring properties.
(c) The City Council may require that lighting be controlled by
automatic timing devices to mitigate nuisance glare during
specified periods.
§ 224-50 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-50
210:1016
§ 224-51. Landscaping and buffering.
(d) Proper fixture selection and application, including design,
angles, shields, height and lighting levels, shall serve as the
primary means of glare control, rather than screening
methods, such as vegetation and fences.
(4) Installation.
(a) Lighting fixtures shall not be mounted in excess of the
maximum permitted building height for the district.
(b) Electrical feeds to lighting standards shall be underground not
overhead.
(c) Lighting standards in parking areas shall be placed at a
minimum of five feet outside of the paved lot area or five feet
behind perimeter tire stops or mounted on concrete pedestals
at least 30 inches above the pavement or protected by other
acceptable means.
(5) Maintenance. Lighting fixtures used for safety and security shall be
maintained in proper working order so as to continuously meet the
requirements of this chapter.
(6) Additional requirements. In addition to the above standards, the
requirements of § 197-63 of Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall apply. Lighting for proposed parking lots shall
meet the criteria of § 197-44 of Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(7) Lighting plan. When applicable, lighting plans shall be submitted to
ensure the requirements of this chapter are met. Such plans shall
include a layout of proposed fixture locations, footcandle data that
demonstrate conforming intensities and uniformity and a
description of the equipment, glare control devices, lamps,
mounting heights, hours of operation and mounting methods
proposed.
A. Landscaping. Landscaping along proposed streets and internal
landscaping of parking areas, industrial, institutional, commercial,
multifamily buildings and other uses and areas requiring landscaping
shall meet the requirements of §§ 197-49 and 197-50 of Chapter 197,
Subdivision and Land Development.
B. Buffering. The purpose of the following buffering standards is to create
an acceptable transition between potentially incompatible land uses
and to reduce conflicts between these uses:
(1) Applicability. In addition to the landscaping requirements of
§ 224-51A above, buffer areas shall be located between potentially
§ 224-50 TOWING SERVICES § 224-51
210:1017
conflicting uses. Visual screening, consisting of the indicated Class
A, B or C buffer, shall be required between the following uses:
(a) Any retail complex, retail center, office complex or office park
adjacent to zoning districts RN-1, RN-2, RN-3 or RC or any
single-family detached or semidetached uses shall provide a
Class A buffer.
(b) Any industrial or warehouse use, except as noted below, that
adjoins a residentially zoned district or any residential use
shall provide a Class B buffer.
(c) Any industrial use with greater than 50,000 square feet of
gross floor area or industrial park adjacent to a residentially
zoned district or any residential use shall provide a Class C
buffer.
(d) A junkyard, landfill, recycling center or transfer station shall
provide a Class D buffer between the required fence and the
street line or any edge of the property adjacent to a residential
use or district.
(e) Other uses determined to be potentially conflicting shall
provide the buffer class specified by the City Council.
(2) Buffer class standards. After determining the required buffer class,
the applicant shall select an appropriate planting option listed
below. Plantings are not required to be aligned on property or
right-of-way boundaries but may be sited as necessary to achieve
the optimal screening level. Plant materials shall be selected from
the plant materials list below.
(a) Class A:
[1] One canopy tree per 40 feet plus one evergreen per 30 feet
of boundary; or
[2] One canopy tree per 40 feet plus one flowering tree per 60
feet plus one evergreen per 60 feet of boundary.
(b) Class B: one evergreen per 20 feet and one flowering tree per
60 feet of boundary.
(c) Class C:
[1] One evergreen per 25 feet plus one berm four feet high; or
[2] Six-foot-high cedar or spruce fencing with one flowering or
evergreen tree every 30 feet.
(d) Class D:
§ 224-51 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-51
210:1018
[1] One canopy or flowering tree at an average of one tree per
40 linear feet plus one evergreen tree at an average of one
tree per 20 linear feet; or
[2] One canopy or flowering tree at an average of one tree per
40 linear feet plus one shrub per eight linear feet.
(3) Plant materials.
(a) Each plant option listed in Subsection B(2) above may use any
of the plant materials listed in the Plant Materials List below.
Minimum plant size shall be as indicated in the Plant Materials
List below. The City Council may permit other planting types if
they are hardy to the area, are not subject to blight or disease
and are of the same general character and growth habit as
those listed below. All planting materials shall meet the
standards of the American Association of Nurserymen.
(b) Existing planting, topography or man-made structures can
reduce or eliminate the buffering requirements if they partially
or completely achieve the level of screening as the planting
requirements outlined in this section. This determination shall
be made at the discretion of the City Council.
Plant Materials List
Deciduous/canopy trees
All canopy trees used to meet the required planting
requirements shall be of a two-inch caliper minimum.
Required canopy tree plantings shall be selected from the
below list or a species hardy to the area. Trees marked with
"+" before their botanical name are native species, and the
use of these trees is encouraged.
Botanical Name Common Name
Acer campestre Hedge maple
Acer ginnala Amur maple
+ Acer Negundo Box elder
Acer palmatum Japanese maple
+ Acer rubrum Red maple
+ Acer saccharum Sugar maple
+ Betula lenta Black birch
+ Betula nigra River birch
Carpinus betulus European hornbeam
+ Carya ovata Shagbark hickory
Crataegus phaenopyrum
treeform
Washington hawthorn
§ 224-51 TOWING SERVICES § 224-51
210:1019
Botanical Name Common Name
Crataegus vividis, Winter
King
Winter King hawthorn
+ Fagus grandifolia American beech
Fagus sylvatica European beech
+ Fraxinus americana White ash
+ Fraxinus pennsylvania Green ash
Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo (male only)
Larix kaempferi Japanese larch
+ Liquidambar stryraciflua Sweet gum
+ Liriodendron tulipfera Tulip tree, yellow poplar
Metasequoia
glyptostroboides
Dawn redwood
+ Nyssa sylvatica Black gum, sourgum
+ Ostrya virginiana American hophornbeam
Phellondendron amurense Amur cork tree (male only)
Platanus acerifolia London plane tree
+ Quercus alba White oak
Quercus coccinea Scarlet oak
Quercus palustris Pin oak
Quercus phellos Willow oak
+ Quercus rubra Red oak
+ Sassafras albidum Sassafras
Sophora japonica Japanese pagodatree
Tilia americana, Redmond Redmond linden
Tilia cordata, Chancellor Chancellor linden
Zelkova serrata Japanese zelkova
Deciduous/Flowering trees
All flowering trees used to meet the required planting
requirements shall be of two-inch caliper minimum. Required
flowering tree plantings shall be selected from the below list
or a species hardy to the area. Trees marked with "+" before
their botanical name are native species, and the use of these
trees is encouraged.
Botanical Name Common Name
+ Amelanchier canadensis Shadblow serviceberry
+ Cercis canadensis Eastern redbud
+ Chioanthus virginicus Fringetree
§ 224-51 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-51
210:1020
Botanical Name Common Name
+ Cornus florida Flowering dogwood
Cornus kousa Kousa dogwood
Cornus mas Cornelian cherry
Crataegus species Any hawthorn species
Halesia carolina Carolina silverbell
Koelreuteria paniculata Golden rain tree
Magnolia soulangeana Saucer magnolia
Magnolia virginiana Sweetbay magnolia
Malus species Any crab species
Oxydendrum arboreum Sourwood, sorrel tree
Prunus cerasifera Purpleleaf flowering plum
Prunus kwanzan Kwanzan cherry
Prunus sargentii Sargent cherry
Prunus serrulata, Kwanzan Kwanzan cherry
Prunus subhirtella var.
pendula
Weeping higan cherry
Pyrus calleryana, Aristocrat Aristocrat pear
Pyrus calleryana, Capital Capital pear
Pyrus calleryana, Redspire Redspire pear
Pyrus calleryana,
Whitehouse
Whitehouse pear
Stewartia koreana Korean Stewartia
+ Viburnum prunifolium Blackhaw viburnum
Evergreen trees
All evergreen trees used to meet the required planting
requirements shall be at least four feet in height. Required
evergreen tree plantings shall be selected from the below list
or a species hardy to the area. Trees marked with "+" before
their botanical name are native species, and the use of these
trees is encouraged.
Botanical Name Common Name
Abies concolor Concolor fir
+ Ilex opaca American holly
+ Juniperus virginiana Eastern redcedar
+ Kalmia latifolia Mountain laurel
Picea abies Norway spruce
Picea omorika Serbian spruce
§ 224-51 TOWING SERVICES § 224-51
210:1021
Botanical Name Common Name
Pinus nigra Australian pine
+ Pinus strobus White pine
Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglas fir
Taxus baccata English yew
Taxus cuspidata Japanese yew
+ Tsugas canadensis Hemlock
Shrubs
All shrubs used to meet the planting requirements shall be at
least four feet in height. Required shrubs shall be selected
from the below list or a species hardy to the area. Shrubs
marked with "+" before their botanical name are native
species, and the use of these shrubs is encouraged.
Botanical Name Common Name
Euonymus alatus Winged euonymus
Hamamelis vernalis Vernal witch hazel
+ Hamamelis virginiana Common witch hazel
+ Ilex glabra Inkberry
+ Ilex verticillata Winterberry
+ Kalmia latifolia Mountain laurel
+ Myrica pennsylvanica Bayberry
Pyracantha coccinea, lalandi Laland firethorn
Rhamnus frangula Glossy buckthorn
Taxus cuspidata, capitata Upright yew
Taxus x media, hicksii Hicks yew
+ Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood viburnum
Viburnum lantana Wayfaring tree viburnum
+ Viburnum trilobum Highbush cranberry
(4) General buffering requirements.
(a) All buffer yards shall be maintained and kept clean of all
debris, rubbish, weeds and tall grass.
(b) All planting in the buffer area shall be installed and thereafter
maintained by the property owner.
(c) Plant materials required within the buffer area shall be
assured by a performance guaranty posted with the City
Council in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the plant
§ 224-51 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-51
210:1022
§ 224-52. Fences, hedges and walls.
Fences, hedges and walls shall meet the following standards:
materials. Such guaranty shall be released only after the
passage of the second growing season following planting.
(d) No structures may be placed within the buffer area, and no
manufacturing or processing activity or storage of materials
shall be permitted, except for the following:
[1] Landscaped treatments, such as berms, fences or walls,
which aid in screening and do not conflict with the
character of adjoining properties nor block clear sight
distance required at intersections.
[2] Structures relating to and used for landscaping, such as
tree wells, tree guards, tree grates and retaining walls, to
preserve stands or specimens of existing trees or used for
other functional purposes.
[3] Roads which provide direct ingress/egress for the tract or
lot, including appurtenant structures within road rights-ofway,
such as curbs, sidewalks, signs, lighting standards or
benches.
[4] Underground utilities.
(e) When buffer requirements are part of a subdivision or land
development plan, the proposed buffer plantings shall be
included as part of the landscape plan required by § 197-50 of
Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development. Otherwise, a
plan shall be submitted sufficient to indicate compliance with
the above buffering requirements.
A. Fences, hedges, walls and retaining walls shall comply with the height
and other requirements of §§ 197-56 and 197-57 of Chapter 197,
Subdivision and Land Development. Where required elsewhere in this
chapter for buffering or other purposes, a greater fence height than
those specified by Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development,
shall be permitted.
B. No fence, hedge or wall shall obstruct vision for through traffic at street
intersections or along streets in accordance with § 224-53 of this
chapter.
C. Fences or walls that are in conformance with all other provisions of this
chapter and other applicable ordinances may be permitted within
required setbacks.
§ 224-51 TOWING SERVICES § 224-53
210:1023
§ 224-53. Access and traffic control.
Every building and use hereafter established or altered shall meet the
following standards for access and traffic control:
§ 224-54. Open space.
A. Traffic control and impact assessment. When applicable, proposed uses
shall comply with the impact assessment and mitigation requirements
of § 197-77 of Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
B. Sight distances at intersections. On any lot, no wall, fence or other
structure shall be erected, altered or maintained and no hedge, tree,
shrub or other growth shall be installed or maintained which may cause
danger to traffic on a street by obscuring the view. A clear sight triangle
shall be maintained in accordance with the design standards and
required improvements for streets set forth in § 197-40D of Chapter
197, Subdivision and Land Development.
C. Right-of-way widths for streets. Whenever the existing street right-ofway
is less than that required for the particular street classification, the
right-of-way widths set forth in § 197-40D of Chapter 197, Subdivision
and Land Development, shall be applicable to any development related
to this article.
D. Access.
(1) Provisions shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to
and from public or private streets, without undue congestion or
interference with normal traffic flow within the City. The developer
shall be responsible for the design and construction and the costs
thereof of any necessary traffic control device and highway
modifications required by the City and the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT).
(2) No parking or paved areas, except for permitted accessways, shall
directly abut a street. Each such area shall be separated from the
street to prohibit unregulated access to that street.
(3) Areas provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and
other vehicles and for the servicing of uses by refuse collection and
for fuel and other service vehicles shall be adequate in size and
shall be so arranged that they may be used without blockage or
interference with the use of pedestrian and vehicular accessways
or parking facilities.
A. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all areas
designed as permanent open space, including common open space,
deed-restricted portions of lots and private open space or recreation
facilities, including land for active or passive recreation, designed to
satisfy requirements of this chapter. Open space proposed within a
§ 224-53 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-54
210:1024
cluster development shall meet the requirements of § 224-13D as well
as the requirements contained within this section.
B. Open space design standards.
(1) No more than 60% of common open space shall be comprised of the
designated Floodplain Conservation Overlay District, wetlands and
steep slopes in excess of 25%.
(2) Impervious parking areas, sewage treatment and structural
development, including buildings and stormwater management
basins, spillways and level spreaders, shall not be calculated as
part of the minimum required common open space area. Certain
facilities, such as stormwater recharge facilities, may be allowed to
count towards open space requirements if the City Council
determines they would enhance or be consistent with the intent of
open space provision.
(3) Where open space is designated as separate, noncontiguous
parcels, no single parcel shall be less than 10,000 square feet in
area. In addition, the ratio of the longest to shortest dimension of
an open space parcel shall not exceed five to one (5:1). Exceptions
to these standards are permitted where a portion of the open space
is:
(a) Serving as a connecting strip between larger open space
parcels or as a trail or portion of a trail network;
(b) Contiguous to either the Brandywine River or one of its named
tributaries; or
(c) Connects or includes sections of the trails or greenway
corridor depicted on Maps 4 and 5 of the 1993 Open Space,
Recreation and Environmental Resources Plan.
(4) Areas designated for open space shall be configured as far as
possible to meet the following purposes:
(a) Maximizing the conservation of site features identified as
having particular environmental, historical or recreational
value, including steep slopes, floodplains, watercourses,
wetlands, mature trees, woodlands, historic sites or structures
and other noted landscape features as identified in the Open
Space, Recreation and Resources Plan.
(b) Providing links to open space or recreation areas on abutting
parcels, including pedestrian trails, to create linked pathway
corridors in the City.
(c) Implementing applicable open space and recreation plans of
any federal, state, county, regional, local municipality or
recognized private organization to complement and extend
such resources in the City.
§ 224-54 TOWING SERVICES § 224-54
210:1025
(d) Improving accessibility for the general public to the
recreational facility or open space resource and to promote its
use among residents.
C. Open space designation. Where a subdivision or land development plan
is required, the plan shall contain the following statement for lands
designated as open space: "Open space land may not be separately sold,
nor shall such land be further developed or subdivided." All plans shall
further designate the use of open space and the type of maintenance to
be provided. In designating use and maintenance, the following classes
may be used:
(1) Lawn: a grass area, with or without trees, which may be used by
the residents for a variety of purposes and which shall be mowed
regularly to ensure a neat and orderly appearance.
(2) Natural area: an area of natural vegetation undisturbed during
construction. Such areas may contain pathways. Meadows shall be
maintained as such and not left to become weed-infested.
Maintenance may be minimal but shall prevent the proliferation of
weeds and undesirable plants, such as honeysuckle and poison ivy.
Litter, dead trees and brush shall be removed, and streams shall be
kept in a free-flowing condition.
(3) Recreation area: an area designated for specific recreational use,
including, but not limited to tennis, swimming, playfields and
totlots. Such areas shall be maintained so as to avoid creating a
hazard or nuisance and shall perpetuate the proposed use.
D. Management of open space.
(1) Any application for a use containing permanent open space shall
include a plan for the long-term management of the open space.
Such plan shall include the following information:
(a) The manner in which the open space will be owned, managed
and maintained.
(b) The conservation and land management techniques which will
be used to conserve and protect the open space.
(c) The professional and personnel sources necessary to maintain
and manage the property.
(d) The nature of public and private access planned for the open
space.
(e) The source of money available for such maintenance and
management on a perpetual basis.
(2) The adequacy and feasibility of the management plan shall be
considered as factor in the approval or denial of the development
application. The City Council may require that the management
§ 224-54 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-54
210:1026
plan be recorded with final subdivision and land development plans
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County.
(3) To allow for potentially changing land management needs, the
management plan may be changed by written application to the
City Council. To be approved, the change must be feasible and
consistent with the purposes of open space preservation in the City.
Further, the change must not increase the likelihood that the
obligation for management and maintenance of the land will fall
upon the City.
E. Ownership of common open space. The following methods may be used,
either individually or in combination, to preserve, own and maintain
open space or protected natural resources:
(1) Condominium. The open space or natural resource areas may be
controlled through the use of condominium agreements. Such
agreements shall be in conformance with the Uniform
Condominium Act of 1980, as amended.255 All open space land or
natural resource areas shall be held as a common element.
(2) Fee simple dedication. The City may but shall not be required to
accept any portion or portions of the open space or natural
resource area, provided that:
(a) Such land is accessible to residents of the City.
(b) There is no cost of acquisition other than costs incidental to the
transfer of ownership, such as title insurance.
(c) The City has access to and agrees to maintain such lands.
(3) Dedication of easements. The City may but shall not be required to
accept easements for public use of any portion or portions of open
space land or natural resource area, title of which is to remain in
ownership by condominium or homeowners' association, provided
that:
(a) Such land is accessible to the residents of the City;
(b) There is no cost of acquisition other than costs incidental to the
transfer of ownership, such as title insurance; and
(c) A satisfactory maintenance agreement is reached between the
developer and the City.
(4) Transfer of easements to a private conservation organization. With
the permission of the City, an owner may transfer easements to a
private nonprofit organization among whose purposes it is to
conserve open space land and natural resources, provided that:
255. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 224-54 TOWING SERVICES § 224-54
210:1027
(a) The organization is acceptable to the City and is a bona fide
conservation organization with perpetual existence.
(b) The conveyance contains appropriate provision for proper
reversion or retransfer in the event that the organization
becomes unwilling or unable to continue to carry out its
functions.
(c) A maintenance agreement acceptable to the City is entered
into by the developer and the organization.
(5) Homeowners' association. The open space and natural resource
areas may be held in common ownership by a homeowners'
association. This method shall be subject to all of the provisions for
homeowners' association set forth below and in Article VII of the
Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247).256
(a) The developer shall provide a description of the association,
including its bylaws and methods for maintaining the open
space.
(b) The association is organized by the developer and operating
with financial subsidization by the developer, if necessary,
before the sale of any lots within the development.
(c) Membership in the association is mandatory for all purchasers
of homes therein and their successors.
(d) The association shall be responsible for maintenance of
insurance and taxes on common open space or natural
resource areas, enforceable by liens placed by the City.
(e) The members of the association shall share equitably the costs
of maintaining and developing such common open space or
natural resource area, in accordance with the procedures
established herein.
(f) In the event of the proposed transfer, within the methods here
permitted, of common open space land or natural resource
area by the homeowners' association or the assumption of
maintenance of common open space land or natural resource
area by the City as hereinafter provided, notice of such action
shall be given to all property owners within the planned
residential development.
(g) The association shall have or hire adequate staff to administer
common facilities and maintain the common open space or
natural resource area.
(h) The homeowners' association may lease back open space lands
or natural resource areas to the developer, his heirs or assigns
256. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10701 et seq.
§ 224-54 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-54
210:1028
§ 224-55. Airport height restrictions.
or to any other qualified person or corporation for operation
and maintenance of open space lands or natural resource
areas, but such a lease agreement shall provide that:
[1] The residents of the development where the open space or
natural resource is located shall at all times have access to
such open space lands or natural resource areas;
[2] The common open space or natural resource to be leased
shall be maintained for the purposes set forth in this
chapter; and
[3] The operation of open space or natural resource facilities
may be for the benefit of the residents only or may be open
to the residents of the City at the election of the developer
or property owners' association, as the case may be.
[4] In addition, the lease shall be subject to the approval of the
City Council, and any transfer or assignment of the lease
shall be further subject to the approval of the City Council.
Lease agreements so entered upon shall be recorded with
the Recorder of Deeds of Chester County within 30 days of
their execution, and a copy of the lease shall be filed with
the Secretary of the City.
A. Applicability.
(1) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Aviation; the Federal Aviation
Administration of the United States Department of Transportation;
and the Pennsylvania Laws Relating to Aviation, Act 164 of 1984,
Section 5911, Airport Zoning Requirements,257 all building permit
applications within the airport hazard area shall be
administratively checked to ensure that the height of a proposed
building or structure does not exceed the height limitations
prescribed within the City by the Height Limitations and Zoning
District Map, prepared in 1989 by L. Robert Kimball and
Associates, Consulting Engineers and Architects, in association
with the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of
Aviation, for the City of Coatesville.
(2) The building restrictions shall apply only to height. The underlying
zoning district shall prescribe all other uses and standards
applicable to land within the airport hazard area.
B. Required information. The applicant shall submit such plans,
topographic surveys, drawings, blueprints or other information
257. Editor's Note: See 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5911 et seq.
§ 224-54 TOWING SERVICES § 224-55
210:1029
§ 224-56. Conversion and use of existing commercial buildings.
The ground or first floor of an existing commercial or office building in
the C-1, C-2, C-3 or PS Districts shall not be converted to residential uses
and shall only be used for commercial, office, service or other permitted
nonresidential uses of the applicable district.
necessary for the Code Enforcement Officer to determine the height of
any proposed building or structure.
C. Appeals and variances.
(1) Should the Code Enforcement Officer be unable to determine
compliance of the proposed use with this chapter, the building
permit shall be denied. The applicant may then appeal the Code
Enforcement Officer's decision in accordance with § 224-87 of this
chapter.
(2) No variances to the height limitations within the airport hazard
area shall be granted without the express written consent from the
Federal Aviation Administration, such consent to be obtained by the
applicant. In addition, the applicant shall notify the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation of the intent to apply for any
variances; such notification shall be in written form and sent so as
to reach the Department at least 10 days before the application is
to be submitted.
§ 224-55 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-56
210:1030
ARTICLE XII
Supplemental Use Regulations
§ 224-57. Applicability.
A. Except as provided by law or in this chapter, in each district, no
building, structure or land shall be used or occupied except for the
purposes permitted in the applicable zoning district and in accordance
with the supplemental use regulations of this article. Unless otherwise
specified in this chapter, on any property, parcel or tract of land, only
one principal use shall be permitted.
B. Uses specifically regulated in this article include the following:
Reference Type of Use
Accessory uses and structures
§ 224-59B, Residential accessory uses and structures
(1) Customary
(2) Ancillary:
(a) Residential rooming accommodations
(b) Accessory apartments
(c) Home occupations (including home day care and bed-andbreakfast
inn)
(3) Temporary
(4) Prohibited
§ 224-59C, Nonresidential accessory uses and structures
(1) Customary
(2) Ancillary
(3) Temporary
(4) Prohibited
Principal uses and structures
§ 224-60A, Residential uses
(1) Multifamily
(2) Mobile home park
§ 224-60B, Public/institutional uses
(1) Day-care center
(2) School/educational facility
(3) Rooming/boarding house
(4) Group quarters
(5) Life-care facility
(6) Nursing home
§ 224-57 TOWING SERVICES § 224-57
210:1031
§ 224-58. Applicability of other ordinances and regulations.
Reference Type of Use
(7) Hospital
(8) Community utility
(9) Radio, television or microwave transmitter
§ 224-60C, Commercial uses
(1) Retail center/retail complex
(2) Restaurant, fast-food
(3) Restaurant, with drive-through
(4) Financial institution, with drive-through
(5) Auto service/gas station/car wash facility
(6) Amusement hall/arcade
(7) Adult commercial
(8) Office center/office park
§ 224-60D, Industrial uses
(1) Industrial center
(2) Industrial park
(3) Miniwarehouse/public warehouse
(4) Recycling center
(5) Junkyard
(6) Transfer station
(7) Solid waste landfill
(8) Solid waste incinerator
Conversion of uses
§ 224-61A, Residential conversions
§ 224-74B, Adaptive reuse projects
C. Uses not listed in Articles IV through VII (district requirements) or
prohibited by Articles VIII through X (overlay districts) of this chapter
shall not be permitted.
A. Uses permitted by right, special exception or conditional use shall be
subject, in addition to the supplemental use regulations of this article,
to such regulations of yard, lot size, lot width, building area and
easements and provisions for off-street parking and loading,
landscaping and buffering and access and to other provisions specified
in this chapter, Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development, and
any other applicable ordinances. Where ordinance regulations conflict,
the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 224-57 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-58
210:1032
§ 224-59. Accessory uses and structures.
B. The laws of the commonwealth and the regulations of the City of
Coatesville Authority and the Chester County Department of Health
regarding water supply and waste disposal shall be adhered to.
A. Universal accessory use and structure regulations. The following
standards shall apply to all accessory uses and structures:
(1) Accessory uses and structures shall comply with the use standards
applicable in the zoning district in which they are located, unless
explicitly exempted by this chapter.
(2) Unless otherwise specified, accessory uses and structures in
residential districts shall not be located in the front yard.
(3) The land area occupied by accessory structures shall be calculated
into floor-area or lot-coverage standards for each lot.
(4) No accessory structure shall exceed the height limitations of the
district in which it is located except for any freestanding pole,
tower, antennas or similar structure not designed for human
habitation for which required permits have been obtained.
B. Residential accessory uses and structures.
(1) Customary residential accessory uses and structures. The following
customary accessory uses and structures shall be permitted on a
residential lot when they meet the definition of "accessory" and
applicable permits are obtained in accordance with § 224-79. Such
permitted uses and structures include but are not limited to:
(a) Private garage, carport or off-street parking facility.
[1] Any detached structure shall be located in the rear or side
yard.
[2] Unless permitted as an adaptive reuse or permitted home
occupation, the use of a garage shall be limited to the
storage of vehicles and household goods.
[3] Recreational vehicles shall not be occupied as a dwelling
or rooming facility on the premises.
[4] The outside, overnight storage of commercial vehicles
shall be limited to one vehicle, not to exceed one-ton
loading capacity. One additional commercial vehicle shall
be permitted if parked inside a garage, an enclosed
structure or a parking space screened from view at the
street line.
(b) Private swimming pool, tennis court or other recreational
facility.
§ 224-58 TOWING SERVICES § 224-59
210:1033
[1] The use or structure shall be located in the side or rear
yard.
[2] A tennis court, fences and related lighting shall not be
closer to a rear or side lot line than the distance of the
required principal building setbacks. Tennis court fences
shall be permitted but shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
[3] The following requirements apply specifically to private,
nonportable, noncommercial swimming pools which are 24
inches or more in depth:
[a] A building permit shall be required to construct a
private swimming pool.
[b] For lots 15,000 square feet or greater, a swimming
pool shall be located no closer to a property line or
street line than 10 feet. A minimum setback of five feet
is required for lots less than 15,000 square feet.
[c] Swimming pools shall be totally enclosed by a fence of
a minimum of four feet in height. The height
calculation may include a combination of the pool wall
and fence, provided that the combined height equals
four or more feet.
[d] Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from
the pool and shall be self-closing and have a selflatching
device located on the pool side of the gate.
[e] There shall be no cross-connection with the public
sewage system. No permit shall be granted for the
installation or construction of any in-ground,
permanent pool or portable pool having a capacity of
20,000 gallons or more, unless the City Engineer has
certified that the drainage of such pool is adequate
and will not interfere with the water supply system,
with existing sanitary facilities or with public streets.
(c) Accessory buildings for storage or recreational use.
[1] Such uses shall include storage sheds, bathhouses,
gazebos and similar structures.
[2] Such uses shall meet the minimum setbacks indicated in
the Table of Residential Neighborhood District Lot Area,
Bulk and Coverage Requirements258 for residential
accessory structures.
(d) Antennas, flagpoles and microwave satellite dishes.
258. Editor's Note: This table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 224-59 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-59
210:1034
[1] Where applicable, the structures shall comply with Federal
Communications Commission and Building Code
regulations.
[2] Freestanding structures shall be set back from all property
lines a distance of at least 1 1/2 times the height of the
structure and shall be securely anchored to the ground in
a manner satisfactory to the City.
[3] The height requirements of § 224-48D shall apply in
addition to the following:
[a] The highest point of an antenna attached to a building
shall not exceed the peak of the roof by more than 10
feet.
[b] When freestanding, the total height of a microwave
satellite dish shall not exceed 10 feet; when roofmounted,
the dish shall not exceed three feet in
diameter and shall be located on a portion of the roof
sloping away from any front or side street. Neither the
dish or its supports shall exceed the peak of the roof in
height.
[4] No more than two antennas shall be permitted per
residential property nor more than one antenna tower or
microwave satellite dish.
[5] Antenna towers and microwave satellite dishes shall not
be located within any front yard, nor shall they be located
within a side yard facing a street unless sufficiently
screened from the street.
[6] Radio, television or microwave transmitters are subject to
the regulations of § 224-60B(9).
(e) Outdoor storage for residential uses. In addition to the outdoor
storage requirements of § 224-49J, the following requirements
shall apply:
[1] Outdoor storage shall be limited to a maximum of 10% of
the total lot area.
[2] No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be
stored except for tanks of fuel directly connected to energy
or heating devices.
(f) Signs, in accordance with Article XIV.
(2) Ancillary residential accessory uses and structures. An ancillary
use or structure is a noncustomary use or structure which shall
only be permitted on a residential lot if it meets the definition
contained herein for accessory uses and structures, a development
§ 224-59 TOWING SERVICES § 224-59
210:1035
plan has been submitted for review and applicable zoning, building
and occupancy permits are obtained.
(a) Residential rooming accommodations. Such use includes the
keeping of roomers, boarders or lodgers as a residential
accessory use subject to the following provisions:
[1] Rooming accommodations shall only be permitted in
single-family detached or semidetached dwellings.
[2] No more than two roomers, boarders or lodgers shall be
accommodated at any one time.
[3] Occupants of the rooming accommodations shall share a
common access with the primary residents and have
access to the remainder of the dwelling unit; no separate
cooking facilities or entrances shall be created.
(b) Accessory apartments. An accessory apartment is a selfcontained
residential dwelling unit subordinate to and within
or on the same lot as the principal residential dwelling.
Accessory apartments shall only be permitted within a singlefamily
detached or semidetached dwelling, except as provided
for in Subsection B(2)(b)[3], and shall be subject to the
following provisions:
[1] Only one accessory apartment shall be permitted on a
property.
[2] Both the accessory apartment and principal dwelling shall
be owned by the same person; one of the two dwelling
units must be owner-occupied.
[3] The principal structure shall be at least five years old for
use as an accessory apartment. Detached or attached
garages and other outbuildings may be used as accessory
apartments if they are at least five years old and meet the
adaptive reuse requirements of § 224-61. The garage or
outbuilding shall be on the same lot as a single-family
detached or semidetached dwelling.
[4] The structure and lot in and on which the accessory
apartment is located shall be conforming in regard to
required size and setbacks for the district in which it is
located.
[5] The accessory apartment shall meet the following
minimum size requirements:
§ 224-59 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-59
210:1036
Number of Bedrooms in
Apartment
Gross Floor Area in
Apartment
(square feet)
0 (efficiency) 400
1 (maximum allowed) 500
[6] The accessory apartment shall not exceed 35% of the gross
habitable floor area contained in the existing dwelling
prior to conversion.
[7] Alterations to the exterior of the existing dwelling shall be
limited to access, windows and ventilation. After creation
of the accessory apartment, the building shall maintain the
appearance of a single-family detached dwelling and shall
remain compatible with the character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
[8] The converted dwelling shall have no more than the
original number of entrances along the front of the
building. All other entrances to either the principal or
accessory dwelling units shall be located on the side or
rear of the building.
[9] There shall be no accessory apartment located in a belowground
basement where the exterior grade is more than
halfway up the height of the exterior wall, unless there is
at least one exterior facade where the unit is at grade with
the ground outside.
[10] An annual permit shall be required for the accessory
apartment to ensure that the ownership requirements of
Section B(2)(b)[2] above are met. If a property containing
an accessory apartment is sold, it shall be the
responsibility of the seller to inform the buyer of the
restrictions and permit requirements applicable to the
apartment.
(c) Home occupations. A home occupation is an activity, conducted
for gain by person(s) residing on the premises, that is clearly
subordinate to the existing residential use of the property.
There shall be two categories of home occupations, major and
minor. These uses shall only be permitted in accordance with
the standards set forth below:
[1] Minor home occupation. Minor home occupations, which
meet all of the following criteria, shall be permitted by
right in all residential districts. All other home occupations
shall be defined as major.
§ 224-59 TOWING SERVICES § 224-59
210:1037
[a] The use is only carried on by the inhabitants of the
dwelling.
[b] The use does not involve any customer or client visits
to the dwelling, and there are no direct sales of
products on the site.
[c] There is no exterior indication, including but not
limited to signs, advertising or other display, that a
home occupation is located on the premises.
[d] Commercial delivery and pickup of goods and supplies
is limited to no more than once a week, exclusive of
normal postal and parcel service typically serving a
residential area.
[e] The floor area devoted to the use does not exceed 25%
of the floor area of the principal residential structure
or 400 square feet, whichever is less.
[2] Major home occupation. A home occupation that cannot
meet one or more of the criteria listed in Section B(2)(c)[1]
above shall be defined as a major home occupation. Major
home occupations shall be permitted by special exception
in all residential districts when other applicable criteria of
this chapter can be met.
[3] Prohibited home occupations. The following uses shall not
be permitted as home occupations under any conditions:
[a] Those home occupations which cannot meet any of the
criteria of Subsection B(2)(c)[1] above for a minor
home occupation.
[b] The following uses are prohibited as home
occupations and shall be classified as commercial
uses:
Animal hospitals
Auto or small engine repair
Commercial kennels
Funeral parlors or undertaking establishments
Furniture stripping
Gift or antique shops
Medical or dental clinics (2 or more doctors or
dentists)
Painting of vehicles, trailers or boats
Private schools with organized classes
Rental businesses
§ 224-59 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-59
210:1038
Restaurants
Rooming houses
Welding shops
Other uses of similar character to those listed above
[4] Determination of classification. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall determine whether a proposed home
occupation is major, minor or prohibited. The applicant
shall be responsible for supplying such information as
deemed necessary by the Code Enforcement Officer to
make this determination.
[5] Issuing of permits. The following procedure for approval
and permitting shall apply:
[a] Upon determination that the proposed use is a minor
home occupation and is in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue a permit.
[b] Where the Code Enforcement Officer determines that
the proposed use is a major home occupation, the use
shall require review and approval by the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the provisions of
§ 224-87C, Special exceptions, and the criteria of
§ 224-59B(2)(c), Home occupations. The Zoning
Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions
and safeguards as it deems necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter. Following approval, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit.
[6] Permit limitations. A home occupation permit shall not be
transferable to another person or property. The permit
issued shall only be valid for the person and on the
property for which it was originally issued.
[7] General standards applicable to home occupations. The
following standards shall apply to all home occupations,
whether major or minor:
[a] A home occupation shall be conducted within a
dwelling which is the residence of the principal
practitioner or in an accessory building which is
normally associated with the residential use. The
home occupation shall be carried on wholly indoors.
[b] All applicants shall be required to obtain a permit in
accordance with the requirements of Subsection
B(2)(c)[5] above.
§ 224-59 TOWING SERVICES § 224-59
210:1039
[c] The appearance of the residential structure or
accessory structure shall not be altered nor the
occupation conducted in such a manner which would
cause the premises to differ from its residential
character by the use of materials, construction,
lighting, show windows, signs or advertising visible
outside the premises to attract customers or clients,
other than those signs permitted by this chapter. No
interior display of goods shall be visible from the
outside.
[d] The storage of commercial vehicles shall comply with
Subsection B(1)(a)[4] of this section.
[e] There shall be no exterior storage of materials or
refuse resulting from the operation of the home
occupation.
[f] No equipment or process shall be used in a home
occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors, dust or electrical interference
detectable to normal senses beyond the property line
in excess of levels customarily generated by a
residential use.
[g] There shall be no storage or use upon the premises of
toxic, explosive, polluting, dangerous or other
substances defined as hazardous by the Pennsylvania
Department of Community Affairs or the Department
of Environmental Protection. [Amended 3-25-1996
by Ord. No. 1012-96]
[8] Standards applicable to major home occupations. In
addition to other applicable criteria of this chapter, the
following standards shall apply to major home
occupations:
[a] Major home occupations shall only be permitted in
single-family detached, semidetached and attached
structures.
[b] The total area used for a major home occupation shall
not exceed 25% of the floor area of the principal
residential structure.
[c] No more than one person, other than resident
members of the immediate family, may be employed or
subcontracted at the residence. Use of nonresident
employees must have prior approval from the Zoning
Hearing Board.
§ 224-59 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-59
210:1040
[d] No articles shall be sold or offered for sale on site
except those produced on the premises. Such sales
must have prior approval by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
[e] No more than one sign shall be permitted per
property, provided that it is no larger than two square
feet per side. It shall not be illuminated, animated or
placed in a window.
[f] Off-street parking shall be provided in sufficient
capacity to prevent interference with normal
residential parking in the neighborhood. Off-street
parking, inclusive of required residential parking,
shall not exceed five spaces.
[g] Beauty parlors and barbershops may be permitted as
a major home occupation, provided that no more than
two beauty parlor or barber chairs are provided and
all other provisions of this chapter are met.
[h] Instructional services may be permitted as a major
home occupation, provided that a maximum of two
musical students may be instructed at any one time.
Nonmusic instruction shall be limited to no more four
students at any one time and no more than two trips
per hour.
(d) Home day care. An accessory home day-care use is a private
residence where care and supervision are provided for
between four to 11 children, not related to the caregiver, in
either a for-profit or nonprofit situation. (NOTE: Day care
provided for more than 11 children is a day-care center and is
considered a commercial use, not permitted in residential
districts.) Accessory home day care is further divided into two
categories: family day care and group day care. These uses
shall meet provisions outlined below:
[1] Family day care. A family day-care use is a facility in which
care is provided for four to six children at any one time,
who are not relatives of the caregiver, where the child-care
areas are being used as a family residence.
[a] Family day-care uses shall only be permitted as an
accessory use in a single-family detached dwelling.
[b] There shall be no alterations to exterior facades of
residential structures to accommodate accessory daycare
facilities in a residential district, except for safety
purposes, which shall be confined to rear or side walls
not visible from any public right-of-way.
§ 224-59 TOWING SERVICES § 224-59
210:1041
[c] A minimum outdoor play area of 200 square feet of
contiguous play area shall be provided for each child.
The outdoor play area shall be located to the side or
rear of the property. If a public park or playground is
located within 1,000 feet of the family day-care use,
this may be substituted for the play-area requirement.
[d] If within 500 feet of any street, nonresidential use,
parking lot of five or more spaces, water body or other
safety hazard, the outdoor play area shall be enclosed
by a fence with a minimum height of four feet or
natural barrier suitable to prevent children from
crossing.
[e] In addition to the off-street parking required for a
single-family home, at least one additional space is
required for each nonresident employee.
[f] Prior to final approval of the use and issuing of a
permit by the Code Enforcement Officer, the applicant
must hold all pertinent approvals and registration
certificates from appropriate state or county agencies
as a condition of permit approval and continuation.
Where applicable, the use shall also be subject to
review and approval by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception.
[2] Group day care. A group day-care use is a facility in which
care is provided for more than six but no more than 11
children, where the child-care areas are being used as a
family residence. Day care in excess of 11 children shall be
defined as a day-care center and only permitted as a
commercial use in accordance with the standards of this
chapter.
[a] All standards noted above for family day care shall be
met.
[b] The minimum lot area required for this use shall be
10,000 square feet.
[c] Group day-care facilities shall be located no closer
than 1,000 feet to any other such use within any
residential district.
[d] Safe off-street loading passenger space and adequate
stacking capacity to avoid interference with any
adjacent street shall be provided.
[e] Prior to final approval of the use and the issuing of a
permit by the Code Enforcement Officer, the applicant
must hold all pertinent approvals and licenses from
§ 224-59 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-59
210:1042
appropriate state or county agencies as a condition of
permit approval and continuation. Where applicable,
the use shall also be subject to review and approval by
the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
(e) Bed-and-breakfast inn. A bed-and-breakfast inn is a building or
group of buildings occupied by a resident innkeeper containing
guest rooms for the temporary lodging of guests for
compensation and providing to the occupants such lodging
services as maid service and accessory eating and drinking
facilities limited to the serving of breakfast. A bed-andbreakfast
shall be subject to the following standards:
[1] A bed-and-breakfast shall only be permitted in a singlefamily
detached dwelling in accordance with the
requirements of § 224-61A for a residential conversion or
as an adaptive reuse in accordance with § 224-61B of this
chapter.
[2] The property upon which the bed-and-breakfast is
established shall be the principal residence of the
innkeeper. The use shall be carried on by members of the
immediate family who reside on the premises; nonresident
employees shall be restricted to two in addition to the
resident members of the family.
[3] A bed-and-breakfast shall not contain more than five guest
facilities; any accommodations beyond this standard shall
be regulated as a hotel.
[4] Guests shall not remain in the same bed-and-breakfast for
more than 14 consecutive days.
[5] There shall be no separate kitchen or cooking facilities in
any guest room. Food served to the guests on the premises
shall be limited to breakfast. In nonresidential districts,
privately catered events, such as wedding receptions, shall
be permitted. In any district, eating facilities shall not be
open to the general public.
[6] In residential districts, there shall be no use of windows
for display or advertising visible outside the premises to
attract guests other than a single, nonilluminated sign,
which may not exceed four square feet in area. In
nonresidential districts, the requirements of Article XIV,
Signs, shall apply.
[7] No external alterations, additions or changes to the
exterior structure shall be permitted except as required by
the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry or for
safety reasons as required by another governmental
§ 224-59 TOWING SERVICES § 224-59
210:1043
agency. Fire escapes or external stairways shall be located
either to the side or rear of the residence.
[8] The use of amenities provided by the bed-and-breakfast,
such as porches, swimming pools and tennis courts, shall
be restricted in use to guests of the establishment. The use
of active outdoor recreation amenities shall be limited to
the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
[9] Bed-and-breakfasts shall be served by a public sewage
system. The applicant shall submit documentation that the
proposed use can be adequately served by the Municipal
Authority.
[10] One off-street parking space shall be provided for each
guest room, plus one space for each nonresident
employee, plus the required spaces for a single-family
detached dwelling. The off-street spaces shall be located to
the side or rear of the main dwelling and screened from
the roadway and adjacent properties by fencing or
vegetation.
[11] A bed-and-breakfast inn designated as a historic resource
requires approval of a certificate of appropriateness in
accordance with Article X.
(3) Temporary residential accessory uses and structures. The following
uses and structures shall be permitted as a temporary accessory
use on a residential lot, provided that they meet the standards
below:
(a) A temporary permit may be issued for structures or uses
necessary during construction or other special circumstances
of a nonrecurring nature, subject to the following provisions:
[1] The time period of the initial permit shall be six months.
The permit may be renewed for three-month time periods,
provided that the applicant can demonstrate reasonable
progress towards the completion of the project
necessitating the temporary structure or use.
[2] Such structure shall be removed completely within 30 days
of the expiration of the permit without cost to the City.
[3] A temporary structure, garage or partial structure can be
used for temporary dwelling purposes subject to the
following:
[a] The structure is used to temporarily house residents
displaced from the principal residence due to damage
which has made the structure uninhabitable while the
principal dwelling is being repaired.
§ 224-59 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-59
210:1044
[b] The use is located on the same lot as the principal
dwelling.
[c] Cooking and sanitary facilities must be provided.
[d] The structure complies with applicable Building Code
requirements.
(b) Garage or yard sales. The temporary display and sale of goods
and crafts items on a residentially used property shall be
subject to the following provisions: [Amended 3-26-2012 by
Ord. No. 1374-2012]
[1] Community-wide garage or yard sales shall be permitted
on two occasions, once in the Spring and once in the Fall at
such dates as are set by resolution of City Council.
[2] In addition to the community-wide garage or yard sales,
such temporary uses shall be limited to occurrences of not
more than two consecutive days and not more than two
times within one calendar year. There shall be at least a
thirty-day period between such occurrences.
[3] Signs advertising garage sales shall be posted no more
than two days prior to the first day of the sale and shall be
removed on the final day of the sale. No more than two offpremises
signs shall be placed, which must be approved by
the owners of the property on which they are placed and
subject to the requirements as more specifically set forth
in Article XIV, Signs, § 224-71M.
(4) Prohibited residential accessory uses and structures. The following
uses and structures shall not be permitted on a residential lot:
(a) Outside storage of unregistered or abandoned vehicles.
(b) Outside storage of automotive parts and accessories.
(c) Outside storage or parking of commercial vehicles except in
accordance with Subsection B(1)(a)[4].
(d) Outside storage of construction material for any structure
other than those on the property.
(e) Display of merchandise to be sold, either outside or visible
from the outside, except as permitted for a garage or yard sale
in accordance with Subsection B(3)(b).
C. Nonresidential accessory uses and structures. The following uses and
structures shall be permitted as accessory to any permitted
commercial, business, industrial or institutional use, provided that they
meet the definition contained herein of "accessory," the universal
provisions of Subsection A, any regulations of this chapter which apply
§ 224-59 TOWING SERVICES § 224-59
210:1045
to the principal use and the nonresidential accessory use standards of
this section.
(1) Customary nonresidential accessory uses and structures. The
following customary accessory uses and structures shall be
permitted on a nonresidential lot when they meet the definition of
"accessory" and applicable permits are obtained in accordance
with § 224-79. Such permitted uses and structures include, but are
not limited to, the following:
(a) Lighting, in accordance with § 224-50.
(b) Off-street parking, in accordance with Article XIII.
(c) Loading and unloading facilities, in accordance with Article
XIII.
(d) Signs, in accordance with Article XIV.
(2) Ancillary nonresidential accessory uses and structures. An
ancillary accessory use or structure is a noncustomary accessory
use or structure, which shall only be permitted on a nonresidential
lot when it meets the definition contained herein for "accessory
uses and structures" and the following conditions:
(a) A development plan is filed in accordance with Chapter 197,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(b) Applicable zoning, building and certificate of occupancy
permits are obtained in accordance with § 224-79.
(c) A conditional use permit has been obtained for any use or
structure which is detached from the principal use or which
generates traffic, parking or stormwater impacts over and
above the rates that exist with the principal use.
(d) The ancillary uses below may be permitted as accessory to the
principal uses in this section if all other applicable
requirements are met.
Ancillary Accessory Uses and Structures
Ancillary Accessory Use or
Structure Principal Use
Convenience store Gas station, life-care facility,
mass transit terminal or
hospital
Gas station Car wash, convenience store
or auto service
§ 224-59 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-59
210:1046
Ancillary Accessory Uses and Structures
Ancillary Accessory Use or
Structure Principal Use
Public or semipublic
swimming pool
Hotel, motel, recreation area,
community center, multifamily
complex, mobile home parks,
health/recreation spa,
educational use or life-care
facility
Day-care facility Community center,
educational use, office
complex, office park,
industrial complex, industrial
park or religious use
Financial institution Office complex, office park,
industrial complex or
industrial park
Restaurant Hotel, motel, office complex,
office park, industrial complex
or industrial park
(3) Temporary nonresidential accessory uses and structures. The
following temporary accessory uses and structures shall be
permitted on a nonresidential lot, provided that they meet the
standards below:
(a) A temporary permit may be issued for structures or uses
necessary during construction or other special circumstances
of a nonrecurring nature, subject to the following provisions:
[1] The time period of the initial permit shall be six months.
The permit may be renewed for three-month periods,
provided that applicant can demonstrate reasonable
progress towards the completion of the project
necessitating the temporary use or structure.
[2] Such structure shall be removed completely within 30 days
of the expiration of the permit without cost to the City.
(b) A temporary permit may be issued for a structure used to
temporarily house operations that have been displaced from
the principal building due to damage which has made the
structure uninhabitable, subject to the following provisions:
[1] The temporary structure shall only remain in use until the
principal building has been repaired. The time period of
the initial permit shall be six months. The permit may be
renewed for three-month periods, provided that applicant
can demonstrate reasonable progress towards the
§ 224-59 TOWING SERVICES § 224-59
210:1047
§ 224-60. Principal uses and structures.
completion of the project necessitating the temporary use
or structure.
[2] The use shall be located on the same lot as the principal
use.
[3] Such structure shall be removed completely within 30 days
of the expiration of the permit without cost to the City.
(c) A temporary community event, including but not limited to
carnivals, circuses, flea markets, public exhibitions, auctions,
picnics, air shows, suppers for fundraising and similar
organization activities, shall be permitted subject to the
following:
[1] Such events shall have obtained a permit from the City.
The applicant shall provide the City with plans to ensure
adequate parking, emergency access, road access,
sanitary facilities, refuse collection, noise control and
cleanup after the event.
[2] Signs advertising a temporary community event shall be
subject to the following provisions:
[a] Such signs shall comply with the provision of Article
XIV, Signs, in regard to size and placement.
[b] Such signs shall be posted not more than 14 days prior
to the first day of the event and shall be removed on
the final day of the event.
[c] No more than four off-premises signs shall be placed.
The location of the off-premises signs must be
approved by the owners of the properties upon which
they are to be placed.
(4) Prohibited nonresidential accessory uses and structures. The
following uses and structures shall not be permitted as accessory
uses or structures on a nonresidential lot:
(a) The storage of unregistered or abandoned vehicles, except in
garages.
(b) The use of vehicles or trailers for temporary or permanent
business operations or storage except in accordance with
Subsection C(3).
A. Residential uses. Residential uses shall comply with the use standards
for the zoning district in which they are located, the lot area, setback,
and bulk standards of the Table of Residential Neighborhood District
Lot Area, Bulk and Coverage Requirements and the Table of Residential
§ 224-59 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1048
Conservation District Lot Area, Bulk and Coverage Requirements259
and all other applicable standards of this chapter and other ordinances.
Area and bulk standards for mobile home parks shall be as indicated
in Subsection A(2) below. In addition, the following supplemental
standards shall apply to the specific residential uses listed below:
(1) Multifamily housing.
(a) If the proposal involves an adaptive reuse, the requirements of
§ 224-61, Conversion of uses, shall be met. [Amended
6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 1350-2011]
(b) Multifamily dwelling units shall not be located in a belowground
basement where the exterior grade is more than
halfway up the height of the exterior wall unless there is at
least one exterior facade where the unit is at grade with the
ground outside.
(c) Pedestrian-access facilities shall be provided to the public
rights-of-way at the perimeter of the property.
(d) Each dwelling unit shall have direct access to the outdoors or
to a common hall from which there is direct access to the
outdoors.
(e) Each dwelling shall have separate kitchen and bathroom
facilities.
(f) Each dwelling unit shall meet the following minimum size
requirements:
Number of Bedrooms
Gross Floor Area of
Dwelling Unit
(square feet)
0 (efficiency) 400
1 500
2 650
3 800
Each additional bedroom 120 additional
(g) Where condominium ownership of the dwelling units is
proposed, an approved homeowners' association document, in
accordance with § 224-54E(5), Homeowners' association, shall
be submitted.
(2) Mobile home park. A mobile home park, where permitted, shall
comply with the site design standards of Article XIII of Chapter
197, Subdivision and Land Development, and all applicable
259. Editor's Note: These tables are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-60
210:1049
standards of this chapter. Plans for a proposed mobile home park
shall be submitted in accordance with the plan submittal and
review procedures of Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(a) Area, bulk and setback standards. Area, bulk and setback
standards shall be as follows:
[1] Mobile home tract:
[a] Minimum tract size: 150,000 square feet.
[b] Minimum tract width: 100 feet at street line.
[c] Minimum open space: 20%.
[2] Mobile home lots:
[a] Minimum lot size:
[b] Single-wide: 3,000 square feet.
[c] Double-wide: 5,000 square feet.
[d] Minimum lot width: 25 feet.
[e] Maximum lot coverage: 40%.
[f] Maximum gross density: eight homes per acre.
[g] Mobile home setback requirements.
[h] From public street right-of-way or tract line: 30 feet.
[i] From cartway line of park street: 15 feet.
[j] From another mobile home: 20 feet.
[k] Accessory uses: from park street: 10 feet; from public
street: 30 feet.
(b) Service buildings. Within a mobile home park, nonresidential
uses, such as a management office, storage facilities for the
park residents, laundry facilities, maintenance building and a
community room for the use of park residents, may be
constructed. A maximum of 10% of the site area may be used
for these purposes. When computing the area, buildings,
parking and buffer yard requirements shall be included.
(c) Recreational facilities. A minimum of 25% of the required open
space must be used for recreational facilities or areas, such as
playgrounds, tennis or basketball courts, or other recreational
facilities approved by the City Council. Recreation areas shall
be of a size, shape and grade that is conducive to active
recreation.
§ 224-60 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1050
(d) Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
of § 197-91H of Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(e) Buffering and landscape requirements of this chapter and
§ 197-91J of Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development,
shall be met.
B. Public/institutional uses. Public/institutional uses shall comply with the
use standards for the zoning district in which they are located, the lot
area, setback and bulk standards of Subsection A and all other
applicable standards of this chapter and other ordinances. In addition,
the following supplemental standards shall apply to the specific public/
institutional uses listed below:
(1) Day-care center. Day-care centers include those facilities in which
care is provided for children and where the child-care facility is not
being used for a family residence. Such a facility shall be subject to
the following regulations:
(a) An outdoor play area shall be provided. This area shall be
located to the side or rear of the building. The minimum
required size of the outdoor play area shall be 200 square feet
per child.
(b) The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence or natural
barrier suitable to restrict children within the play area.
(c) Rear and side yards shall be sufficiently screened so as to
protect adjacent residential area from inappropriate noise and
disturbance.
(d) Safe, off-street passenger unloading space and adequate
stacking capacity shall be provided to prevent interference
with traffic flow on any adjacent street or road. One unloading
space per 20 children shall be provided.
(e) Prior to the issuing of a permit by the Code Enforcement
Officer, the applicant shall have received and hold all pertinent
approvals and licenses from appropriate state or county
agencies as a condition of permit approval and continuation.
Where applicable, the use shall also be subject to review and
approval by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception
before a permit is issued.
(f) When used in combination with another nonresidential use, a
permit shall be required for each use.
(2) School/educational facility.
(a) A public or private school which is not conducted as a private
gainful business and is licensed under the proper
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-60
210:1051
governmental authority shall be subject to the following
provisions:
[1] Access shall be taken from a major or minor collector as
defined in Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land
Development.
[2] Outdoor play areas shall be a minimum of 50 feet from side
and rear property lines. Outdoor play areas shall be
sufficiently screened to protect adjacent residential
neighborhoods from inappropriate noise and other
disturbances.
(b) A commercial (for-profit) school, including trade or
professional schools and art, music or dancing schools, shall
only be permitted in nonresidential zoning districts.
(3) Rooming/boarding house. A dwelling used for the housing of
roomers, boarders or lodgers with or without common eating
facilities, including dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses or
other buildings of charitable, educational or philanthropic use,
shall be subject to the following provisions:
(a) Individual rooming units shall not contain kitchen and cooking
facilities.
(b) Each rooming unit shall have at least 250 square feet of floor
area.
(c) No more than one resident shall be permitted per rooming unit
unless they are related by blood or marriage, in which case two
residents per room shall be permitted.
(d) Residents shall have access to the common areas of the
rooming/boarding house and shall share a common outside
access.
(4) Group quarters. Group quarters include living arrangements for up
to five unrelated individuals that do not meet the definitions of
"family" or "group home." This may include a licensed communitybased
facility which provides lodging, habilitative services or meals
to clients, where supervision is provided seven days a week, 24
hours a day, or is staffed continuously by the provider whenever the
structure is occupied. Such a facility shall comply with the
following standards:
(a) Group quarters shall only be permitted in detached buildings.
(b) The number of persons living in group quarters shall not
exceed five. Support staff, which does not reside at the group
quarters, shall not be included in the maximum number.
§ 224-60 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1052
(c) Group quarters must be sponsored and operated by a group,
organization or corporation licensed by either the county or
state. Proof of licensing shall be submitted with applications
for group quarters use. Proof of compliance with all applicable
county or state regulations shall be furnished to the Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the granting of the zoning
permit.260
(4.1) Group homes. [Added 11-9-1998 by Ord. No.
1090-98; amended 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
1444-2015]
[1] Group homes shall be permitted in any residential
dwelling.
[2] The number of persons living in the group home shall have
an occupancy permit from the State Department of Labor
and Industry.
[3] Group homes must be sponsored and operated by a group,
organization or corporation licensed by either the county
or state. Proof of licensing shall be submitted with the
application for group home use. Proof of compliance with
all applicable county or state regulations shall be
furnished to the Codes Department prior to granting of
any permits.
(5) Life-care facility. A life-care facility provides for the transitional
residency of elderly and/or disabled persons, progressing from
independent living in single-family units to congregate apartment
living where residents share common meals and culminating in a
full health- and continuing-care nursing home facility. A life-care
facility shall comply with the following standards:
(a) The life-care facility shall be designed specifically for the needs
of the elderly. The proposed design shall provide efficient
pedestrian access between dwelling units, parking, community
facilities, recreation or open space areas and mass transit
facilities.
(b) The following ancillary accessory uses may be included when
designed for the exclusive use of residents: community center,
intermediate-care facility, nursing facility, health center,
common dining facility, administrative offices, recreation
facilities and retail or service facilities.
(c) A life-care facility shall have direct access to a street serving as
a collector road or greater function as defined in Chapter 197,
Subdivision and Land Development.
260. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(4)(d), which immediately followed this subsection,
pertaining to number of group homes per block, was repealed 8-14-2000.
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-60
210:1053
(d) Each life-care facility shall provide an outdoor sitting facility.
The sitting area shall be landscaped and shall not be located
adjacent to parking lots, major collector streets or detention or
retention basins, unless adequate screening is provided.
Sitting areas shall not be located on slopes of over five-percent
grade.
(e) Residency requirements. Residents must be at least 55 years of
age or physically disabled.
(f) The maximum density shall be 10 dwelling units per acre.
(g) Nursing facilities within a life-care facility shall be designed for
the temporary and long-term care of the residents. Long-term
nursing beds within the facility shall not exceed one bed per
three dwelling units. Two beds shall be equivalent to one
dwelling unit in the determination of density.
(h) Where the life-care facility is not located within 1/4 mile to
basic services, such as post office, bank, grocery store, library,
public transportation, etc., the developer shall outline a
transportation service for the residents to be provided by the
owner or manager, providing access to these facilities at
reasonable intervals.
(6) Nursing home. A nursing home provides bed care or chronic or
convalescent care for persons who, by reason of illness, physical
infirmity or age, are unable to properly care for themselves. A
nursing home facility shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Nursing and medical care shall be prescribed and performed
under the general direction of persons licensed to provide such
care or services in accordance with state laws.
(b) A minimum lot area of 750 square feet per bed shall be
provided.
(c) Each nursing home facility shall provide an outdoor sitting
facility. The sitting area shall be landscaped and shall not be
located adjacent to parking lots, major collector streets or
detention or retention basins unless adequate screening is
provided. Sitting areas shall not be located on slopes of over
five-percent grade.
(7) Hospital. A hospital is an accredited general medical facility within
which the diagnosis, treatment and care of human ailments is
performed primarily on an inpatient basis. Such use shall comply
with the following standards:
(a) Access shall be taken from a collector street as defined in
Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 224-60 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1054
(b) Where the use adjoins existing residential uses, care shall be
taken to locate emergency and service entrances where they
are not objectionable to adjoining neighbors.
(8) Community utility. A community utility refers to a building,
structure or use which is operated, owned or maintained by a
public utility corporation, municipality or municipal authority or
which is privately owned and approved by the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission for the purpose of providing public sewage
disposal and/or treatment or public water supply, storage and/or
treatment or for the purpose of providing transmission of energy or
telephone service. Such use shall meet the following standards:
(a) The installation shall be essential in serving the immediate
community.
(b) No public business office or any storage yard or storage
building shall be operated in connection with the use.
(c) No facility or projecting area thereof as viewed in the plan view
shall occupy greater than 10% of the property on which it is
located.
(d) When located adjacent to a residential use or a residential
district, a Class B buffer, as defined in § 224-51B, shall be
provided between the utility and the residential use or district.
(9) Radio, television or microwave transmitter. A radio, television or
microwave transmitter shall include a transmitting or relay tower
and supportive buildings and shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) Such transmitter shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet or one
and one-half (11/2) times its height, whichever is greater, from
its property line.
(b) Such transmitter shall be licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission.
(c) No public business office or any storage yard or storage
building shall be operated in connection with the use.
(d) No facility or projecting area thereof as viewed in the plan view
shall occupy greater than 10% of the property on which it is
located.
(e) When located adjacent to a residential use or a residential
district, a Class B buffer, as defined in § 224-51B, shall be
provided between the use and the residential use or district.
C. Commercial uses. Commercial uses shall comply with the use standards
for the zoning district in which they are located, the lot area, setback
and bulk standards of the Table of Commercial Use Lot Area, Setback
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-60
210:1055
and Bulk Standards261 and all other applicable standards of this chapter
and other ordinances. In addition, the following supplemental
standards shall apply to the specific commercial uses listed below:
(1) Retail center/retail complex. A retail center involves two or more
retail or service uses located in one building; a retail complex
involves two or more retail or service uses located in two or more
buildings on a single lot. Both uses are preplanned and designed as
a group of related uses or structures and circulation patterns. A
retail center or complex shall comply with the following standards.
The standards below shall also apply to a single proposed retail use
15,000 square feet or more in gross floor area.
(a) When located adjacent to a residentially zoned district or
existing residential development, no parking, loading or
service area shall be located less than 15 feet from the
adjacent property line.
(b) Primary access shall be from a collector street as defined by
Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
(c) Parking lot design and landscaping shall be in accordance with
the requirements of Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(d) Signs, lighting, outdoor storage, screening and access shall be
in accordance with the applicable sections of this chapter.
(e) Establishments furnishing shopping carts shall provide defined
areas on the site for storage of such carts, which shall be
clearly marked and designed for their storage.
(f) Trash receptacles for patron use shall be provided outside any
establishment with takeout service or convenience shopping.
(g) Sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontage.
Pedestrian access to sidewalks and mass transit stops on or
adjacent to the property shall be provided.
(2) Restaurant, fast-food. A fast-food restaurant is a commercial
establishment that offers quick food service, which is accomplished
through a limited menu of items prepared and held for service or
prepared quickly. Generally, orders are not taken at the customer's
table and food is served in disposable wrapping or containers. Such
use shall comply with the following standards:
(a) When the use is adjacent to or on the same lot with a group of
commercial facilities, it shall use the common access with the
other business establishments and not have a separate access
to the abutting collector street.
261. Editor's Note: This table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 224-60 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1056
(b) Sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontage. A
pedestrian walkway shall be provided from the entrance of the
restaurant to the sidewalk adjacent to the street.
(c) Trash receptacles shall be provided outside of the restaurant
for patron use.
(d) A trash storage area shall be provided which is designed to be
screened from the street and adjacent properties to prevent
trash from blowing from the area and to permit safe and easy
trash removal.
(e) In addition, the following standards shall apply to a fast-food
restaurant with a gross floor area of 1,800 square feet or
greater:
[1] The use shall have direct access to a collector street as
defined by Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land
Development.
[2] There shall be only one point of ingress and one point of
egress to the collector street.
[3] The access shall be at least 40 feet from street
intersections. The distance shall be measured from the
street right-of-way to the edge of the access driveway.
(f) A fast-food restaurant with drive-through service shall also
comply with the standards of Subsection C(3) below.
(3) Restaurant, drive-through. A drive-through restaurant is a
commercial establishment which delivers prepared food and
beverages to waiting customers in motor vehicles for consumption
on or off premises. Such use shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) The use shall have direct access to a collector street as defined
by Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
(b) There shall be only one point of ingress and one point of egress
to the collector street.
(c) The access shall be at least 40 feet from street intersections.
The distance shall be measured from the street right-of-way to
the edge of the access driveway.
(d) When the use is adjacent to or on the same lot with a group of
commercial facilities, it shall use the common access with the
other business establishments and not have a separate access
to the abutting collector street.
(e) Drive-through service windows shall have a vehicle stacking
lane which can accommodate a minimum of eight cars. The
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-60
210:1057
stacking lane shall not be used for parking lot circulation
aisles, nor shall it conflict in any way with circulation or
parking. The drive-through window shall not be located
adjacent to a residential use or residential zoning district.
(f) Sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontage. A
pedestrian walkway shall be provided from the entrance of the
restaurant to the sidewalk adjacent to the street.
(g) Trash receptacles shall be provided outside of the restaurant
for patron use.
(h) A trash storage area shall be provided which is designed to be
screened from the street and adjacent properties to prevent
trash from blowing from the area and to permit safe and easy
trash removal.
(i) Where a drive-through restaurant is also a fast-food
restaurant, the standards of Subsection C(2) above shall also
apply.
(4) Financial institution with drive-through service windows or drivethrough
automated tellers. Banks, savings and loan associations,
credit unions and other financial establishments proposed in
conjunction with drive-through windows or drive-through
automated tellers shall comply with the following standards:
(a) The use shall have direct access to a collector street as defined
by Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
(b) There shall be only one point of ingress and one point of egress
to the collector street.
(c) The access shall be at least 40 feet from street intersections.
The distance shall be measured from the street right-of-way to
the edge of the access driveway.
(d) Drive-through windows or automated tellers shall have a
vehicle stacking lane which can accommodate a minimum of
six cars. The stacking lane shall not be used for parking lot
circulation aisles, nor shall it conflict in any way with
circulation or parking.
(5) Auto service/gas station/car wash facility. Commercial
establishments involving the retail sales of vehicular fuel or
automotive repair or service or a car wash facility shall comply with
the following standards:
(a) For gas station or car wash facilities, access to streets shall be
at least 40 feet from the intersection of any street.
(b) Fuel pumps shall be at least 25 feet from any street right-ofway.
§ 224-60 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1058
(c) All automotive parts, refuse and similar articles shall be stored
within a building or enclosed area.
(d) All automotive repair or service activities, except those
performed at the fuel pumps, shall take place within a
completely enclosed building.
(e) Vehicles shall not be stored outdoors more than five days while
waiting for repairs unless such vehicles are completely
screened from view; junk vehicles may not be stored in the
open at any time.
(f) Stacking spaces for fuel pumps and car wash bays shall not
interfere with circulation or parking on the remainder of the
lot. Stacking room for vehicles shall be provided as follows:
[1] Fuel pumps: stacking room for two vehicles at each fuel
pump island in addition to the space required adjacent to
each pump.
[2] Car wash bay: stacking room for four vehicles at each
entrance and two drying spaces at each exit.
(6) Amusement hall/arcade. An amusement hall or arcade is an
entertainment facility operated as a gainful business within a
building or structure, providing three or more automatic
amusement devices or games, including pool or billiard rooms or
similar facilities. Such use shall comply with the following
standards: [Amended 4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
(a) No audio speakers or equipment shall be installed inside or
outside the location of such use which would cause sound to
emanate to the exterior of the premises.
(b) Such use shall only be operated between the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(c) This use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a public or
private school.
(7) Adult entertainment uses. Such uses shall comply with the
following standards: [Amended 4-28-1997 by Ord. No.
1047-97]
(a) Statement of Purpose.
[1] Because adult entertainment uses tend to bring with them
secondary concerns that impact on the health, safety and
general welfare concerns of the City of Coatesville, the
City desires to restrict or limit the location where such
uses can locate.
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-60
210:1059
[2] The City does not intend to effect or suppress any activities
protected by the First Amendment of the United States
Constitution, but instead address these secondary effects.
Neither is it the intent nor effect of these ordinance
provisions to condone or legitimize the distribution of
obscene material. Neither is it the intent to permit any use
which is prohibited by the provisions of any other city code
or ordinance.
[3] Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses on the community from findings
incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime
Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini
Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Northend Cinema, Inc. v.
Seattle, 585 P.2d 1153 (Wash. 1978), and on studies in
other communities, including but not limited to Phoenix,
Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Saint Paul, Minnesota;
Manatee County, Florida; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis,
Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Los Angeles, California; Austin,
Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and
Beaumont, Texas; and also on findings found in the Report
of Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of
Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of
Minnesota), the City Council finds that the following
concerns are associated with the establishment of these
uses in the City of Coatesville:
[a] Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to
ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that may
go uncontrolled by the operators of the
establishments. Further, there is recently no
mechanism to make the owners of these
establishments responsible for the activities that
occur on their premises.
[b] Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses
defined in this chapter as adult theatres and cabarets
engage in a higher incident of certain types of sexually
oriented behavior at these businesses than employees
of other establishments.
[c] Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and anal
sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially
those which provide private or semiprivate booths or
cubicles for viewing films, videos or live sex shows, as
defined under this chapter as adult bookstores, adult
novelty shops, adult video stores, adult motion-picture
theatres or adult arcades.
[d] Offering and providing such space encourages such
activities, which create unhealthy conditions.
§ 224-60 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1060
[e] Persons frequent certain adult theatres, adult arcades
and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose
of engaging in sex within the premises of such
sexually oriented businesses.
[f] At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by
activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses,
including but not limited to syphilis, gonorrhea,
human immunodeficiency virus infection (AIDS),
genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non B amebiasis,
salmonella infections and shigella infections.
[g] Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an
increasing cumulative number of reported cases of
AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) in the United States: 600 in 1982, 2,200 in 1983,
4,600 in 1984, 8,555 in 1985 and 253,448 through
December 31, 1992.
[h] As of May 1, 1995, there have been 13,559 reported
cases of AIDS in the State of Pennsylvania.
[i] Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an
increasing cumulative number of persons testing
positive for the HIV antibody test in Chester County,
Pennsylvania.
[j] The number of cases of early (less than one year)
syphilis in the United States reported annually has
risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982 and 45,200
through November of 1990.
[k] The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States
reported annually remains at a high level, with over
500,000 cases being reported in 1990.
[l] The Surgeon General of the United States in his report
of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public
that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted
through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse,
exposure to infected blood and blood components and
from an infected mother to her newborn.
[m] According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and
HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are
principally transmitted by sexual acts.
[n] Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented
businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the
activities conducted there are unhealthy and, in part,
because of the unregulated nature of the activities and
the failure of the owners and the operators of the
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-60
210:1061
facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain
those facilities.
[o] Numerous studies and reports have determined that
semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented
businesses where persons view adult oriented films.
[p] The findings noted in Subsection C(7)(a)[3][a] through
[o] raise substantial governmental concerns.
(b) Design requirements. The purpose of these design
requirements is to minimize, where conditions permit, the
secondary concerns which include difficulties for law
enforcement, municipal maintenance, trash, deleterious
effects on business and residential property values, increased
crime, particularly corruption of the morals of minors, and
prostitution and encourage residents and businesses to move
elsewhere.
[1] Yard and area regulations.
[a] In addition to the lot area, setback and bulk standards
applicable to uses permitted pursuant to the
provisions of § 224-18.1, no adult entertainment use
shall be located:
[b] Within 1,000 feet of a public or private school.
[c] Within 500 feet of any residential use or district,
religious use, active or passive recreation facility or
community center.
[d] Within 500 feet of a similar use.
[e] Within 200 feet of a licensed premises, licensed
pursuant to the alcoholic beverage control regulations
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
[f] Within 100 feet of an entertainment business which is
oriented primarily towards children and family
entertainment.
[g] No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be
permitted within an adult entertainment use.
[h] No materials sold shall be visible from any window,
door or exterior of the building.
[2] For the purpose of Subsection C(7)(b)[a], [b] and [c], the
lot area, setback and bulk standards measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
building or structure used as the part of the premises
§ 224-60 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1062
where a sexually oriented business is conducted to the
nearest property line of the premises of a use. Presence of
a municipal, county or other political subdivision boundary
shall be irrelevant for the purposes of calculating and
applying the distance requirements of this section.
(c) Data. Sufficient additional data shall be submitted to enable
the Planning Commission and the City Council to determine
that the requirements of this and other ordinances of the City
relevant to the proposed use have been fulfilled and that the
owners and operators of proposed adult entertainment
facilities demonstrate a desire and ability to comply with the
ordinances of the City and to prevent their establishments from
being used for any illegal activities.
(d) Adult entertainment uses must maintain any license or permit
required by the state and must operate in conformance with all
requirements of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code. No alcoholic
beverages can be served at any adult entertainment use.
(8) Office center/office park. An office center is a structure or building
containing two or more offices that share common facilities, such
as parking, signs or entryways. An office park is a tract of land
designed and developed from a single, unified plan involving the
layout of several lots, buildings, access streets, landscaping and
other improvements typically in a campus-like setting. The
following standards shall apply to all office parks and to any office
center with more than 5,000 square feet of gross leasable floor
area:
(a) When located adjacent to a residentially zoned district or
existing residential development, no parking, loading or
service area shall be located less than 15 feet from the
adjacent property line.
(b) Primary access shall be from a collector street as defined by
Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontage.
Pedestrian access to sidewalks and mass transit stops on or
adjacent to the property shall be provided.
D. Industrial uses. Industrial uses shall comply with the use standards for
the zoning district in which they are located, the lot area, setback and
bulk standards of the Table of Industrial Use Lot Area, Setback and Bulk
Standards262 and all other applicable standards of this chapter and
other ordinances. In addition, the following supplemental standards
shall apply to the specific industrial uses listed below:
262. Editor's Note: This table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-60
210:1063
(1) Industrial center. An industrial center is a structure or building
which contains two or more industrial uses that share common
facilities, such as parking, signs or entryways. Such use shall
comply with the following standards:
(a) There shall be a minimum of 10,000 square feet of lot area per
use in the industrial complex building.
(b) Access for the center shall be from a collector street as defined
by Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
(c) Sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontage.
Pedestrian access to sidewalks and mass transit stops on or
adjacent to the property shall be provided.
(d) All loading and outside storage shall be located to the side or
rear of the building.
(e) The applicant shall submit a plan for the overall design and
improvements of the industrial center.
(f) The proposed development shall be served by public water and
sewage, the adequacy of which shall be demonstrated prior to
plan approval.
(2) Industrial park. An industrial park is a grouping of two or more
industrial establishments in separate buildings, developed
according to a single, unified plan, involving the layout of several
lots, buildings, access streets, utilities, landscaping and other
improvements. Such use shall comply with the following standards:
(a) The minimum lot size for the individual structures within the
industrial park shall be 20,000 square feet.
(b) At least 70% of the total floor area of the park shall be devoted
to industrial uses.
(c) Access for the park shall be from a collector street as defined
by Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
(d) Sidewalks shall be provided along all street frontage.
Pedestrian access to sidewalks and mass transit stops on or
adjacent to the property shall be provided.
(e) All uses within the industrial park shall take access from an
interior roadway. Interior roadways shall have street trees in
accordance with the requirements of § 197-49 of Chapter 197,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(f) All loading and outside storage shall be located to the side or
rear of the buildings.
(g) The applicant shall submit a plan for the overall design and
improvements of the industrial park.
§ 224-60 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1064
(h) The proposed development shall be served by public water and
sewage, the adequacy of which shall be demonstrated prior to
plan approval.
(3) Miniwarehouses/public warehouse. Miniwarehouses are storage
units provided for lease to the public for the purpose of storage of
personal property and in which each storage unit has direct access
from the outside. A public warehouse is a single structure
providing individual storage of personal property where access to
the majority of the storage units is made through a main entrance
into the building. Such uses shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) Access shall be from a collector street as defined by Chapter
197, Subdivision and Land Development.
(b) Preliminary plans shall be reviewed and subject to approval by
city police and fire officials regarding security and fire
protection.
(c) Storage of explosive, radioactive, toxic, highly flammable or
otherwise hazardous materials shall be prohibited.
(d) All storage shall be within closed buildings except as noted
below in Subsection D(3)(g)[3].
(e) No business activity other than the leasing of storage units
shall be permitted.
(f) The construction of new miniwarehouses or public warehouses
shall not be permitted within the Floodplain Conservation
Overlay District as defined in Article VIII of this chapter. Where
public warehouses are located in existing buildings in the
Floodplain Conservation Overlay District, the storage areas
shall be located above the one-hundred-year floodplain
elevation and all applicable requirements of the Floodplain
Conservation Overlay District shall be met.
(g) In addition to the above standards, miniwarehouses shall also
comply with the following:
[1] The minimum aisle width between buildings shall be 15
feet. Additional width shall be provided to accommodate a
ten-by-twenty-foot parking space in front of each storage
unit.
[2] Each structure shall not exceed 6,000 square feet in size
and shall be built on a permanent foundation of durable
material. Trailers, boxcars or similar structures shall not
be used for storage.
[3] Outdoor storage shall comply with the following
requirements:
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-60
210:1065
[a] Outdoor storage of automobiles, boats and recreation
vehicles is permitted, provided that they are screened
so as not to be visible from adjacent streets or
properties.
[b] A maximum of 20% of the total site area may be used
for such outdoor storage.
[c] Stored vehicles shall not interfere with traffic
movement through the complex.
[4] The storage facilities shall be surrounded by a fence at
least eight feet in height, of a type approved by the City.
(4) Recycling center. A recycling center is a business that accumulates
material, such as paper, glass, aluminum and plastic, that is no
longer useful for its intended purpose. The materials are then used
or sold to another business as a raw material which can be used to
manufacture a new product. Such use shall comply with the
following standards:
(a) Operation of a recycling facility shall at all times be in full
compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the rules and regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection (PaDEP) and the provisions of this
chapter. In the event that any of the provisions of this chapter
are less restrictive than any present or future rules or
regulations of PaDEP, the more restrictive regulations shall
supersede and control. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
(b) Storage of recycled material shall:
[1] Be within containers that prevent the material from being
carried from the site by wind or water.
[2] Prevent the inhabitation of vectors.
[3] Be set back a minimum of 100 feet from a property line or
street line.
(c) Any materials stored outdoors shall be properly screened so as
not to be visible from any adjacent streets or property. The
storage of paper shall be within a building.
(d) Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times when
an attendant is on duty. In order to protect against
indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, every recycling
center shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates or
other means designed to deny access to the area at
unauthorized times or locations. Such barricades shall be at
least six feet high and shall be kept in good repair and neatly
painted in a uniform color.
§ 224-60 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1066
(e) Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing litter to the
work area, and a working plan for cleanup of litter shall be
submitted to the City. To control blowing paper, a fence shall be
erected with a minimum height of six feet, with openings not
more than three inches by three inches, along all boundaries.
(f) A Class D buffer shall be required between the fence and the
street line and along any edge of the property adjacent to a
residential use or district. (See § 224-51B, Buffering.)
(g) Unloading of materials shall be continuously supervised by a
facility operator.
(h) Hazardous waste included on the list of hazardous waste
maintained by the Department of Environmental Protection
shall not be disposed of at a recycling center. No municipal or
solid waste or hazardous waste shall be processed or stored at
a recycling center. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
(i) When this use is combined with a transfer station, the
separation of material shall be done so that the recycling
process does not interfere with the prompt disposal of the
municipal solid waste.
(j) A zoning permit shall be obtained and renewed on an annual
basis.
(5) Junkyard. A junkyard is an area of land, with or without buildings,
used for the storage of used or discarded materials, including but
not limited to wastepaper, rags, metal, building materials, house
furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, with or without
the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use or
disposition of the same. Such use shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) No material shall be placed in any junkyard in such a manner
that it is capable of being transferred out of the junkyard by
wind, water or other natural causes.
(b) All paper, rags, cloth and other fibers and activities involving
the same, other than loading and unloading, shall be within
fully enclosed buildings.
(c) The land area being used for junkyard purposes shall not be
exposed to public view from any public street or road by virtue
of its location on a hillside or location on a plateau below street
level.
(d) Buffering and screening requirements shall be as follows:
[1] The junkyard shall be entirely closed by a solid fence or
wall, at least eight feet high but not more than 10 feet
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-60
210:1067
high, constructed of plank boards, brick, cinder block or
concrete, with access only through solid gates.
[2] The fence or wall shall be situated no closer to any street
or property line than 30 feet.
[3] Such fence or wall shall be kept in good repair and painted
a uniform color.
[4] The contents of the junkyard shall not be placed or
deposited to a height greater than the height of the
required wall or fence.
[5] A Class D buffer shall be required between the fence and
the street line and along any edge of the property adjacent
to a residential use or district. (See § 224-51B, Buffering.)
(e) All materials shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent the
breeding or harboring of rats, insects or other vermin. When
necessary, this shall be accomplished by enclosure in
containers, raising of materials above the ground, separation
of types of materials, preventing the collection of stagnant
water, extermination procedures or other means.
(f) No explosive, toxic, radioactive or highly flammable materials
shall be kept on the property.
(g) No burning shall be carried on in any junkyard. Fire shall be
prevented and hazards avoided by organization and
segregation of stored materials, with particular attention to
the separation of combustibles from other materials and
enclosure of combustibles where necessary (gas tanks shall be
drained), by the provision of adequate aisles of at least 15 feet
in width for escape and fire-fighting and by other necessary
measures.
(h) All vehicles shall be drained of liquid before they are placed in
the junkyard. An impervious pad, free of cracks and sufficiently
large for draining liquids from all vehicles, shall be provided.
The pad should be sloped to drain to a sump or holding tank,
and liquid shall be removed from the site as often as is
necessary to prevent overflow of the system. Curbing around
the pad must be able to retain runoff from a one-hundred-year,
twenty-four-hour storm. All hazardous liquids shall be properly
disposed of according to the Department of Environmental
Protection rules and regulations. [Amended 3-25-1996 by
Ord. No. 1012-96]
(i) A zoning permit shall be obtained and renewed on an annual
basis.
§ 224-60 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1068
(j) Outside storage of motor vehicles not having valid inspection
stickers issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, wrecked or broken vehicles or the major parts
of such vehicles shall only be permitted in a licensed junkyard.
(6) Transfer station. A transfer station is a facility where municipal
solid waste is delivered for the purpose of compacting the material
into larger vehicles for transport to a final disposal site or
processing facility. Such use shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) Operation of a transfer station shall at all times be in full
compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the rules and regulations of the Department of
Environmental Protection (PaDEP) and the provisions of this
chapter. In the event that any of the provisions of this chapter
are less restrictive than any present or future rules or
regulations of PaDEP, the more restrictive regulations shall
supersede and control. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No.
1012-96]
(b) Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing litter to the
work area, and a working plan for cleanup of litter shall be
submitted to the City. To control blowing paper, a fence shall be
erected with a minimum height of six feet, with openings not
more than three inches by three inches, along all boundaries.
(c) A Class D buffer shall be required between the fence and the
street line and along any edge of the property adjacent to a
residential use or district. (See § 224-51B, Buffering.)
(d) Access to the site shall be limited to those posted times when
an attendant is on duty. In order to protect against
indiscriminate and unauthorized dumping, every transfer
station shall be protected by locked barricades, fences, gates
or other means designed to deny access to the area at
unauthorized times or locations. Such barricades shall be at
least six feet high and shall be kept in good repair and neatly
painted in a uniform color.
(e) The entire transfer process, which includes unloading,
compaction and loading onto the transfer trucks, shall occur
inside a building. Unloading of materials shall be continuously
supervised by a facility operator.
(f) Municipal solid waste shall not remain on the site for more
than 72 hours.
(g) At the end of each workday, all municipal solid waste shall be
compacted in a transfer container. Oversized items and items
that cannot be compacted because of their size or construction
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-60
210:1069
shall be stored in the building. These items shall not remain on
the site for more than 15 days.
(h) A contingency plan for disposal of municipal solid waste during
a plant shutdown must be submitted to the City and approved
by the City Council.
(i) Leachate from the municipal solid waste and water used to
wash vehicles or any part of the operation shall be disposed of
in a manner in compliance with PaDEP regulations. If the
leachate is to be discharged to a municipal sewage treatment
plant, appropriate permits shall be obtained from the
applicable agencies and authorities. In no event shall the
leachate be disposed of in a storm sewer, to the ground or in
any other manner inconsistent with PaDEP regulation.
[Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
(j) Solid waste landfill operations and open burning of any
materials shall be specifically prohibited.
(k) A zoning permit shall be obtained and renewed on an annual
basis.
(l) A transfer station may include the separation and collection of
material for the purpose of recycling if the standards of
§ 224-60D(4) for a recycling center are met.
(7) Solid waste landfill. A solid waste landfill is a land site on which
engineering principles are used to bury deposits of solid waste
without creating public health or safety hazards, nuisances,
pollution or environmental degradation. Such use shall comply with
the following standards:
(a) Operation of any solid waste landfill shall at all times be in full
compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and the rules and regulations of the Department
of Environmental Protection and the provisions of this chapter.
In the event that any of the provisions of this part are less
restrictive than any present or future rules of the Department,
the more restrictive Department rules or regulations shall
supersede and control in the operation of such solid waste
landfill. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
(b) Hazardous materials, including but not limited to highly
flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes and
radioactive materials and liquids, shall not be disposed of in a
solid waste landfill. The disposal of sewage liquids and solids
shall be specifically prohibited in a solid waste landfill.
(c) Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing litter to the
work area, and a working plan for cleanup of litter shall be
established. Measures shall also be provided to control dust.
§ 224-60 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1070
(d) Suitable measures shall be taken to prevent fires by means and
devices mutually agreeable to the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the City. Burning of municipal
solid waste is prohibited at a solid waste landfill. [Amended
3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
(e) A solid waste landfill operation shall be under the direction at
all times of a responsible individual who is qualified by
experience or training to operate a landfill. Unloading of waste
shall be continuously supervised.
(f) Access to the site shall be limited to posted times when an
attendant is on duty. In order to protect against indiscriminate
and unauthorized dumping, every solid waste landfill shall be
protected by locked barricades, fences, gates or other means
designed to deny access to the area at unauthorized times or
locations.
(g) Salvaging shall be conducted by the operator only and shall be
organized so that it will not interfere with prompt sanitary
disposal of waste or create unsightliness or health hazards.
The storage of salvage shall be controlled in a manner that will
not permit the inhabitants or reproduction of deleterious
vectors.
(h) Direct access to a major collector or highway collector, as
defined by Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development,
shall be required for the operation of a solid waste landfill.
(i) Buffering and screening requirements shall be as follows:
[1] The landfill shall be entirely closed by a fence or wall, at
least eight feet high but not more than 10 feet high,
constructed of plank boards, brick, cinder block or
concrete, with access only through solid gates. There shall
be no openings greater than three by three inches in the
fence or wall.
[2] The fence or wall shall be situated no closer to any street
or property line than 50 feet.
[3] Such fence or wall shall be kept in good repair and painted
a uniform color.
[4] A Class D buffer shall be required between the fence and
the street line and along any edge of the property adjacent
to a residential use or district. (See § 224-51B, Buffering.)
(j) A zoning permit shall be obtained and renewed on an annual
basis.
(8) Solid waste incinerator. A solid waste incinerator is a facility
designed to reduce municipal solid waste by combustion. This use
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-60
210:1071
may or may not include heat exchange equipment for energy
recovery. Such use shall comply with the following standards:
(a) Operation of any incinerator shall at all times be in full
compliance with the statutes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the rules and regulations of the Department
of Environmental Protection and the provisions of this chapter.
In the event that any of the provisions of this part are less
restrictive than any present or future rules of the Department,
the more restrictive Department rules or regulations shall
supersede and control in the operation of such incinerator.
[Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1012-96]
(b) Hazardous materials, including but not limited to highly
flammable materials, explosives, pathological wastes and
radioactive materials and liquids, shall not be disposed of in an
incinerator.
(c) Litter control shall be exercised to confine blowing litter to the
work area, and a working plan for cleanup of litter shall be
established.
(d) Unloading of municipal solid waste shall be continuously
supervised by a facility operator.
(e) All parts of the process, unloading, handling and storage of
solid waste, shall occur within a building. Open burning of any
materials shall be specifically prohibited.
(f) Process waste (ash) from the incinerator shall be stored in
such a manner as to prevent it from being carried from the site
by wind or water. This process waste shall be located at least
100 feet from any property line and stored in leakproof and
vectorproof containers. Such process waste shall be disposed
of in a solid waste landfill approved by PaDEP or in another
manner approved by PaDEP. [Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord.
No. 1012-96]
(g) Access to the site shall be limited to posted times when an
attendant is on duty. Access shall be controlled by locked
barricades, fences, gates or other means designed to deny
access to the area at unauthorized times or locations.
(h) Direct access to a major collector or highway collector, as
defined by Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development,
shall be required for the operation of an incinerator.
(i) Buffering and screening requirements shall be as follows:
[1] The site shall be entirely enclosed by a fence or wall, at
least eight feet high but not more than 10 feet high,
constructed of plank boards, brick, cinder block or
§ 224-60 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-60
210:1072
§ 224-61. Conversion of uses.
concrete, with access only through solid gates. There shall
be no openings greater than three inches by three inches
in the fence or wall.
[2] The fence or wall shall be situated no closer to any street
or property line than 50 feet.
[3] Such fence or wall shall be kept in good repair and painted
a uniform color.
[4] A Class D buffer shall be required between the fence and
the street line and along any edge of the property adjacent
to a residential use or district. (See § 224-51B, Buffering.)
(j) A zoning permit shall be obtained and renewed on an annual
basis.
A. (Reserved)263
B. Adaptive reuse projects. This section applies to all proposals involving
the conversion of an existing structure into some other form of
permitted use. The purpose of permitting adaptive reuse projects is to
promote the preservation of large older structures and historic
resources in the City by providing incentives to help maintain these
structures. Adaptive reuse projects shall be permitted, provided that
the following standards are met:
(1) General requirements.
(a) The proposed reuse of an existing building or structure shall
comply with the use requirements of the applicable base or
overlay zoning district.
(b) Area and bulk requirements shall be maintained but may be
modified by the City Council where the applicant has
demonstrated sensitive restoration.
(c) Adaptive reuse projects that create residential living space
shall meet the applicable requirements for such, as defined in
§ 224-60, for that portion of the project. [Amended
6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 1350-2011]
(d) Adaptive reuse projects that involve any multifamily or
nonresidential use shall satisfy the applicable supplemental
regulations for such uses, as defined in this article.
263. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Residential conversions, was repealed 6-27-2011 by
Ord. No. 1350-2011.
§ 224-60 TOWING SERVICES § 224-61
210:1073
(e) Evidence verifying the capability of existing or proposed
services to meet the expanded needs of the proposed use shall
be provided.
(f) If a proposed adaptive reuse project involves a structure which
occupies a parcel which is also proposed for land development,
the adaptive reuse project must be completed consecutively to
or prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for that project,
otherwise an adaptive reuse shall not be permitted. This shall
also apply where the structure proposed for adaptive reuse has
been subdivided from a parcel within the last five years.
(2) Structural and facade alterations.
(a) Every effort shall be made to restore buildings or structures
defined as historic resources to their original architectural
style and scale. [Amended 4-11-2005 by Ord. No.
1247-2005]
(b) Signage, lighting or other accessory uses or structures shall be
designed in a manner which reflects the original use of
structures or buildings to the extent possible for historic
resources.
(c) Improvements to the exterior of historic resources beyond
routine maintenance and repair shall be avoided except for
safety improvements, which shall be designed to achieve the
least disruption to building facades which are visible from any
public right-of-way.
(d) Additional entrances to historic resources shall be placed on
the side or the rear of the building, not visible from any public
right-of-way, to avoid disruption of the facade.
(e) The removal or alteration of significant architectural features
from historic resources to accommodate a new use shall be
prohibited.
(f) Deteriorated architectural features which contribute to the
character of historic resources shall be repaired rather than
replaced. In the event that replacement is necessary, the new
material shall match the material being replaced in
composition, color, design, texture and other visual qualities.
(3) Parking and access.
(a) Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be expanded, in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter; the
location and design of additional facilities shall reflect the
permitted use of the property.
§ 224-61 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-61
210:1074
§ 224-62. Unified land development process. [Admended 4-11-2005
by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
(b) All access, off-street parking and storage requirements shall be
improved to meet the requirements for the new use, as defined
by this chapter.
(c) Any reuse project that involves the conversion of an existing
garage into some other use must be analyzed in terms of
availability of parking.
A. More than one principal use, building or structure may be established
on a single lot where permitted, provided that all lot and yard
requirements, standards and other requirements of this chapter shall
be met for each use. In each case, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
require suitable provision for access, as defined in § 224-53 of this
chapter, in the event of potential subdivision of the tract or lot.
B. More than one principal use may be permitted in a single structure or
on a lot, provided that such unified development plans meet the
provisions of this section, the uses and number of uses proposed are
listed as a permitted use in that district or in any overlay district, that
the criteria for each use are satisfied and that all permit application and
review processes are followed.
C. Unified land development plans shall use the lot area, setback, bulk and
coverage requirements as defined for each use in their respective
districts or in any overlay district.
D. The ground level portion of the front of a building shall be reserved for
nonresidential uses in any building that contains both residential
dwellings and nonresidential uses. The foregoing shall also apply to the
side of a building for mixed-use buildings on a corner lot.
§ 224-61 TOWING SERVICES § 224-62
210:1075

ARTICLE XIII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 224-63. Purpose.
Off-street parking and loading requirements have been established to:
§ 224-64. Off-street parking.
A. Provide adequate parking and loading facilities for all permitted
structures and uses.
B. Reduce traffic congestion on the streets, thereby maintaining traffic
flow, increasing public safety and convenience and facilitating
emergency access.
C. Minimize the amount of impervious coverage to prevent undesirable
effects upon the environment, such as the alteration of drainage
patterns, groundwater recharge areas and microclimatic conditions.
A. Applicability.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall be provided whenever:
(a) A structure is constructed or a new use is established.
(b) The use of an existing structure is changed to a use requiring
more parking facilities.
(c) An existing structure or use is altered or enlarged so as to
increase the amount of parking spaces required.
(2) Structures and uses in existence on the date of adoption of this
chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this section,
except as provided in Subsection A(1), above.
B. General provisions.
(1) Construction and maintenance. All parking areas required by this
section shall be constructed and maintained for as long as the
structure or use which they are designed to serve remains in
existence.
(2) Location of required parking spaces.
(a) Required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same
lot as the principal use, unless otherwise provided in
Subsection D below.
(b) Off-street parking shall be located in back of the front building
line, with access to a street or alley or to an approved driveway.
Where such access is to a major or minor collector street,
adequate turnaround space should be provided on the lot.
§ 224-63 TOWING SERVICES § 224-64
210:1077
(c) Off-street parking spaces shall be located outside of a public
right-of-way.
(3) Parking area use restrictions.
(a) It shall be unlawful to utilize any required off-street parking
facilities for motor vehicle repair work, service, display or sales
of any kind.
(b) No parking area shall be utilized for any use that interferes
with its availability for the parking need it is required to serve.
(4) Subdivision and land development. Parking stall and aisle
dimensions shall be as required in § 197-44 of Chapter 197,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(5) Design and landscaping. For those structures and uses subject to
Chapter 197, Subdivision and Land Development, parking areas
shall be designed and landscaped in accordance with § 197-44
contained therein.
C. Number of parking spaces required. The parking space requirements in
the following table apply to all structures and uses in the City of
Coatesville, except as provided for in § 224-64D and E. When
determining the number of parking spaces required for a structure or
use, the following standards shall apply: [Amended 4-28-1997 by
Ord. No. 1047-97]
(1) Where a choice of standards is listed as an "or" condition, the
greater amount applies.
(2) Where the results are listed as a fraction, the number of parking
spaces required is rounded to the next highest whole number.
(3) Requirements expressed in square footage, including indoor and
outdoor facilities, refer to gross leasable area (gla). (NOTE:"Gross
leasable area" is the total floor area designed for tenant occupancy
and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and upper
floors, if any, expressed in square feet.)
(4) Where a proposed structure or use includes more than one type of
use, regardless of whether each use is listed in the table below, the
number of parking spaces required shall be the sum of the parking
requirements for each separate use.
(5) Where a use is not specifically listed in the table below, the
requirements for the most similar use listed in the table shall apply.
(6) No required off-street loading area shall be used to satisfy the
parking requirements listed in the table below.
§ 224-64 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-64
210:1078
Type of Structure or Use
(spaces) Parking Requirement
Residential
Single-family detached 2 per unit
Single-family semidetached 2 per unit
Single-family attached 2 per unit
Multifamily
Efficiency/studio 1 per unit
1 bedroom 1.5 per unit
2 or more bedrooms 2 per unit
Multifamily developments
consisting of 50 or more
dwelling units
Parking requirement shall be
increased by 15% to provide
for visitor parking.
Residential conversion As required by § 224-61
Rooming House 1 per unit available for rent.
Commercial
Motel 1 per unit available for rent,
plus the number of spaces
required for ancillary uses
Hotel 1 per unit available for rent,
plus the number of spaces
required for ancillary uses
Movie theater 1 per 4 seats
Restaurant 1 per 200 square feet (gla),
plus 1 space per 3
employees on largest shift
Restaurant, fast-food 1 per 100 square feet (gla),
plus 1 per 3 employees on
largest shift
Restaurant, drive-through 1 per 100 square feet (gla),
plus 1 per 3 employees on
largest shift
Retail store 1 per 250 square feet
Retail center (gla). Where an
establishment is greater
than 1 floor, floors other
than the one closest to
ground level shall be
computed at 1 per 400
square feet
Retail complex
§ 224-64 TOWING SERVICES § 224-64
210:1079
Type of Structure or Use
(spaces) Parking Requirement
Variety store
Department store 1 per 75 square feet of store
sales floor area or other area
serving customers
Funeral home/mortuary 1 per 400 square feet (gla)
Indoor commercial
recreation
1 per 200 square feet (gla)
Health/recreation spa 1 per 200 square feet (gla)
Tavern 1 per 200 square feet (gla),
plus 1 per
3 employees on largest shift
Nightclub 1 per 200 square feet (gla),
plus 1 per
Private club
Adult entertainment use 3 employees on largest shift
Amusement hall/arcade
Day-care center 1 per caregiver, plus 1 for up
to 6 children and 1
additional for each 3
children thereafter
Auto sales 1 per every 200 square feet
of floor and ground area
devoted to sales and
accessory service use, plus 1
for each employee
Auto service 1 per pump, plus 2 stacking
spaces per pump, plus 2 per
bay
Watering and gambling
establishment
20 per every 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area, plus
1 per each employee on
largest shift
Office
Financial institution 1 per 200 square feet (gla)
Office 1 per 250 square feet (gla)
Government building/facility 1 per 250 square feet (gla)
Medical clinic 1 per 250 square feet (gla)
Veterinary/animal hospital 1 per 250 square feet (gla)
Public/institutional
§ 224-64 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-64
210:1080
Type of Structure or Use
(spaces) Parking Requirement
Life-care facility 1 per dwelling unit, plus 1
per 3 beds, plus 1 per
employee on largest shift
Group quarters 1 per 3 residents, plus 1 per
employee on largest shift
Institution 1 per 3 beds, plus 1 per
employee on largest shift
Hospital 1 per 3 beds, plus
1 per employee on largest
shift
Library 1 per 300 square feet
Museum/gallery 1 per 300 square feet
Church/religious use 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 8
linear feet of pews
Playhouse 1 per 4 seats
Indoor public recreation 1 per 200 square feet (gla)
Active recreation 1 per 5,000 square feet of
playing field area
Mass transit terminal
Bus and charter bus
passenger station
1 per 200 square feet (gla)
Railroad passenger station 1 per 150 square feet (gla)
School
Elementary and secondary 1 per classroom, (nonprofit)
plus 1 per 500 square feet
devoted to administrative
use, plus 1 per 15 students
in grades 10 through 12
University, college and 1 per 3 students professional
school plus 1 per 500 square
feet devoted to
administrative use
Manufacturing
Light industry/business 2 per 1,000 square feet (gla)
Light industrial center 2 per 1,000 square feet (gla)
Manufacturing 2 per 1,000 square feet (gla)
Industrial park 2 per 1,000 square feet (gla)
§ 224-64 TOWING SERVICES § 224-64
210:1081
Type of Structure or Use
(spaces) Parking Requirement
Distribution/ warehouse/
storage
1 per 1,000 square feet (gla)
Recycling center 2 per 1,000 square feet (gla)
D. Off-street parking alternatives.
(1) On-street and public parking credit. Aside from a separate parcel
being utilized for off-site parking in accordance with Section (2),
below, on-street parking or a public parking lot can be credited
towards the off-street parking requirements in accordance with the
following provisions:
(a) Only commercial, professional, office, or similar and related
uses within the RN-4, C-1, C-2 and PS districts shall be
permitted to count on-street or public parking towards the offstreet
parking requirements. All other uses shall utilize offstreet
parking facilities on the same parcel as the proposed
use.
(b) A maximum of 40% of on-street or public parking spaces may
be counted towards meeting off-street parking requirements,
provided that the spaces can be accessed without pedestrians
crossing arterial or collector streets and the spaces are located
within 400 feet of the building entrance regularly used by
patrons.
(c) In the RN-4, C-1, C-2 and PS Districts, nonresidential uses
meeting the criteria listed below shall be permitted to solely
utilize on-street or public parking to meet their parking
requirements:
[1] Such use shall have a gross leasable floor area of 850
square feet or less;
[2] Such use shall be located in an existing commercial
building which occupies at least 90% of the lot, essentially
precluding the provision of parking spaces on the same lot
as the proposed use.
(2) Off-site parking lots. The number of required parking spaces may
be located off-site within an existing parking area, provided that:
(a) The number of parking spaces required for all structures and
uses may be accommodated in the lot.
(b) Pedestrian walkways or sidewalks for pedestrian safety are
available.
§ 224-64 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-64
210:1082
(c) The lot is on the same side of a road or highway as the principal
structure or use and within 400 feet of the principal use. This
distance shall be measured as the shortest distance a
pedestrian must walk from the off-site parking lot to a public
entrance of the building.
(d) An agreement is established which includes, at a minimum, an
easement which authorizes use of the tract permanently for
parking and assigns maintenance responsibilities.
(e) Any subsequent change in use of any establishment with
shared parking requires proof that sufficient parking will be
available. Additional legal documentation shall be provided to
the City of Coatesville where such a change is not covered by
the initial legal agreement.
(3) Parking reserve area.
(a) In order to prevent the establishment of a greater number of
parking spaces than may actually be needed, the City Council
may grant permission to reserve construction of a percentage
of the total required number of parking spaces required by this
chapter for future parking needs consideration.
(b) In all cases where a percentage of the parking requirement will
be held in reserve, the actual area needed to fulfill the parking
space requirement shall be shown within the design on the
land development plan. Reserve areas shall be restricted from
development other than for parking purposes.
(c) In no case shall the required number of parking spaces held in
reserve be greater than 20% of the total required number of
parking spaces.
(d) The parking reserve area shall not include areas for required
buffer yards, setbacks or yard areas, required common open
space or areas which would otherwise be unsuitable for
parking spaces due to physical or environmental constraints of
the area.
(e) The City Council may require that additional parking spaces be
constructed, in accordance with this article, where the Council
determines that the spaces are necessary due to traffic
congestion or parking overflow on the site.
(f) In the event that the total number of parking spaces are not
required by the City Council, land not used for parking areas
shall remain as open space and shall be deed restricted if
necessary.
(4) Payment in lieu of providing off-street parking. [Added
4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
§ 224-64 TOWING SERVICES § 224-64
210:1083
(a) Whenever the off-street parking required in § 224-64C cannot
be provided because of the nonavailability of space on a lot in
the RN-4, C-1, C-2 and/or PS Districts for a new building or
structure, or for a structural addition to an existing building or
structure, City Council, upon written application, may permit
the payment of a fee by the applicant in lieu of the applicant's
providing such required off-street parking. The fee to be
charged shall be a fee per space in accordance with the fee
schedule adopted by Council and on file at the administrative
offices of the City and payable in accordance with
administrative policies established by City Council.
(b) All fees collected hereunder and all interest earned thereon
shall be placed in the Parking Facilities Fund to be established
by City Council, and such funds shall be used only for studies
relating to parking and parking facilities, the acquisition and/
or lease of land and the improvement or maintenance of
municipally owned or leased off-street parking facilities. Such
collected fees shall be expended for the purposes set forth
herein within 10 years of the receipt thereof.
E. Modification of required parking spaces. An applicant may request,
through the special exception process, that the number of parking
spaces required in Subsection C above be modified according to the
following procedure: [Amended 4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
(1) The applicant shall appear before the Planning Commission and
present any plans, materials or other information which proves:
(a) That the parking requirements are excessive for the proposed
use, based on a study prepared by a professional
transportation engineer, including documentation from
authoritative sources such as from the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) and/or the Urban Land
Institute (ULI).
(b) That a plan is in place describing employee or customer/client
trip-reduction strategies, in accordance with the provisions of
the 1990 Federal Clean Air Act and amendments and state
programs created to implement the federal guidelines.
(c) That the structure or use will be supported primarily by
nondrivers, including but not limited to those using mass
transit, bicyclists, pedestrians and children, based on a study
prepared by a professional transportation engineer.
(2) The Planning Commission shall submit a recommendation to the
Zoning Hearing Board concerning the approval or disapproval of
the request and the reasons for such decision.
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board may reduce the number of spaces
required for the proposed use or development; however, the Zoning
§ 224-64 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-64
210:1084
§ 224-65. Off-street loading requirements.
Hearing Board shall not reduce the number of parking spaces
required by more than 20%.
(4) The Board may require the applicant to design a parking reserve
area, in accordance with Subsection D(3) above, for the number of
additional spaces that would satisfy the parking requirements.
A. Applicability. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided for
structures or uses which require the delivery or distribution of
materials, supplies, merchandise or other goods, in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
B. General provisions.
(1) Construction and maintenance. All off-street loading berths
required by this section shall be constructed and maintained for as
long as the structure or use which they are designed to serve
remains in existence.
(2) Size.
(a) For those structures or uses which are served by pickup trucks
and vans for loading, the minimum size for each loading berth
shall be 10 feet in width and 20 feet in length, with minimum
vertical clearance of 12 feet.
(b) For those structures or uses which are served by vehicles
larger than those specified in Subsection A(2)(a) above, the
minimum size for each loading berth shall be 12 feet in width
and 45 feet in length, with a minimum vertical clearance of 14
feet.
(c) A loading space, as required in Subsection C below need not be
a full berth but shall be sufficient to allow normal loading and
unloading of a kind and magnitude appropriate to the premises
served. The City Council shall determine the sufficiency of
loading space, and in no case shall the use of such space hinder
the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians over a street,
sidewalk or alley.
(3) Location.
(a) All loading berths shall be located on the same lot as the use
served, and no portion of the vehicles shall project into any
traffic lane, parking space, driveway or sidewalk or within
front, side or rear yard setbacks, except as provided in
Subsection D below.
(b) Except as provided in Subsection D below, areas provided for
loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles and
for the servicing of shops by refuse collection, fuels and other
§ 224-64 TOWING SERVICES § 224-65
210:1085
service vehicles shall be so arranged that they may be used
without blocking traffic or interfering with vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, the use of accessways, parking facilities
or pedestrianways. In addition, ingress and egress shall not
require backing onto a street or lot.
(4) Access. All off-street loading berths shall be provided with safe and
convenient access to a street or alley or from an aisle or drive
connecting with a street or alley.
(5) Surfacing. The loading area, aisles and access drives shall be
improved so as to provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be
so graded and drained as to dispose of surface water without
damage to private or public properties, streets or alleys.
(6) Repair and service. No storage or motor vehicle repair work,
except in an emergency, shall be permitted within any loading
berth.
C. Number of required berths. The off-street loading requirements in the
following table apply to all structures and uses in the City of
Coatesville. When determining the number of berths required for a
structure or use, the following standards shall apply:
(1) If the results are listed as a fraction, the number of parking spaces
required is rounded to the next highest whole number.
(2) Requirements expressed in square footage refer to gross floor area,
unless otherwise specified (including indoor and outdoor facilities).
(3) Where a proposed structure or use includes more than one type of
use, regardless of whether each use is listed in the table below, the
number of parking spaces required shall be the sum of the parking
requirements for each separate use, except as provided in
Subsection C(5) below.
(4) Where more than one use is located on a site and the gross floor
area of each use is less than the minimum required but the
aggregate gross floor area is greater than the minimum for which
loading berths are required, off-street loading berths shall be
provided using the standard requiring the greatest number of
loading berths.
(5) Where a use is not specifically listed in the table below, the
requirements for the most similar use listed in the table shall apply.
§ 224-65 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-65
210:1086
Type of Use
Size
(square feet)
Number of Berths
Required
Wholesale and
industrial
Less than 10,000 1 loading space
Retail and groundfloor
nonresidential
Less than 20,000 1 loading space
Retail Greater than 20,000 1 berth per 20,000
square feet
Office buildings,
hospitals, hotels and
motels
Greater than
100,000
1 berth per 100,000
square feet
Wholesale, industrial
and storage
10,000 to 40,000 1 berth
40,001 to 100,000 2 berths
100,001 to 160,000 3 berths
160,001 to 250,000 4 berths
Each additional
90,000
1 additional berth
D. Off-street loading alternatives.
(1) Use of public alleys and streets. The City Council may approve the
use of public alleys and streets for loading and unloading, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(a) The structure or use is within the C-1, C-2 or PS District.
(b) The applicant demonstrates that loading and unloading may be
conducted without blocking or interfering with vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
(c) Loading and unloading is limited to a total of three times per
week.
(2) Common off-street loading facilities. Required off-street loading
spaces may be provided cooperatively for two or more uses,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The structure or use is within the C-1, C-2 or PS District.
(b) Loading and unloading will be conducted in an existing
structure or between existing structures which are adjacent to
the property.
(c) The uses being served are within the same structure.
§ 224-65 TOWING SERVICES § 224-65
210:1087
(d) The applicant demonstrates that loading and unloading may be
conducted without blocking or interfering with vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
(e) An agreement is established which includes, at a minimum,
language which authorizes use of the off-street loading facility
and assigns maintenance responsibilities.
(f) Any subsequent change in use of any establishment with
shared off-street loading facilities requires proof that sufficient
loading facilities will be available. Additional legal
documentation shall be provided to the City of Coatesville
where such a change is not covered by the initial legal
agreement.
§ 224-65 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-65
210:1088
ARTICLE XIV
Signs
§ 224-66. Purpose.
Regulations established under this article serve the following purposes:
§ 224-67. Scope and applicability.
In all zoning districts, signs may be erected, altered, maintained, used or
removed only when in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
any other applicable ordinances and regulations.
§ 224-68. Sign types and classifications.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign erected on or related to the use of a property
which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of six months or more
or any sign which relates to a time, event or purpose which is past.
BANNER — A sign which is permitted to promote special community events
for a temporary period of time as provided for herein. [Added 4-28-1997
by Ord. No. 1047-97]
BILLBOARD — See "off-premises sign."
CANOPY OR AWNING SIGN — Any sign that is a part of or attached to an
awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance, window or outdoor service area.
COMMUNITY SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — A type of temporary sign which is
intended to advertise a nonprofit community or civic event.
CONSTRUCTION/DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A type of temporary sign which
is intended to advertise the name of a project and/or the contractor,
architect, engineer, financier or similar information.
A. Provide general standards for all signs within the City and specific
standards for signs in each zoning district.
B. Establish procedures for the review and approval of sign permit
applications.
C. Regulate the location, size, construction, erection, alteration, use and
maintenance of signs.
D. Protect the safety and general welfare of the community through the
proper use and design of structures for signs.
E. Promote the use of well-crafted signs in harmony with the architectural
and historical character of the City and consistent with the Streetscape
Design Guide for the City of Coatesville, 1989.
§ 224-66 TOWING SERVICES § 224-68
210:1089
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign which displays a message, information or
advertising on both sides of the sign.
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are independent from any
building or structure. The height of a "freestanding sign" shall be measured
from the proposed finished grade to the highest point of the sign structure.
GROUND SIGN — A sign, other than a freestanding sign, placed upon or
supported by the ground, independent from any building or structure.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign which does not conform to one or more
of the applicable regulations in the district in which it is located.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a person,
business, profession, product or activity not conducted on the same
premises.
POLITICAL SIGN — Any temporary sign pertaining to political views, an
individual seeking election or appointment to a public office or a
forthcoming public election or referendum.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign, with or without display or legend, which is selfsupporting
without being firmly embedded in the ground or is fixed on a
movable stand or mounted on wheels or movable vehicles or made easily
movable in some other manner.
PREMISES — A separate lot or tax parcel with individual frontage abutting
the street line. "Premises" may include more than one occupant on a lot or
parcel, such as an office or retail complex.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign affixed to a wall or other vertical building
surface in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches
beyond the surface of such building or wall.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rental of the
property upon which it is located.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof or any
device attached, painted or represented, directly or indirectly, on a
structure or other outdoor surface that shall display or include any letter,
word, insignia, flag or representation used as or which is in the nature of
an advertisement, announcement, visual communication, direction or which
is designed to attract the eye or bring the subject to the attention of the
public.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign intended for short-term use, such as a
promotional sign, including signs pertaining to business events, community
events, political issues, an individual seeking public office or a forthcoming
public election.
WALL SIGN — A sign parallel to a wall or other vertical building surface.
"Wall signs" shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall or other surface
to which they are mounted and shall project no more than six inches from
its surface, otherwise they shall be defined as a projecting sign.
§ 224-68 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-68
210:1090
WINDOW SIGN — A temporary or permanent sign which is oriented to the
public right-of-way and is located on the inside or outside of a window to
direct attention to an activity conducted on the same lot.
§ 224-69. General regulations.
A. Sign area.
(1) The area of a sign shall be construed to include the twodimensional
space which contains all lettering, wording and
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background,
whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not
including any supporting framework and bracing incidental to the
display itself.
(2) Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to
or painted on a building, wall, window, canopy or awning, the sign
area shall be that of the smallest rectangle or other geometric
shape which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
(3) In computing sign area of a double-faced sign, only one side shall
be considered, provided that both sides are identical in area and
wording. If the interior angle is greater than 45º, then both sides of
such sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area.
B. Sign height. The height of a sign shall be measured from the existing
ground elevation at the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign
structure. In the case where there is a sidewalk, the height shall be
measured from the elevation of the sidewalk.
C. Sign illumination. Signs may be illuminated by direct (internal) or
indirect (projection) lighting. In all cases, lighting shall be shielded so
that no light will directly shine or glare onto abutting properties or in
the normal line of vision of the public using the streets or sidewalks. All
lighting shall be in compliance with the applicable standards of
§ 224-50, Outdoor lighting.
D. Sign placement. Except for official traffic and street signs, a sign shall
not be erected so that it:
(1) Is located within five feet of or projects over a point within five feet
of the curbline in the C-1 and C-2 Commercial Districts and the PS
Public Service District or within 10 feet of a street right-of-way in
any other district.
(2) Is located within the clear-sight triangle required by § 224-53B,
Sight distances at intersections.
(3) Obscures the view of a motorist of traffic signals, stop signs or
other warning devices as viewed from any distance of 500 feet
along established thoroughfares.
§ 224-68 TOWING SERVICES § 224-69
210:1091
§ 224-70. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are unlawful and prohibited:
(4) Obscures the view of a motorist of a roadway or intersections
ahead as viewed from a distance of 500 feet along established
thoroughfares.
(5) Limits pedestrian view of vehicular traffic to less than 500 feet
while standing at the curbline at an intersection or other
established pedestrian crossing.
(6) Is located within a distance of five feet from any side property line
in the C-1 and C-2 Commercial Districts and the PS Public Service
District within 10 feet in any other district.
(7) Is located within a parking or fire lane.
(8) Blocks the movement of pedestrians traveling along public
thoroughfares.
(9) Blocks the entrance, exit, fire escape or fire lanes to a building.
E. Sign contents.
(1) With the exception of off-premises signs, the content of permanent
signs shall refer to a use, business, service or activity conducted on
the same lot or premises on which the sign is located.
(2) No sign shall contain an obscene message or graphics.
A. No signs shall be of a flashing, rotating or revolving type, with the
exception of barbershop poles.
B. Any sign suspended between poles and lighted by a series of lights is
prohibited.
C. Any sign suspended between poles which is either a pennant which
blows in the wind or a spinner which spins in the wind is prohibited.
D. Any sign erected on a tree or painted or drawn on a rock or other
natural feature is prohibited. Signs shall only be attached to utility
poles if they are in conformance with all applicable state laws and
utility regulations.
E. Any banner sign or sign of any other type across a public street or any
private property is prohibited, except for community special event signs
which comply with the applicable requirements of § 224-71Q.
F. Any sign is prohibited which does not conform to the requirements of
the sign ordinance which was in effect when the sign was erected.
§ 224-69 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-70
210:1092
§ 224-71. Exempt signs.
The following signs are permitted in all districts and do not require a
permit, provided that the applicable conditions have been met:
G. No sign may be erected containing information on which it states or
implies that a property may be used for any purpose not permitted
under the provisions of this chapter.
H. No sign may use the words "stop," "look," "danger" or any other word or
character which attempts or appears to attempt to direct the movement
of traffic or which interferes with or resembles any official traffic sign,
signal or device.
I. Except for traffic control signals, red or green lights are prohibited
within 75 feet of a public right-of-way or within 200 feet of a traffic
control device, whichever is greater.
J. A sign that uses any method of illumination that can cause glare is
prohibited, except in accordance with the following:
(1) It must be effectively shielded so that glaring beams or rays of light
are not directed to any portion of any street, highway or adjacent
property or structure.
(2) It must be less than 1/4 footcandle, as measured from the curbline
or road shoulder, so as not to cause glare or impair the vision of any
motorist or otherwise interfere with a driver's operation of his
motor vehicle.
A. Official highway route number signs, street name signs, directional or
other official federal, state, county or city signs.
B. Signs displaying only the name and address of the occupant of the
premises, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed one
square foot and not more than one such sign shall be erected for each
property held in single and separate ownership, unless such property
fronts on more than one street, in which case one sign may be erected
on each street frontage.
C. Governmental flags or insignias not exceeding 80 square feet.
D. Legal notices.
E. No-trespassing signs indicating the private nature of a road, driveway
or premises, provided that the area of any such sign does not exceed
one square foot.
F. Real estate signs, provided that the area of such sign shall not exceed
six square feet and that not more than one such sign shall be placed on
the property unless the property fronts on more than one street, in
which case one sign shall be permitted along each street. All such signs
§ 224-70 TOWING SERVICES § 224-71
210:1093
shall be removed within five days after a final settlement or rental
agreement has been reached.
G. Window signs indicating the store hours or names of credit institutions,
provided that the total area of such sign or signs does not exceed two
square feet.
H. Vending machine signs bearing the brand name of a product or price of
such product when displayed on a vending machine selling such
product.
I. Directional, informational or public service signs, such as those
indicating the availability of rest rooms, telephone or similar public
conveniences and signs advertising meeting times and places of
nonprofit service or charitable clubs and organizations, provided that
such signs do not advertise any commercial establishment, activity,
organization, product, goods or service, except public utilities. Any
public service and information sign shall not exceed four square feet.
J. Memorial signs or historical signs or tablets, provided that such sign or
tablet does not exceed four square feet.
K. Signs which are a permanent architectural feature of a building or
structure, such as a cornerstone or identifying letters carved into or
embossed on a building, provided that the letters are not made of a
reflective material nor contrast in color with the building.
L. Temporary signs of mechanics, contractors and artisans erected and
maintained during the period such persons are performing work on the
premises on which such signs are erected, provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign shall not exceed six square feet per side.
(2) Not more than one sign for each such mechanic, contractor or
artisan shall be placed on any one property on which such person is
performing work.
(3) The sign shall be removed immediately after the work has been
completed.
M. A sign advertising a yard sale or garage sale, provided that the sign is
on the premises of the sale, does not exceed four square feet, is erected
no more than two days prior to the first day of the sale and is removed
immediately upon completion of the sale. No more than two offpremises
signs shall be permitted and such signs shall not be larger
than 12 inches by 18 inches in size and may not be erected more than
two days prior to the first day of the sale. Off-premises signs shall only
be located on private property with permission of the property owner
and shall be removed upon completion of the sale. Yard sale or garage
sale signs shall not be permitted on utility poles. [Amended 3-26-2012
by Ord. No. 1374-2012]
§ 224-71 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-71
210:1094
N. A sign, bunting, pennants and similar materials to announce the
opening of a new business or industry, provided that they are removed
within four days of the opening day or first day of business. Such
temporary displays shall not be permitted in residential districts. Such
temporary displays shall also be in accordance with § 224-72G.
[Amended 4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
O. Revolving barbershop pole sign, provided that it does not exceed 36
inches in height.
P. Temporary window signs announcing a drive or event of a civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious organization shall be less than
four square feet and shall be placed inside a store or office window.
Such signs shall also be in accordance with § 224-72G. [Amended
4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
Q. Banners across streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way shall be
permitted to promote community events such as Buffalo Bill Days,
restaurant festivals, sidewalk sales, events sponsored by The Graystone
Society or other like historic preservation group, veterans
organizations or charitable, educational, fraternal, civic or service
organizations. Banners promoting business and commercial enterprises
are prohibited. Banners shall also be governed by the following:
(1) At least 30 days prior to the desired date of hanging a banner over
a public street or way, an applicant must complete and submit a
banner permit to the office of the City Manager for approval by the
City Council. Upon approval of a permit by the City Council, a
banner may be hung and displayed as set forth below.
(2) The hanging of banners must be in complete conformance with the
application as submitted and as finally approved by the City
Council.
(3) The hanging of banners is the sole responsibility of the applicant.
(4) The banner shall be at least 15 feet above the street surface and
shall be securely attached to a building or other structure.
(5) No more than two banners may be displayed over any particular
street or public way.
(6) Banners may not be hung more than 14 days prior to the date of the
event being advertised and must be removed no later than seven
days after the conclusion of the event being advertised.
(7) Banners not removed within seven days after the advertised event
has concluded will be removed by the City, and the applicant shall
be liable for the actual cost of removal.
(8) Banners hung across streets and other rights-of-way without
proper approval will be removed within two working days after the
person(s) or organization(s) responsible has been notified by any
§ 224-71 TOWING SERVICES § 224-71
210:1095
§ 224-72. Regulations for specific sign types.
The following regulations shall apply to the specific sign types as defined
in § 224-68. Section 224-73 indicates the types, area and height of signs
permitted within each district.
means of communication. Failure to remove the banner(s) after
notification shall result in the City's doing so at a charge of the
actual cost of removal and fines as related to zoning violations.
R. Temporary signs advertising political parties or candidates for election
may be erected, provided that:
(1) The size of any such sign shall not exceed four square feet per side.
(2) Such signs are removed within seven days following the election.
A. Freestanding signs.
(1) The bottom or lowest edge of a freestanding sign shall either be
less than four feet or greater than seven feet above the ground.
(2) Freestanding signs shall be limited to one such sign per structure.
If more than one use is carried on in a single structure, the one
permitted freestanding sign may indicate the presence of all uses in
the structure.
(3) A retail center, office complex or industrial complex (two or more
retail, office or industrial uses within a single structure) shall be
limited to one freestanding sign indicating the name of the
development and the name of other uses within the development.
Individual freestanding signs for each use shall not be permitted.
(4) In those zoning districts where freestanding signs, projecting and
ground signs are permitted, only one of the foregoing types of signs
may be erected on a premises.
B. Ground signs.
(1) Ground signs shall be supported and permanently placed by
embedding, anchoring or connecting the sign in such a manner as
to incorporate it into the landscape or architectural design scheme.
(2) In those zoning districts where ground signs, freestanding signs
and projecting signs are permitted, only one of the foregoing types
of signs may be erected on a premises.
C. Projecting signs.
(1) No portion of a projecting sign shall be less than eight feet nor
more than 20 feet above the proposed finished grade, and no such
sign shall be less than five feet from the plane of the face of the
curb or project more than four feet from the face of the building.
§ 224-71 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-72
210:1096
(2) No projecting sign shall be attached to a building where a canopy
or awning sign exists.
(3) In those zoning districts in which projecting signs, freestanding
signs and ground signs are permitted, only one of the foregoing
types of signs may be erected on a premises.
D. Wall signs.
(1) No portion of a wall sign shall be less than eight feet above the
proposed finished grade or extend more than six inches from the
building wall. If the wall sign projects less than three inches from
the building, the sign need not meet the eight-foot height
requirement.
(2) Permanent window signs shall be considered wall signs when
computing the maximum permitted building coverage of wall signs.
(3) Wall signs which are part of the architectural design of a building
shall be exempt from size requirements if they are limited to the
area on the building specifically designed for sign placement.
(4) One wall sign shall be permitted on the front facade of a building,
and one additional wall sign on the side of a corner or end building.
E. Window signs.
(1) A maximum of 25% of the total window area may be used for
permanent signs that are etched, painted or permanently affixed to
the window.
(2) A maximum of 50% of the total window area may be covered by a
combination of permanent and temporary window signs.
(3) Permanent window signs shall be considered wall signs when
computing the maximum permitted building coverage of wall signs.
F. Canopy or awning signs.
(1) Use of a canopy or awning sign shall be limited to not more than
one for each establishment.
(2) A canopy or awning without lettering or other advertising shall not
be regulated as a sign.
G. Temporary signs. [Amended 4-28-1997 by Ord. No. 1047-97]
(1) Temporary signs shall be placed so as not to obstruct access to or
from any door, window, fire escape or ventilating equipment nor be
attached to any standpipe or fire escape.
(2) Such signs shall be placed so as not to obstruct vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or create a safety hazard.
§ 224-72 TOWING SERVICES § 224-72
210:1097
(3) Signs shall either be anchored to the ground or sufficiently stable
so as not to blow over or otherwise create a safety hazard.
(4) Temporary signs for sidewalk sales, flea markets, promotions,
"Now Open" signs, "Now Hiring" signs, "Sale" signs and other like
signs may be placed after a permit is obtained, for up to four
events/occasions per year, for up to four days for each event/
occasion.
(5) Temporary special event signs and all other temporary signs shall
be removed within four days after completion of the event,
situation or circumstance for which it is used.
(6) Temporary signs placed outdoors directing attention to commercial
promotions or activities on the same lot shall be moved indoors at
the end of each business day.
(7) The size of these signs shall not exceed 1/3 square foot of sign area
for each linear foot of building, eight square feet or whatever the
balance of the allowable sign area is after subtracting the other
signs on the property, whichever is less.
H. Off-premises signs.
(1) Where permitted, only one off-premises sign may be erected on a
property. An off-premises sign shall not be permitted on the same
premises as a freestanding sign.
(2) No such sign shall be within 500 feet of a residential zoning
district, public recreation facility, school or church. [Amended
7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 1511-2018]
(3) No off-premises sign or any part thereof shall be erected more than
75 feet from the right-of-way of a public street. [Amended
7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 1511-2018]
(4) No off-premises sign shall be erected within 30 feet of any side or
rear property line.
(5) No off-premises sign shall be erected within 1,000 feet of another
off-premises sign. [Added 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 1511-2018]
(6) An off-premises sign may have changeable copy, provided that:
[Added 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 1511-2018]
(a) Dwell time: No off-premises sign shall change message or copy
on the active area more than once every seven seconds.
(b) Message or copy transition: All message or copy changes shall
be instantaneous; there shall be no scrolling, fading, animated,
flashing or moving messages or copy.
(c) The off-premises sign conforms to all requirements of this
section and those contained § 224-73D(8).
§ 224-72 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-72
210:1098
§ 224-73. Applicability by district.
No signs, other than those specifically exempted in § 224-71, Exempt signs,
shall be permitted except as described below. This section provides a
summary of sign types and maximum sizes permitted in each district.
(7) Restrictions: An off-premises sign shall not: [Added 7-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 1511-2018]
(a) Advertise adult or sexually oriented businesses or materials,
hate speech, advertisements related to abortion, or otherwise
display any content prohibited by 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903.
(b) Advertise obscene or profane language.
(c) Emit any verbal or musical announcements or noises.
(d) Display any moving, flashing, scrolling or animated text or
video.
I. Portable signs.
(1) Portable signs, where permitted, shall be limited to a period of time
not to exceed 30 days in any one calendar year for any one
premises.
(2) Application for a portable sign shall be made to the City Code
Enforcement Officer accompanied by the required permit fee and
an escrow deposit, as established by the City fee schedule,264 as a
guaranty that the portable sign shall be promptly removed at the
end of the authorized period. If not removed within 10 days of the
permit expiration date, the City shall remove the sign and keep a
sum necessary from the escrow account to cover the expense
incurred in removal.
A. Signs permitted in the RN-1, RN-2, RN-3, RN-5, RC and POS Districts.
(1) Wall, ground or freestanding signs for bulletin or announcement
boards or for the identification of schools, churches, recreation
areas and other principal uses or buildings other than dwellings
shall be permitted, provided that the area of any such sign not
exceed 12 square feet and not more than one such sign shall be
placed on property in single and separate ownership, unless such
property fronts on more than one street, in which case one such
sign may be placed on each street frontage.
(2) Wall, ground or freestanding signs for the identification of a
residential development of 12 units or more, erected on the site of
said development and the location of a sale or rental office shall be
permitted, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed
nine square feet and not more than one such sign shall be placed on
264. Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Fees.
§ 224-72 TOWING SERVICES § 224-73
210:1099
property in single and separate ownership, unless such property
fronts on more than one street, in which case one such sign may be
placed on each street frontage.
(3) One wall or window sign for major home occupations, indicating
only names of persons, telephone numbers and the occupation shall
be permitted, provided that the area of any such sign shall not
exceed two square feet. A permit for such sign shall not be required
if the home occupation has been approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(4) One construction/development sign shall be permitted, provided
that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet and
such sign shall be removed within 20 days after the final inspection
by the City Building Inspector or 18 months after the erection of
the sign, whichever comes first.
B. Signs permitted in the RN-4 District.
(1) All signs permitted in the RN-1, RN-2, RN-3, RN-5, RC and POS
Districts shall be permitted in the RN-4 District.
(2) Wall signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted. The total area
of the wall sign(s), including permanent window signs, shall not
exceed 5% of the area of the building face, including the window
and door area and cornices, to which it is attached. In no case shall
they exceed 32 square feet.
(3) Projecting signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted. The
area of such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(4) Freestanding signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted
where they can be set back at least five feet from the curbline.
Freestanding signs shall not exceed six feet in height or 12 square
feet in area.
C. Signs permitted in the C-1, C-2, PS and I-1 Districts.
(1) All signs permitted in the RN-1, RN-2, RN-3, RN-5, RC and POS
Districts shall be permitted in the C-1, C-2, PS and I-1 Districts.
(2) Wall signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted. The total area
of the wall sign(s), including permanent window signs, shall not
exceed 10% of the area of the building face, including window and
door area and cornices, to which it is attached. In no case shall they
exceed 50 square feet.
(3) Projecting signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted. The
area of such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet.
(4) Freestanding signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted
where they can be set back at least five feet from the curbline.
§ 224-73 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-73
210:1100
(a) Freestanding signs identifying a retail center or complex,
office complex or industrial complex shall not exceed 18 feet in
height or 32 square feet in area.
(b) Freestanding signs for all other permitted nonresidential uses
shall not exceed 12 feet in height or 18 square feet in area.
(5) Ground signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted where they
can be set back at least five feet from the curbline.
(a) Ground signs identifying a retail center or complex, office
complex or industrial complex shall not exceed six feet in
height or 32 square feet in area.
(b) Ground signs for all other permitted nonresidential uses shall
not exceed six feet in height or 18 square feet in area.
(6) Canopy or awning signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted.
(a) Where a wall sign already exists, the size of the canopy or
awning sign shall not exceed eight square feet.
(b) Where no wall sign exists, the size of the canopy or awning sign
shall not exceed 12 square feet.
D. Signs permitted in the C-3 and I-2 Districts.
(1) All signs permitted in the RN-1, RN-2, RN-3, RN-5, RC and POS
Districts shall be permitted in the C-3 and I-2 Districts.
(2) Wall signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted. The total area
of the wall sign(s), including permanent window signs, shall not
exceed 15% of the area of the building face, including the window
and door area and cornices, to which it is attached.
(3) Projecting signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted. The
area of such sign shall not exceed 18 square feet.
(4) Freestanding signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted
where they can be set back at least five feet from the curbline.
(a) Freestanding signs identifying a retail center or complex,
office park or complex or industrial park or complex shall not
exceed 20 feet in height or 40 square feet in area.
(b) Freestanding signs for all other permitted nonresidential uses
shall not exceed 15 feet in height or 24 square feet in area.
(5) Ground signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted where they
can be set back at least five feet from the curbline.
(a) Ground signs for a retail center or complex, office park or
complex or industrial park or complex shall not exceed eight
feet in height or 40 square feet in area.
§ 224-73 TOWING SERVICES § 224-73
210:1101
(b) Ground signs for all other permitted nonresidential uses shall
not exceed six feet in height or 24 square feet in area.
(6) Canopy or awning signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted.
(a) Where a wall sign already exists, the size of the canopy or
awning sign shall not exceed 10 square feet.
(b) Where no wall sign exists, the size of the canopy or awning sign
shall not exceed 14 square feet.
(7) Portable signs for nonresidential uses shall be permitted. The area
of such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet.
(8) Off-premises signs shall be permitted within the I-2 District within
125 feet of the center of the intersection of Route 82 and Lincoln
Highway, which signs shall have up to three sign faces with a
maximum area of 480 square feet per face. The height of such sign
shall not exceed 35 feet, as measured from the surface of the
adjacent roadway. [Added 7-9-2018 by Ord. No. 1511-2018]
E. Signs permitted in the C-4 District. [Added 7-9-2018 by Ord. No.
1511-2018]
(1) Off-premises signs shall be permitted in the C-4 District on
property abutting the Route 30 Bypass.
(a) The height of such sign shall not exceed 45 feet, as measured
from the surface of the adjacent roadway.
(b) Such sign may have up to two sign faces with a maximum area
of 960 square feet per face.
§ 224-73 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-73
210:1102
Summary of Sign Type and Size Permitted Within the
RN-1, RN-2, RN-3, RN-4, RN-5, RC, PO, C-1, C-2, C-3,
I-1 and I-2 Districts for Signs Requiring Permits
(Text Must be Consulted for Details)
Zoning District
(square feet)
Sign Type
RN-1,
RN-2,
RN-3,
RN-5, RC
and PO
RN-4 (See
§ 224-73B)
C-1, C-2,
PS and I-1
(See
§ 224-73C)
C-3 and
I-2 (See
§ 224-73D)
Wall See
§ 224-73A
32 or 5% of
building
face,
whichever
is less
50 or 10%
of building
face,
whichever
is less
15% of
building
face
FreestandingSee
§ 224-73A
12 321 403
182 242
Ground See
§ 224-73A
Not
permitted
321 403
182 242
Projecting Not
permitted
12 16 18
Canopy or
awning
Not
permitted
Not
permitted
8 with wall
sign 12
without
wall sign
10 with
wall sign
14 without
wall sign
Portable Not
permitted
Not
permitted
Not
permitted
16
Offpremises
Not
permitted
Not
permitted
Not
permitted
480 in I-2
only4
NOTES:
1 Identification sign for retail center or complex, office
complex, or industrial complex.
2 All other nonresidential signs.
3 Identification sign for retail center or complex, office
park or complex and industrial park or complex.
§ 224-73 TOWING SERVICES § 224-73
210:1103
§ 224-74. Construction, maintenance and removal.
4 Off-premises signs within the I-2 District within 125
feet of the center of the intersection of Route 82 and
Lincoln Highway only.
A. Construction and maintenance requirements.
(1) All signs permitted by this chapter shall be constructed of durable
materials and kept in good condition and repair. Maintenance shall
include ensuring that the sign contents remain in a readable
condition.
(2) All signs requiring the use of electricity shall be manufactured in
accordance with Underwriter Laboratories specifications.
B. Removal of unsafe, unlawful or abandoned signs.
(1) Unsafe or unlawful signs.
(a) Upon written notice by the City of Coatesville, the owner,
person or firm maintaining a sign must remove said sign when
it:
[1] Becomes unsafe, is in danger of falling or it becomes so
deteriorated that it no longer serves a useful purpose of
communication.
[2] Is determined by the City to be a nuisance.
[3] Is deemed unsafe by the City.
[4] Is unlawfully erected in violation of any of the provisions of
this article.
(b) The City may remove or cause to be removed said sign at the
expense of the owner and/or lessee in the event the owner or
the person or firm maintaining said sign has not complied with
the terms of said notice within 30 days of the date of the notice.
In the event of immediate danger, however, the City may
remove said sign immediately upon the issuance of said notice
to the owner, person or firm maintaining said sign.
(2) Abandoned signs.
(a) No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any
premises owned or controlled by such person a sign which has
been abandoned. Any such abandoned sign shall be removed
by the landowner or person controlling the property within 14
days of abandonment.
(b) The City may remove or cause to be removed said sign at the
expense of the owner and/or lessee in the event the owner or
§ 224-73 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-74
210:1104
§ 224-75. Applications and permits.
the person or firm maintaining said sign has not complied with
the terms of said notice within 30 days of the date of the notice.
A. Sign permit.
(1) A permit must be obtained from the City before the erection of any
signs in the City, unless specifically exempted in this article.
(2) Exemptions from the necessity of securing a permit shall not be
construed to relieve the owner of the exempted sign from
responsibility for its construction and installation in a safe manner
and in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
(3) The following changes to a sign shall not require a permit:
(a) Changing of the advertising message.
(b) Regular maintenance of the sign, including electrical,
repainting or cleaning of a sign.
(c) The repair of a sign.
B. Application information. Before a sign permit is granted, a sign permit
application with the following information shall be submitted in
duplicate:
(1) A description of the size, shape, color, sign contents, material,
supports, anchoring, weight and height of the sign, as well as the
intensity of illumination.
(2) An architectural elevation, drawn to scale, of the sign, indicating
the proposed style of the letters, words, symbols or other graphics
and the proposed size, dimensions, shape, color, material, supports,
anchoring and height of the sign.
(3) A plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed sign location
with respect to the property lines and the building(s).
(4) The application shall be accompanied by the written consent of the
owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be
erected for city officials to enter said premises to inspect the sign.
(5) All sign permit applications shall be accompanied by a check to
cover the required fee as set forth in the fee schedule for signs
established by the City Council.
C. Processing and approval of permit.
(1) The Code Enforcement Officer shall process applications for sign
approval permits within 30 days from the date of the filing of the
complete application with the required fee.
§ 224-74 TOWING SERVICES § 224-75
210:1105
§ 224-76. Nonconforming signs.
Nonconforming signs shall be subject to the requirements of § 224-97 of this
chapter.
(2) In determining the appropriateness of the proposed sign, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall determine the following:
(a) That the sign meets all restrictions, standards and sign area
requirements of this chapter.
(b) That the sign has a reasonable location, scale and proportion in
relation to buildings, doors, windows and pedestrian and
vehicular access.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect and approve the
installation of the sign and shall make periodic inspections to
determine conformity of signs to these regulations.
§ 224-75 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-76
210:1106
ARTICLE XV
Administration and Enforcement
§ 224-77. Purpose.
This article contains provisions which will help ensure that the residents,
businesses and institutions within the City of Coatesville comply with this
chapter. In this article, the appointment and duties of a Zoning Officer are
established, the procedures for obtaining permits required by this chapter
are outlined, fees to help cover zoning administration expenses are required
and enforcement proceedings are set forth.
§ 224-78. Zoning Officer.
A. Appointment. A Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the City Council to
administer and enforce this chapter. To be eligible for the position, an
applicant must:
(1) Meet all qualifications for the position as established by the City of
Coatesville;
(2) Demonstrate a working knowledge of municipal zoning to the
satisfaction of the City of Coatesville; and
(3) Not hold any elective office in the City of Coatesville.
B. Duties. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall include the following:
(1) Administer this chapter, and all amendments, in accordance with
its literal terms. The Zoning Officer shall not have the power to
permit any construction or any use or change of use which does not
conform to this chapter.
(2) Receive and examine all applications for permits and to process
certain applications as follows:
(a) Applications for special exceptions and variances shall be
processed in accordance with Article XVI.
(b) Applications for conditional uses shall be forwarded to the City
Council and the Planning Commission.
(3) Receive applications for interpretation appeals and forward these
applications to the Zoning Hearing Board.
(4) Request that the Zoning Hearing Board interpret provisions of this
chapter when necessary.
(5) Forward applications for curative amendments and validity
challenges to the City Council, Planning Commission or Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with this chapter.
(6) Issue permits in accordance with this article. Certain permits shall
be issued only under the following circumstances:
§ 224-77 TOWING SERVICES § 224-78
210:1107
§ 224-79. Permits.
(a) Permits for special exceptions and variances shall be issued
only upon order of the Zoning Hearing Board.
(b) Conditional use permits shall be issued only after authorization
from the City Council.
(7) Revoke permits in accordance with this article.
(8) Institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement
when acting within the scope of employment.
(9) Administer the National Flood Insurance Program.
(10) Conduct inspections and surveys of structures, uses, signs and lots
to determine compliance or noncompliance with the terms of this
chapter.
(11)Keep an official record of all applications, permits, conditions of
approval, plans, documents, complaints and actions taken to
address complaints and all other activities and materials related to
the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(12) Maintain a map or set of maps showing the current zoning
classification of all land in the City.
(13) Make such reports as the City Council, Zoning Hearing Board and
Planning Commission may require.
A. General provisions.
(1) Applications.
(a) Applications for permits shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer, in writing, by the landowner or an authorized agent on
forms furnished by the City of Coatesville.
(b) There shall be included with any such application all other
plans, documents and information necessary for the Zoning
Officer to determine whether the proposal complies with this
chapter and all other pertinent ordinances, codes and
regulations of the City of Coatesville.
(c) No application is complete until all information has been
provided, necessary documents have been filed and fees have
been paid in accordance with § 224-80.
(2) Issuance or refusal of permits.
(a) No permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer has certified:
[1] That all information has been provided and the proposal
complies with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 224-78 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-79
210:1108
[2] That the proposal complies with all other pertinent
ordinances, codes and regulations of the City of
Coatesville.
[3] For conditional uses, that the proposal complies with all
conditions established by the City Council.
[4] That appropriate permits have been issued from the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry for
commercial uses, industrial uses, places of public
assembly and other uses as required by the
commonwealth.
[5] That all other necessary governmental reviews and
permits have been obtained.
(b) If the Zoning Officer determines that an application is in
compliance with the provisions of Subsection A(2)(a) above, it
shall be his or her duty to issue the appropriate permit. If the
Zoning Officer determines that an application is not in
compliance with Subsection A(2)(a) above, it shall be his or her
duty to refuse the permit, in which case the Zoning Officer
shall inform the applicant of the prescribed method of appeal
or further application for approval.
(c) If the Zoning Officer expresses a reasonable doubt that the
proposal will comply with all the requirements of Subsection
A(2)(a) above, it will be incumbent upon the applicant to
furnish adequate evidence in support of the application. If such
evidence is not presented, the permit will be refused.
(d) If the Zoning Officer determines that the application for a
permit is incomplete, it will be incumbent upon the applicant to
furnish information necessary to complete the application. If
such information is not presented, the permit will be refused.
(3) Revocation of permit. The Zoning Officer may revoke a permit
issued under the provisions of this chapter in case of any false
statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the
plan on which the permit or approval was based or for any other
cause set forth in this chapter.
(4) Appeals. All appeals from decisions of the Zoning Officer shall be
taken to the Zoning Hearing Board in the manner set forth in this
chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.265
(5) Deviation from work described in permit. Zoning permits, building
permits and conditional use permits issued on the basis of plans
and applications approved by the Zoning Officer authorize only the
265. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 224-79 TOWING SERVICES § 224-79
210:1109
work described in the permit. Deviations from the work authorized
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable as
provided by § 224-81.
B. Required permits.
(1) Zoning permits.
(a) Applicability. A zoning permit shall be required prior to any of
the following:
[1] A land development.
[2] The construction of a single-family dwelling.
[3] The extension of a nonconformity, in accordance with
Article XVII.
[4] The erection, construction, demolition or alteration of a
structure or use within the Floodplain Conservation
Overlay District.
[5] The erection, construction, demolition or alteration of a
structure or use within the steep slope district.
(b) Issuance.
[1] Zoning permits shall be issued in accordance with
§ 224-79.
[2] The Zoning Officer shall grant or deny the zoning permit
within 30 of a completed application. If the zoning permit
is denied, the Zoning Officer shall specify the reasons for
denying the permit.
[3] The zoning permit, once issued, shall be posted on the
property until completion of the project.
[4] Upon the completion of the activity authorized by the
zoning permit and prior to use or occupancy, the holder of
the permit shall notify the Zoning Officer and a use and
occupancy permit shall be obtained.
(2) Building permits.
(a) Applicability. A building permit shall be required prior to the
erection, construction, demolition or alteration of any building
or structure, or any portion thereof, in accordance with
Chapter 82, Building Construction, of the Code of the City of
Coatesville.
(b) Issuance.
[1] Building permits shall be issued in accordance with
§ 224-79.
§ 224-79 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-79
210:1110
[2] The Zoning Officer shall grant or deny the building permit
within 30 days of a completed application. If the building
permit is denied, the Zoning Officer shall specify the
reasons for denying the permit.
[3] The building permit, once issued, shall be posted on the
property until completion of the project.
(3) Conditional use permit.
(a) Applicability. The governing body shall have the power to
approve conditional use permits when specifically required by
this chapter.
(b) Issuance. A conditional use permit shall be issued in
accordance with § 224-79 and the following procedure:
[1] The Zoning Officer shall forward an application for a
conditional use to the Planning Commission and the City
Council for review.
[2] The Planning Commission shall review the application and
any supporting documents to determine whether the
conditional use is consistent with this chapter, City of
Coatesville Comprehensive Plan and other plans or
ordinances adopted by the City of Coatesville. The
Planning Commission shall forward its comments and
recommendations to the City Council prior to the final
decision by the Council.
[3] The City Council shall conduct a public hearing and make
a decision in accordance with § 224-86.
[4] When making a decision, the City Council shall grant a
conditional use permit only when it finds that a proposed
structure or use will meet requirements listed below. The
applicant shall be responsible for demonstrating
compliance with these standards:
[a] The proposal shall be in compliance with this chapter,
both general provisions and those applicable to the
particular structure or use.
[b] The proposal shall be consistent with the goals and
objectives of the City of Coatesville Comprehensive
Plan as well as recommendations contained therein.
[c] The City Council shall consider the comments and
recommendations of the Planning Commission.
[d] The proposed conditional use shall be suitable for the
lot, including but not limited to its location, water and
§ 224-79 TOWING SERVICES § 224-79
210:1111
sewer service capabilities, natural features and
accessibility to roads, utilities and infrastructure.
[e] The impacts of the proposed conditional use shall not
adversely affect the neighborhood, including but not
limited to traffic, noise and lighting.
[f] The impacts of the proposed conditional use shall not
adversely affect public services and facilities, such as
water supply, sewage disposal, roads, police and fire
protection, emergency services, open space and
recreation facilities and the public school system, and
where necessary, arrangements for mitigating the
impact or improving the public service or facility are
assured.
[g] The impacts of the proposed conditional use on
adjacent municipalities shall be considered, including
but not limited to roads, public services or facilities
and community services or facilities.
[h] The proposed conditional use shall not adversely
affect the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare and shall serve the best interests of the City of
Coatesville.
[i] In granting a conditional use permit, the City Council
may attach reasonable conditions and safeguards as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes of
this chapter and the City of Coatesville
Comprehensive Plan.
[5] The permit, once issued, shall be posted on the property
until completion of the project.
[6] Upon the completion of the activity authorized by the
conditional use permit and prior to use or occupancy, the
holder of the permit shall notify the Zoning Officer and a
use and occupancy permit shall be obtained.
[7] An application for a conditional use permit may be
considered concurrently with the preliminary plan for a
land development or subdivision, provided that a sketch
plan has been approved in accordance with Chapter 197,
Subdivision and Land Development.
[8] The failure of the applicant to demonstrate compliance
with the requirements of this article, at the discretion of
the City Council, can be deemed either a basis for
establishing conditions or limitations on an approval or the
basis for a denial of a conditional use application.
§ 224-79 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-79
210:1112
(4) Use and occupancy permits.
(a) Applicability.
[1] A use and occupancy permit shall be required upon
completion of the project for which a zoning permit or
conditional use permit was issued.
[2] It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy any
structure or land until a use and occupancy permit has
been duly issued and, where applicable, a highway
occupancy permit has been issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
(b) Issuance.
[1] A use and occupancy permit shall be issued in accordance
with § 224-79.
[2] The Zoning Officer shall grant or deny the use and
occupancy permit within 10 days of a completed
application. If the use and occupancy permit is denied, the
Zoning Officer shall specify the reasons for denying the
permit.
(c) Temporary use and occupancy permit. A temporary use and
occupancy permit may be issued by the Zoning Officer for a
period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial
occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that
such a temporary permit may require conditions and
safeguards needed to protect the safety of the occupants and
the public.
C. Variances and special exceptions. [Added 12-10-2007 by Ord. No.
1293-2007]
(1) Applications.
(a) Special exception: permission for a use that would not be
permissible generally or without restriction throughout a
zoning district but which, if controlled as to area, location,
relation to the neighborhood and other such restrictions as
may be deemed appropriate in each case, would be compatible
with surrounding land uses and found to be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for City of Coatesville.
(b) Variances: deviation from specific dimensional requirements
within a regulation. These frequently involve modifications to
required yards. The granting of a variance is generally based
upon special circumstances which create an undue hardship to
the property owner. An undue hardship is defined as an
exceptional hardship which cannot reasonably be corrected or
avoided by the applicant. Self-created problems or common
§ 224-79 TOWING SERVICES § 224-79
210:1113
difficulties shared by all other property owners in an area are
not an undue hardship.
(2) Written petition.
(a) Applications for special exceptions and variances shall be
obtained from and filed with the Zoning Official and shall be
accompanied by the applicable fee. The Zoning Official shall
review the application for sufficiency, which includes
completeness of the application. If additional data is required,
the Zoning Official shall advise the applicant within 15 working
days after receipt of the application.
(b) Upon finding the application to be correct and complete, it
shall be scheduled for a public hearing before the next
available Zoning Hearing Board (ZHB) meeting, but not more
than 60 days after initial filing. Should an error in the
application be discovered, the Zoning Official shall have the
discretion to require the applicant to reapply or submit a
revised plan with additional information. Special exception
applications and applications for variances shall include but
not be limited to the following where applicable:
[1] Site plans of an appropriate scale showing proposed
placement of structures on the property, provisions for
ingress and egress, off-street parking and off-street
loading areas, refuse and service areas and required yards
and other spaces;
[2] Plans showing proposed locations for utilities hookups;
[3] Plans for screening and buffers, with references to type,
dimensions and character;
[4] Proposed landscaping;
[5] Proposed signs and lighting including type, dimension and
character;
[6] A legal description of the entire property encompassing
the special exception or variance;
[7] A narrative description of the total project in sufficient
detail to provide an understanding of the nature of the
development proposal and a statement describing how the
requested special exception and/or variances meet the
standards for approval.
(3) Procedure.
(a) Application materials for any of the petitions prescribed herein
may be obtained at the Urban Planning and Codes Department
Codes office. Staff is available to answer applicants' questions.
§ 224-79 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-79
210:1114
Upon receiving a complete application, the Zoning Official
shall review it for sufficiency and completeness. Once deemed
sufficient and complete, the request is scheduled for the next
available hearing date. An on-site review is performed and a
staff report is written that includes all relevant information
and recommended conditions if the request is approved. The
applicant, or the applicant's representative must be present
at the public hearing to present the request and answer any
questions the ZHB may have.
(b) The ZHB will then make a decision based upon the facts
presented at the public hearing. The applicant will receive
written notification of the ZHB decision as soon as possible
thereafter. In addition, whenever the ZHB approves a variance
or special exception, a document is recorded in the Coatesville
Urban Planning and Codes Department property file stating
the approval, petition number, legal description and the name
and address of the applicant.
(4) Notice of public hearing.
(a) All actions of the ZHB are preceded by a public hearing. Upon
receipt of an application, a hearing date is set. Generally, two
types of notice are given prior to a public hearing:
[1] Legal advertisement giving notice of the request is
published in a newspaper of general circulation in Chester
County. This legal advertisement must contain a
description of the request, a description of the subject
property, and the time, date and location of the public
hearing. All interested persons are invited to appear and
be heard.
[2] Written notice containing the same information appearing
in the legal advertisement is mailed to all persons owning
property within 200 feet of the subject property, excluding
right-of-way, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing.
These notices are sent to the property owners shown on
the latest available tax rolls. Notice is considered to have
been given when placed, postage paid, in the United
States mail.
[3] All notices, including "public notice" as defined in Chapter
224, shall, in such notice, contain language specifying that
any person with a disability or requiring accommodation
should contact the City to make arrangements for such
accommodation. [Added 2-23-2015 by Ord. No.
1444-2015]
§ 224-79 TOWING SERVICES § 224-80
210:1115
§ 224-80. Fees.
No action shall be taken on any application for any special exception,
conditional use, variance, validity challenge, curative amendment, petition
for a zoning change or appeal until all application fees, charges and
expenses have been paid in full, in accordance with Chapter 108, Fees, of
the Code of the City of Coatesville.
§ 224-81. Enforcement.
A. Violations. Failure to secure the appropriate permits in accordance with
this article shall be a violation of this chapter. It shall also be a violation
of this chapter to undertake other deliberate actions which are contrary
to the terms of this chapter or other existing statutes.
B. Causes of action. In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is
or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
converted, demolished, repaired, extended, replaced, maintained or
used in violation of this chapter, the City Council or, with the approval of
the City Council, an officer of the City or any aggrieved owner or tenant
of real property who shows that his or her property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping
or land or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct,
business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is
instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served
upon the municipality at least 30 days prior to the time the action is
begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the City of Coatesville. No
such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
C. Enforcement notice.
(1) If it appears to the City of Coatesville that a violation of this chapter
has occurred, the City shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this subsection.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding
that parcel and to any other person requested in writing by the
owner of record.
(3) The enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the City of Coatesville intends to take action.
(b) The location of the property in violation.
§ 224-80 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-81
210:1116
(c) The specific violation with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right of appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in the ordinance.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
D. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the City of Coatesville, pay a judgment of not more
than $500, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees
incurred by a municipality as a result thereof.
(2) No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If
the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
City of Coatesville may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable rules of civil procedure.
(3) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the District Justice determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation; in which
event, there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation
until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice, and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(4) All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the City of Coatesville.
(5) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(6) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the
§ 224-81 TOWING SERVICES § 224-81
210:1117
right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
section.
§ 224-81 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-81
210:1118
ARTICLE XVI
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 224-82. Role of Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall interpret provisions of this chapter
according to this article and Act 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.266
§ 224-83. Membership.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three members appointed by
the City Council. The membership shall consist of residents of the City,
whose terms of office shall be three years. The Board shall promptly
notify the City Council of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to
fill vacancies are for the unexpired portion of the term only. Members of
the Board shall hold no other office in the City.
B. Any member of the Board may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a
majority vote of the City Council taken after the member has received
15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall
be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in
writing.
C. The City Council may appoint, by resolution, at least one but not more
than three residents of the City to serve as alternate members for threeyear
terms. When seated pursuant to the provisions of § 224-84 below,
an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all procedures and
discussions of the Zoning Hearing Board to the same and full extent as
Zoning Hearing Board members, including specially the right to cast a
vote. Alternates shall hold no other office in the City, including
membership on the Planning Commission and Zoning Officer. Any
alternate may participate in proceedings or discussion of the Board but
shall not be entitled to vote nor be compensated pursuant to § 224-84
unless designated as a voting alternate member.
D. Attendance. [Added 4-22-2013 by Ord. No. 1404-2013]
(1) Any member of the Zoning Hearing Board absent from three or
more consecutive regular meetings of the Zoning Hearing Board
without an approved leave of absence granted by the City Council
after public hearing and prior written notice thereof shall be
removed from the Zoning Hearing Board by the City Council of the
City of Coatesville.
(2) Any member of the Zoning Hearing Board absent from 20% or
more of the regularly scheduled meetings of the Zoning Hearing
Board within any one-year period shall be notified in writing by the
266. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 224-82 TOWING SERVICES § 224-83
210:1119
§ 224-84. Organization.
§ 224-85. Expenditures for services; fees.
City Manager acting on behalf of the City Council of the attendance
requirements of this subsection. Any member of the Zoning
Hearing Board who is absent from 20% or more of the regularly
scheduled meetings within a one-year period shall thereafter be
removed for cause from such position by the City Council with prior
written notice after public hearing unless such member resigns in
writing or waives the public hearing in writing.
(3) Any member of the Zoning Hearing Board may be removed for
cause as determined by the City Council after public hearing and
prior written notice thereof.
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not preclude the removal of
any member of the Zoning Hearing Board without cause by the City
Council when authorized by state law, City Charter or City
ordinance.
A. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. A quorum of a
majority of the members of the Board must be present to hold any
hearing or take actions on any issues requiring a vote. Where two
members are disqualified to act in a particular matter, the remaining
member may act for the Board, if an alternate has not been appointed.
B. The Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to
conduct any hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further
action by the Board as provided in § 224-86. The Board may make, alter
and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with
ordinances of the City and laws of the commonwealth. The Board shall
keep full public records of its business and shall submit a report of its
activities to the City Council once each year.
C. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board shall designate as
many alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board to sit on said
Board as may be needed to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of
the Zoning Hearing Board shall continue to serve on that Board in all
proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate was
initially appointed, until the Board has made a final determination of
the matter or case.
A. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the City Council, the Board
may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services. However, the
Solicitor for the Zoning Hearing Board shall be a different individual
than the Solicitor for the City Council. Members of the Board may
§ 224-83 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-85
210:1120
§ 224-86. Hearings and decisions.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in the following
manner:
receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as may be
fixed by the City Council.
B. The City Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board by resolution. Fees for said
hearings may include compensation for the secretary and members of
the Board, public notice arrangements and necessary administrative
overhead costs. The costs, however, shall not include legal expenses for
the Board, expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical
consultants or expert witness costs.
C. The applicant before the Board shall deposit with the Director of
Finance of the City such a sum of money as shall be deemed sufficient
by the Board to pay the cost of Zoning Hearing Board expenses for the
hearing. Funds deposited in excess of the actual cost of the requested
hearing shall be returned to the applicant upon completion of the
proceedings, and, in the event the costs of the hearing exceed the funds
deposited, the applicant shall pay funds equal to such excess cost.
A. Notice requirements.
(1) The Board shall fix a time and place for public hearings and shall
give notice thereof as follows:
(a) By providing notice in accordance with the definition of public
notice in Article II of this chapter. In the event that more than
one hearing is required to consider any application or a
hearing is continued, while in progress, to another date,
announcement at the hearing to be continued of the next
hearing date shall be deemed adequate notice. If the
subsequent hearing is not held within 45 days or the date or
time is changed following the original announcement, then
public notice pursuant to Article II of this chapter is required.
(b) By mailing a notice thereof to the parties of interest and all
abutting owners and owners within 200 feet along the frontage
of the lot and a one-hundred-foot radius of the side and rear lot
lines.
(c) By providing notice thereof to the Zoning Officer, the City
Secretary, each member of the City Council, each member of
the Planning Commission, the Secretary of the Chester County
Planning Commission and to every person or organization who
shall have registered with the Board for the purpose of
receiving such notices.
§ 224-85 TOWING SERVICES § 224-86
210:1121
(2) The notice herein required shall state the location of the lot or
building and the general nature of the question involved.
(3) In addition to the above requirements, notice of said hearing shall
be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land.
B. The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
C. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be
made by the Board, but the parties may waive decision or findings by
the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as
final.
D. The parties to the hearing shall be the City, any person affected by the
application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board and any other person, including civic or community
organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. All persons who wish
to be considered parties must enter appearances, in writing, on forms
provided by the Board for that purpose.
E. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and documents requested by the
parties.
F. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
G. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
H. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings, and a transcript of the
proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received in
evidence shall be made available to any party at cost. The appearance
fee of the stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the
Zoning Hearing Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid
by the Zoning Hearing Board if the transcript is ordered by said Board
or Zoning Officer. In the event of an appeal, the cost of the original
transcript shall be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the
Zoning Hearing Board. The cost of additional copies shall be paid by the
person requesting such copies. In other cases, the party requesting the
original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
I. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or their representatives in connection with
any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda or other material so noticed and shall not inspect the site
§ 224-86 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-86
210:1122
§ 224-87. Board's functions.
or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party
or his or her representative unless all parties are given an opportunity
to be present.
J. The Board or the hearing officer shall render a written decision or,
when no decision is called for, make written findings on the application
within 45 days after the last hearing before the Board or hearing officer.
Each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions
based thereon, together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based
on any provisions of this chapter or any act, rule or regulation shall
contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the
conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. If the
hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there has been no
stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall make
his report and recommendations available to the parties within 45 days,
and the parties shall be entitled to make written representations
thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the
Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the
decision of the hearing officer. Where the Board has power to render a
decision and the Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, fails
to render the same within the period required by this subsection, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party
opposing the application to urge that such decision is erroneous.
K. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
or her by certified mail not later than the day following its date. To all
other persons who have filed their name and address with the Board,
brief notice shall be provided by mail or otherwise of the decision or
findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or
findings may be examined.
A. Appeals from the Zoning Officer. The Board shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that the Zoning Officer has
failed to follow prescribed procedures or has misinterpreted or
misapplied any provision of a valid ordinance or map or any valid rule or
regulation governing the action of the Zoning Officer.
B. Challenge to the validity of this chapter or map. The Board shall hear
challenges to the validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map except as
indicated in Article IX and X-A of the Act, as amended.267 In all such
challenges, the Board shall take evidence and make a record thereon as
provided in § 224-86. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall
decide all contested questions and shall make findings on all relevant
267. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq. and § 11001-A et seq.
§ 224-86 TOWING SERVICES § 224-87
210:1123
issues of fact, which shall become part of the record on appeal to the
court.
C. Special exceptions. Where special exceptions are provided for in this
chapter, the Board shall hear and decide requests for such special
exceptions in accordance with stated standards and criteria. In
granting a special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this
chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the purpose of this
chapter. In addition, the Board shall consider any recommendations
provided by the Planning Commission in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan. In rendering its decision, the Board shall
determine that the applicant has demonstrated the following:
(1) The property is suitable for the use desired; and the proposed
request is consistent with the spirit, intent and purpose of this
chapter.
(2) The proposed special exception will not substantially injure or
detract from the use of neighboring property or from the character
of the neighborhood and that the use of property adjacent to the
area included in the proposed change or plan is adequately
safeguarded.
(3) The proposed special exception will serve the best interests of the
City, convenience of the community and the public welfare.
(4) There will be no adverse effect of the proposed special exception
upon the logical efficient and economical extension of public
services and facilities, such as public water, sewers, police and fire
protection and public schools.
D. Variances.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that
the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. In such cases, the burden of proof for demonstrating
hardship are on the applicant.
(2) The Board may, by rule, prescribe the form of application and may
require preliminary application to the Zoning Officer. The Board
may grant a variance, provided that the following findings are
made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located.
§ 224-87 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-87
210:1124
§ 224-88. Parties appellant before Board.
(b) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of a variance is, therefore, necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property.
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, not substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
(3) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter and the Act.
E. Unified appeals. Where the Board has jurisdiction over a zoning matter
pursuant to § 224-87, the Board shall also hear all appeals which an
applicant may elect to bring before it with respect to any city ordinance
or requirement pertaining to the same development plan or
development. In any such case, the Board shall have no power to pass
upon the nonzoning issues but shall take evidence and make a record
thereon as provided in § 224-86. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Board shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact which shall
become part of the record on appeal to the court.
A. Appeals under § 224-87 and proceedings to challenge any ordinance
under § 224-87 shall be in writing, on forms prescribed by the Board.
Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific provisions of this
chapter involved and shall set forth the interpretation that is claimed,
the grounds for any challenges to the validity and the relief which is
sought.
B. Applications for a special exception or variance shall be submitted to
the Zoning Officer on forms prescribed by the Board. Such applications
may be made by a tenant of the property with the written approval of
the owner.
C. Applications and appeals, together with the required filing fee, shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer. No action by the Board will begin until
a complete application form is filed along with the required fee.
§ 224-87 TOWING SERVICES § 224-88
210:1125
§ 224-89. Time limitations.
§ 224-90. Stay of proceedings.
D. All applications or appeals shall be forwarded to the City Planning
Commission, which may review and offer comment on such at its
discretion. An applicant or appellant may request to appear before the
Planning Commission to review his or her submission. The Planning
Commission shall not be required to schedule such appearances prior
to taking action, if any, on a particular application. The failure of the
Planning Commission to offer comment on any application shall not
invalidate any action taken by the Board.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later
than 30 days after any application for development, preliminary or final,
has been approved by the City if such proceeding is designed to secure
reversal or to limit the approval in any manner unless such person
alleges and proves that he had no notice or knowledge or reason to
believe that such approval had been given. If such person has
succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall be bound by the
knowledge of his predecessor in interest.
B. The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an
adverse decision on a tentative or preliminary subdivision plan or from
an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity
of an ordinance or map pursuant to Article IX or X-A of the Act268 shall
preclude an appeal from a final approval except in the case where the
final submission substantially deviates from the approved tentative or
preliminary approval.
C. Unless otherwise specified by the Board, a special exception or
variance shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit or
a use and occupancy permit, as the case may be, within one year from
the date of final authorization. Should the applicant or appellant
commence construction or alteration within said one-year period, the
Board may grant an extension, upon appeal by the applicant, if the
Board determines that good cause appears for the extension. If the
permits have not been secured and an extension is not approved, the
Board may, upon 10 days' notice in writing, rescind or revoke the
granted special exception permit or variance.
A. Upon filing of any proceedings referred to in § 224-88 and during its
pendency before the Board, all land development pursuant to any
challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any
agency or body and all official action thereunder shall be stayed unless
the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to
the Board facts indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to
life or property. In such cases, the development or official action shall
not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be
268. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq. and § 11001-A et seq.
§ 224-88 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-90
210:1126
§ 224-91. Appeals.
Any person, taxpayer or the City aggrieved by any decision of the Board
may, within 30 days after such decision of the Board, seek review by the
Court of Common Pleas of such decision in the manner provided by the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and Article IX or X-A of the Act, as
amended.269
granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals on petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer or other
appropriate agency or body.
B. When an application for development, preliminary or final, has been
duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the
approval are filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant,
the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing
the proceedings before the Board.
C. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court.
269. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq. and § 11001-A et seq.
§ 224-90 TOWING SERVICES § 224-91
210:1127

ARTICLE XVII
Nonconformities
§ 224-92. Applicability.
All uses, structures, lots and signs that do not conform to regulations
of the district in which they are located but were in lawful existence
prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be known and regarded as
"nonconforming," and the following regulations shall apply to them.
§ 224-93. Continuation.
Any nonconforming use, building, sign or other structure legally existing
at the time of adoption of this chapter or authorized by a building permit
issued prior thereto may be continued in accordance with this article.
§ 224-94. Nonconforming uses.
A. Extension or enlargement. The nonconforming use of a building or of a
lot shall not be extended or structurally enlarged so as to use other
portions of the building or lot, except insofar as is permitted by law to
assure the structural safety of a structure, unless the Zoning Hearing
Board shall, by special exception as hereinafter provided, authorize the
extension or enlargement of such use or building. The Zoning Hearing
Board, upon proper application, may grant such special exception,
provided that:
(1) It is clear that such extension is not materially detrimental to the
character of the surrounding area or to the interest of the City.
(2) The area devoted to the nonconforming use shall not be increased
by more than a total of 10%. This increase shall occur only once
during the life of a nonconforming use.
(3) Any extension or enlargement of the building or of a lot having a
nonconforming use shall conform to all applicable area and bulk
regulations of the district in which it is situated and to all
regulations applicable to such a use in the City.
B. Change of use. A nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use by the grant of a special exception only upon
determination by the Zoning Hearing Board, after public hearing, that
the proposed new use will be similar to or less detrimental to its
neighborhood and abutting properties than is the use it is to replace.
Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be
permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. In evaluating relative
detriment, the Zoning Hearing Board shall take into consideration,
among other issues:
(1) Potential traffic generation.
§ 224-92 TOWING SERVICES § 224-94
210:1129
§ 224-95. Nonconforming structures.
(2) Nuisance characteristics, such as emission of noise, dust, odor,
glare and smoke.
(3) Fire hazards.
(4) Hours and manner of operation.
C. Restoration. A structure containing a nonconforming use involuntarily
destroyed by 75% or less of its value by fire, explosion, flood or other
phenomena or legally condemned may be reconstructed and used for
the same nonconforming use, provided that:
(1) Reconstruction of the structure shall commence within one year
from the date the structure was destroyed or condemned and shall
be completed within one year of the date commenced.
(2) The reconstructed structure shall not exceed area and bulk of the
damaged or destroyed structure, except as provided by Subsection
A(1).
D. Abandonment. If a nonconforming use of a structure or land is razed,
removed or intentionally and voluntarily abandoned for 12 consecutive
months, subsequent use of such building or land shall conform with the
regulations of the district in which it is located. However, this same or
another nonconforming use shall be allowed, provided that the request
for the nonconforming use is filed and approved by the Board within the
twelve-month period and the permit application for such approved
nonconforming use is filed within 30 days after the decision of the
Board.
E. Accessory uses. The provisions of this article relative to continuation
and extension of nonconforming uses shall not apply or be applicable to
an accessory use.
A. Extension or enlargement.
(1) Buildings of which a conforming use is made but which are
nonconforming in area and bulk by exceeding the allowable lot
coverage, setback or height regulations for the district in which
they are located may not be enlarged unless the lot size is enlarged
to conform to the district regulations.
(2) Buildings of which a conforming use is made but which are
nonconforming in location on a lot may be enlarged or additional
buildings may be constructed, subject to the following:
(a) Additional buildings and enlargement of existing buildings
must conform to the distances from lot and setback lines and
all design standards from the district.
§ 224-94 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-95
210:1130
§ 224-96. Nonconforming lots.
(b) The additions and enlargements, together with the existing
structures on the lot, shall not exceed lot coverage
requirements for the district.
(c) Such alteration, renovation or enlargement shall not increase
any existing nonconformity and shall comply with all area and
bulk regulations. In the case of a nonconforming structure
which is occupied by a nonconforming use, such alteration,
renovation or enlargement shall also meet the requirements of
§ 224-94A of this article. In the case of a nonconforming
structure which is located on a nonconforming lot, such
alteration, renovation or enlargement shall also meet the
requirements of § 224-96 of this article.
(3) Single-family residences and accessory structures existing at the
time of adoption of this chapter which are nonconforming solely
because of coverage and setback requirements shall be considered
conforming to requirements of the district in which they are
located and other regulations in this chapter, provided that, in the
opinion of the Zoning Officer:
(a) Adherence to the coverage and setback requirements of this
chapter constitutes a hardship to the applicant.
(b) No hazard, nuisance or other adverse effect would be created
as a result of such action.
(4) Any extension or enlargement of a nonconforming structure must
meet the off-street parking and buffering requirements of Articles
XI and XIII, herein.
B. Restoration. Any lawful nonconforming building or other structure
which has been involuntarily damaged or destroyed by 75% or less of its
value by fire, explosion, windstorm or other active cause may be
reconstructed in the same location, provided that:
(1) The reconstructed building or structure shall not exceed the
height, area or bulk permitted by Subsection A or the original
building, whichever shall be the more limited.
(2) Reconstruction shall begin within one year from the date of
damage or destruction and shall be completed without
interruption.
(3) Any restoration required as a result of flooding shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the Floodplain Conservation
Overlay District.
§ 224-95 TOWING SERVICES § 224-96
210:1131
§ 224-97. Nonconforming signs.
Any existing nonconforming signs, signboards, billboards or advertising
device existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter may be used in
its existing location, provided that it is maintained in accordance with the
following provisions and all Building Code requirements for structures:
A. A use or building may be constructed on a nonconforming lot of record
in existence at the effective date of this chapter under the following
circumstances:
(1) The owner does not own or control other adjoining properties
sufficient to enable him to comply with the area and bulk
requirements for the district.
(2) A special exception is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. In
addition to other standards governing special exceptions, the
Board shall impose the following:
(a) The use of the lot and building shall conform to the permitted
use of the district.
(b) The building height shall conform to the requirements for the
district.
(c) The design standards for uses in the district shall be applied.
(3) In any residential district, a single-family dwelling may be
constructed on a lot of this character without special exception
approval if the conditions of Subsection A(2)(a) above are met and
if all the setback, yard and coverage requirements for the district
are met; otherwise, the requirements for a special exception as
outlined in Subsection A(2) above shall apply.
B. Single-family dwellings and accessory structures existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter which are nonconforming solely because of
area or lot width requirements shall be considered conforming.
A. Moving. A nonconforming sign may be moved, provided that moving
such a sign would eliminate the nonconformity. A nonconforming sign
shall not be moved to a position where such a sign remains
nonconforming unless permitted by special exception.
B. Area. The total area of all such signs relating to a single use at the
effective date of this chapter or at the effective date of any amendment
of this chapter by which any sign shall be made nonconforming shall not
be increased.
C. Replacement. No such sign shall be physically altered or replaced
unless authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Nonconforming signs, once removed, may be replaced only by
conforming signs unless authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 224-96 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-97
210:1132
D. Discontinuance. Whenever any nonconforming use of building,
structure or land or of a combination of buildings, structures and land
ceases as prescribed in § 224-94D, all signs accessory to such use shall
be deemed to become nonconforming and shall be removed within
three calendar months from the date such use terminates.
§ 224-97 TOWING SERVICES § 224-97
210:1133

ARTICLE XVIII
Traditional Neighborhood Development Overlay District
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
§ 224-98. Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) Overlay
District.
A. Purpose. Provisions for the TND District have been enacted to:
(1) Implement the Tier I "Revitalization Plan 2002," dated August 23,
2002, and in particular the Traditional Neighborhood Development
Revitalization Guidelines and Best Practices.
(2) Implement the Tier II "Urban Center Revitalization Plan," dated
December 23, 2002, and in particular "Focus Area One," the
Central Business District, as described in the General Action Plan
of the Tier II report.
(3) Comply with Article VII-A, Traditional Neighborhood Development,
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended; in particular, those purposes and objectives listed in
Section 701-A of Article VII-A such as: encouraging innovation for
mixed-use pedestrian-oriented development; extending
opportunities for housing and employment; encouraging a more
efficient use of land; allowing for integrated, mixed-use,
pedestrian-oriented neighborhoods; establishing public space;
minimizing traffic congestion; and fostering a sense of place and
community.
(4) Foster redevelopment of the Central Business District (CBD).
(5) Promote the principles of traditional neighborhood development
through the revitalization and redevelopment of the City as a
compact, mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented place, as described in
Exhibit B, General Design Principles for the TND Overlay
District.270
B. Description of the Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND)
Overlay District and conditions of eligibility.
(1) The TND District overlays the PS, POS, C-1, C-2, and I-1 Districts as
shown in the Zoning Overlay Districts (Map), dated January 11,
2005, Exhibit A, and Exhibit A-1 dated November 22, 2004,
attached hereto.271
(2) The underlying zoning district provisions shall apply if an applicant
wishes to utilize same in the PS, POS, C-1, C-2, and I-1 Districts.
However, given the incentives in the TND Overlay District, the
applicant may elect to utilize the provisions in this article XVIII.
270. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included at the end of this chapter.
271. Editor's Note: Said maps are on file in the City offices.
§ 224-98 TOWING SERVICES § 224-98
210:1135
C. General design principles. The overarching principles for TND design
and development shall be consistent with the "Revitalization Guidelines
and Best Practices" in the Tier I "Revitalization Plan 2002" with
particular emphasis on:
(1) Adaptive reuse of an existing building.
(2) Alley.
(3) Building design.
(4) Building height/width/proportion.
(5) Building location.
(6) Building placement (setback).
(7) Building separation distances.
(8) Building size.
(9) Building types.
(10) Buildings: vertical form.
(11) Build-to line.
(12) Curb cuts.
(13) Deck parking structure.
(14) First floor/ground floor use.
(15) Infill development.
(16) Landscaping.
(17) Mixed use.
(18) Parking: off-street.
(19) Parking: on-street.
(20) Parking lots — private.
(21) Parking lots — public.
(22) Public space.
(23) Sidewalks, walkways, and pedestrian links.
(24) Street and alley network.
(25) Street lights.
(26) Street trees/shade trees.
(27) Street wall.
§ 224-98 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-98
210:1136
(28) Streetscape.
(29) Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND).
NOTE: The general design principles and the "Revitalization
Guidelines and Best Practices" appear as Appendix B to
this article XVIII.272
D. Permitted uses and structures. The following uses and structures may
be permitted, and shall not be subject to Article IX and Article XI:
(1) New uses permitted in the TND Overlay District may include any
uses permitted in the C-1 and C-2 Districts in all portions of the
TND Overlay District.
(2) Mixed uses shall also be permitted, especially in a vertical
arrangement. (For example, live-work units are encouraged.)
(3) Restaurant-sidewalk cafe, in accordance with § 224-98F(8).
E. Lot area, width, coverage and yard requirements.
(1) Lot area:
(a) Three hundred square feet minimum of gross lot area per
dwelling unit, and 1,500 square feet minimum of gross lot area
for each nonresidential use, whenever the TND Overlay
District overlays lots in the C-1 and C-2 Districts.
(b) One thousand five hundred square feet minimum per dwelling
unit, and 3,000 square feet minimum for each nonresidential
use, whenever the TND Overlay District overlays lots in other
districts as shown in Exhibit A-1.
(c) For live/work units, the minimum lot areas shall be computed
as a nonresidential use.
(2) Lot width: 20 feet minimum.
(3) Lot coverage: 98% maximum, subject to the provisions of
§ 224-98F(6)(b) for the other 2% of lot coverage.
(4) Yards: front, zero; side, zero; rear, zero feet minimum, provided the
primary facades of buildings are located at the edge of the sidewalk
adjoining the street as per § 224-98F(2).
(5) Building Height:
(a) Two stories or 20 feet minimum for all principal buildings in
the TND Overlay District.
(b) The maximum height for principal buildings shall be 250 feet.
272. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 224-98 TOWING SERVICES § 224-98
210:1137
F. Development standards. In addition to the standards in § 224-98C (and
Exhibit B) and the Design Handbook referenced in § 224-98G(2)(i), the
following shall apply:
(1) Streets, alleys, and streetscape. Continue and extend the
interconnected network of streets and alleys. Maintain and/or
provide rear services streets and/or alleys in all new developments,
and avoid mid-block curb cuts. Maintain and emulate traditional
streetscape dimensions (see Exhibit B, Streetscape, and maintain
and/or create street walls (see Exhibit B, Street Wall along
sidewalks. An alley shall be a minimum paved width of 12 feet for
one-way alleys, and 16 feet for two-way alleys (see Exhibit B, Alley).
(2) Buildings. Place at build-to line to form street wall.
(3) Parking. Build and maintain in rear of buildings or in deck parking
structure in accordance with Article XIII, except that:
(a) For development that overlaps the C-1 and C-2 Districts:
[1] The parking requirements of Article XIII may be reduced
by 50% for development that overlays the C-1 and C-2
Districts, provided that sufficient off-site deck parking is
available within 400 feet of the property and such parking
has not been assigned or committed to any other
development; or
[2] The parking requirements of Article XIII may be reduced
by 100%, provided that off-site deck parking is available
within 400 feet of a property, and that all such parking is
owned and maintained by the same property owner that is
seeking the one-hundred-percent relief of the Article XIII
requirements.
(4) Pedestrian access. Build and maintain sidewalks on both sides of all
streets. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet six inches in
width. Sidewalks shall be six to 12 feet wide in the C-1 and C-2
Districts (see Exhibit B, Sidewalks, Walkways and Pedestrian
Links).
(5) Signage.
(a) No new freestanding signs shall be installed.
(b) A promotional sign up to 64 square feet may be installed to
identify a development or facility. However, such sign shall be
considered as a temporary sign that shall be removed within 14
days of receipt of a certificate of occupancy.
(6) Landscape features.
§ 224-98 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-98
210:1138
(a) Install and maintain street trees at an average interval of 40
feet along both sides of all streets where there are no existing
street trees (see Exhibit B, Street Trees/Shade Trees).
(b) Install and maintain internal landscaped courtyard areas, roof
gardens and/or green areas.
(7) Utilities. Place new utilities underground.
(8) Restaurant-sidewalk cafe. The purpose of restaurant-sidewalk cafe
designation is to promote the pedestrian character of the City. The
following shall apply:
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or
maintain a restaurant-sidewalk cafe without first applying for
and securing a permit therefor as hereinafter provided.
(b) Any person who shall desire to open a restaurant-sidewalk cafe
in the City shall make application therefor (the applicant) in
writing to the Codes Department. Such application shall be
accompanied by such application fee as required by a schedule
of fees established by and amended from time to time by
resolution of City Council. Such application shall be made upon
forms provided by the City and shall set forth and include the
following:
[1] The name and address of the applicant.
[2] A plan specifying the precise location of the outdoor
portion of the restaurant-sidewalk cafe, including a
calculation of the proposed occupant load.
[3] The written consent of the property owner.
[4] An agreement of indemnity as outlined in Subsection
F(8)(d).
[5] The indoor seating capacity of the restaurant-sidewalk
cafe.
[6] Such other information as may be required from time to
time.
(c) No action shall be taken on any application for a permit under
this subsection until the application has been completed in its
entirety and the application fee, as required by a schedule of
fees established and amended from time to time by resolution
of City Council, has been paid in full. The schedule of fees shall
be kept on file at the Codes Department. There shall be no
proration of fees under this subsection.
(d) The applicant shall well and truly save, indemnify, defend and
keep harmless the City of Coatesville, its officers, employees
§ 224-98 TOWING SERVICES § 224-98
210:1139
and agents from and against any and all actions, suits,
demands, payments, costs and charges for and by reason of
the existence of the restaurant-sidewalk cafe and all damages
to persons or property resulting from or in any manner caused
by the presence, location, use, operation, installation,
maintenance, replacement or removal of such restaurantsidewalk
cafe or by the acts or omissions of the employees
or agents of the applicant in connection with such restaurantsidewalk
cafe.
(e) The restaurant-sidewalk cafe shall have a minimum indoor
seating capacity of 15 persons.
(f) The restaurant-sidewalk cafe outdoor areas are required to
stop serving customers on or before 11:00 p.m. prevailing
time, and clear all tables of food, beverages and customers on
or before 12:00 midnight prevailing time.
(g) The restaurant-sidewalk cafe shall serve all beverages in a
glass only.
(h) The applicant shall maintain the restaurant-sidewalk cafe in
accordance with all City ordinances and state and federal laws,
as well as rules and regulations promulgated and adopted by
the City which pertain to this use of restaurant-sidewalk cafes.
(i) The applicant shall remove the outdoor portion of the
restaurant-sidewalk cafe within 30 days after written notice if
the City determines that the restaurant-sidewalk cafe is
detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the
City or its citizens.
[1] Due to pedestrian traffic changes, the restaurant-sidewalk
cafe narrows the sidewalk to the extent that pedestrian
traffic is impeded;
[2] The restaurant-sidewalk cafe interferes with the
maintenance or installation of an underground utility
structure;
[3] The restaurant-sidewalk cafe is no longer being used as
such;
[4] The restaurant-sidewalk cafe has been temporarily or
permanently closed for violation of any City, state or
federal law and/or regulation; or
[5] The restaurant-sidewalk cafe is operated in violation of
any ordinance, rule or regulation of the City of Coatesville.
(j) In the event that the applicant fails to remove the restaurantsidewalk
cafe within 30 days after written notice, the City may
proceed to remove and restore the area and charge the
§ 224-98 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-98
210:1140
applicant for the cost thereof. Should the restaurant-sidewalk
cafe be removed by the City, the applicant shall be entitled
to a return of the equipment, furnishings or appurtenances so
removed only after the payment of all costs due to the City
and by requesting the return in writing. The responsibility for
removal under the provisions of this subsection shall be the
sole responsibility of the applicant without any obligation or
cost assessed against the City.
(k) The City may, from time to time, promulgate whatever rules or
regulations it deems necessary or desirable to effectuate the
purposes of this subsection, and the same shall be approved by
the City Council.
(l) In any location where the restaurant-sidewalk cafe is not
separated from the flow of traffic by parking areas or other
barriers, no table shall be located within five feet of the curb.
(m) The restaurant-sidewalk cafe outdoor area must provide table
service.
G. Procedures for approval of development in the TND Overlay District.
(1) All applicants are encouraged to submit sketch plans for all TND
Overlay proposals. As per Section 707-A of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, such plans may be informally
reviewed as conceptual plans in order to provide an opportunity for
the City to make suggestions and recommendations on the design
of the proposed development.
(2) The applicant shall follow the preliminary and final plan application
requirements of the most recent version of the City of Coatesville
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and shall include the
following information:
(a) Building plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to
depict the proposed building program. Said plan shall indicate
the proposed principal and accessory uses, the gross square
footages of all uses, and the building heights. The building plan
shall also indicate the total lot coverage, existing and
proposed.
(b) Street, alley, and streetscape plan.
[1] A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict the
proposed interconnected street and alley network. Such
plan shall indicate all street widths and rights-of-way
widths.
[2] Such plan shall indicate all materials, depths of pavement
courses, and gradients.
(c) Pedestrian access plan.
§ 224-98 TOWING SERVICES § 224-98
210:1141
[1] A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict the
proposed interconnected network for pedestrian access,
including sidewalks and other pathways.
[2] Such plan shall indicate all sidewalk and path widths,
materials and gradients.
(d) Staging/phasing plan.
[1] A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict
proposed staging or phasing of the total land development.
[2] In the case of a development proposed to be developed
over a period of years, flexibility of housing density, design
and type may be addressed to:
[a] Permit a variation in each section to be developed
from the density or intensity of use established for the
entire development.
[b] Allow for a greater concentration of density or
intensity of land use within some section or sections of
development, whether it be earlier or later in the
development.
[c] Require that the approval of such greater
concentration of density or intensity of land use for
any section to be developed be offset by a smaller
concentration in any completed prior stage or by an
appropriate reservation of common open space on the
remaining land by a grant of easement or by covenant
in favor of the City, provided that the reservation shall,
as far as practicable, defer the precise location of such
common open space until an application for final
approval is filed so that flexibility of development,
which is a prime objective of this article, can be
maintained.
(e) Landscape plan.
[1] A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict all
proposed landscape features.
[2] The landscape plan shall indicate all plant types, size and
quantities as well as the types, sizes, and materials for all
paving, benches, walls, and other structures.
(f) Parking plan.
[1] A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict
proposed surface and deck parking. Such plan shall list the
number of parking spaces proposed in relation to the
proposed use(s).
§ 224-98 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-98
210:1142
[2] On-street parking spaces may be counted toward the
overall parking requirement whenever such parking is
located along the frontage of the property that is proposed
for development.
[3] Off-street deck parking may be counted toward up to 50%
of the overall parking requirement whenever such parking
is located within 400 feet of the property proposed for
development.
(g) Signage plan.
[1] The provisions of Article XIV, Signs, shall apply.
[2] A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict all
proposed signage for all wall and window signs, as well as
any proposed banners, directional, and way-finding signs.
[3] Such plan shall also depict the size, materials, colors,
graphics, and anchoring details for all signs.
(h) Utilities plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to
depict all proposed utilities. Such plan shall indicate all
proposed types, sizes, and materials of utilities that are
proposed.
(i) Design handbook. At the time of land development plan
submission for each phase or stage of development, a design
handbook shall be submitted by the applicant to illustrate the
proposed design excellence, architectural excellence, and
related construction excellence for the proposed architectural,
streetscape, and landscape features. Said handbook shall be
consistent with the general design principles for the TND
Overlay District set forth in Exhibit B to this article XVIII, and
shall be submitted for approval by City Council, which approval
shall not be unreasonably denied, provided it complies with the
applicable aforementioned General Design Principles.
(j) Declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions. A
declaration shall be submitted to the City and shall be in such a
form as deemed satisfactory to the City Solicitor.
(3) In order to promote flexibility of design of a traditional
neighborhood development, modifications from specific design
criteria contained in the Zoning Ordinance may be needed, as
provided for in Article VII-A, Traditional Neighborhood
Development, of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
Sections 701-A(a)(8), 701-A(a)(9), 702-A(2), 706-A(a), and
706-A(g)(2). The City Council shall have the authority to grant de
minimus modifications of such zoning requirements if, in Council's
discretion, it determines that such modifications will result in a
better design of a traditional neighborhood development and will
§ 224-98 TOWING SERVICES § 224-98
210:1143
not adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the City.
Such grant shall occur after a public hearing and public meeting to
consider the modifications.
(4) Compliance with the provisions for a traditional neighborhood
development under this article shall be determined by City Council
in the exercise of its reasonable discretion and judgment, in
consultation with the City Planning Commission, the City
Engineers, City Planner, and other advisors.
§ 224-98 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-98
210:1144
ARTICLE XIX
Hilltop Neighborhood Development Overlay District
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
§ 224-99. Hilltop Neighborhood Development (HND) Overlay
District.
A. Purpose. Provisions for the HND District have been enacted to:
(1) Allow for traditional neighborhood development as a form of city
revitalization.
(2) Provide an alternative in the form of neighborhood development of
mixed uses as an overlay for the Residential Conservation (RC)
District.
(3) Promote the principles of neighborhood development for the
largest undeveloped area of the City as a compact, mixed use,
pedestrian-oriented place.
B. Description of the Hilltop Neighborhood Development (HND) District
and conditions of eligibility:
(1) The HND District shall coincide with and form an overlay of the
Residential Conservation (RC) District of the City, as shown on the
Overlay District Map, Exhibit A, dated January 11, 2005.273
(2) To be eligible for development in accordance with the HND Overlay
District regulations, a tract of land located in the Residential
Conservation District shall have a minimum tract size of 50 acres.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following uses and structures may
be permitted and shall not be subject to Article IX and Article XI:
(1) Residential dwellings of all types, including: a) multiple family
(apartments); b) multiplex (including any mix of multistory units,
such as "back-to-back" townhouses, and townhouses over
apartments, or apartments over townhouses); c) single-family
attached (townhouse or row house, up to a maximum of eight units
in any one building); d) single-family semidetached; and e) singlefamily
detached.
(2) Nonresidential uses permitted in the HND Overlay District may
include by right any of the following uses, either separately or in
combination with other uses:
(a) Financial institution, including bank with drive-through. [Refer
to § 224-60C(4).]
(b) Garage, public, including deck parking.
273. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in City offices.
§ 224-99 TOWING SERVICES § 224-99
210:1145
(c) Health/recreation spa.
(d) Medical clinic.
(e) Municipal use.
(f) Playhouse.
(g) Restaurant.
(h) Restaurant, fast-food. [Refer to § 224-60C(2).]
(i) Tavern, brewery pub.
(j) Day-care center. [Refer to § 224-60B(1).]
(k) Group quarters and group homes. [Amended 2-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 1444-2015]
(l) Life-care facility. [Refer to § 224-60B(5).]
(m) Offices, office center. [Refer to § 224-60C(8).]
(n) Hotel.
(o) Retail, including retail center. [Refer to § 224-60C(1).]
(p) Retail service such as barber shop, beauty shop, hair salon,
nail salon, drycleaner, laundromat, shoe repair shop, tailor,
upholstery shop.
(q) Convenience store, farmers market.
(r) Appliance store, office supply store, bicycle shop (sales and
rental), bookstore, camera shop/photography store, cell-phone
store, clothing store, dry goods store, furniture store, grocery
store, hardware store, jewelry store, music store, newsstand,
pharmacy, record, CD or similar technology store, shoe store,
stationery store, video store.
(s) Dentist office, doctor office, optometrist office.
(t) Travel agency.
(u) Funeral home.
(v) Library, museum.
(w) Printing shop.
(x) Pharmacy with drive-through.
(y) Antique shop, art gallery, art supply store, florist, framing
shop, gift shop.
(z) Bakery, cafe, corner store, deli, pizzeria.
§ 224-99 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-99
210:1146
(aa) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(bb) Copy center.
(3) Mixed uses, or any combination thereof, shall also be permitted,
especially in a vertical arrangement, such as a "live-work unit,"
and/or apartments over ground floor retail.
D. Density, coverage, setback and height requirements.
(1) Residential density: The maximum density of the residential
component of an HND development shall not exceed 12 dwelling
units per acre.
(2) Maximum nonresidential development: The total floor area of the
nonresidential component of an HND development shall not exceed
200 feet, multiplied by the maximum number of dwelling units
permitted, based upon the residential density limitation of
Subsection D(1) above.
(3) Building coverage: not to exceed 30% of gross tract area.
(4) Tract coverage: not to exceed 75% of gross tract area.
(5) Perimeter setback: No building shall be placed closer than 25 feet
to any perimeter property lines, and no impervious coverage shall
be placed closer than 10 feet to any perimeter property lines,
except for access roads/drives.
(6) Building height: A minimum principal building height of two
stories, and a maximum principal building height of four stories or
50 feet, except in the Core Area, where the building height shall not
exceed five stories or 65 feet.
(7) Minimum open space: Within the twenty-five-percent minimum
green area, not less than one-half thereof (12 1/2% of the tract
area, including the perimeter buffer area) shall be set aside for
buffers and active and/or passive recreational areas (including
"pocket parks" within the development area).
E. Development standards.
(1) Design approach: An HND development shall contain a minimum of
two design areas, being a core area, in which a "Main Street"
setting is established, and a perimeter residential area where
nonresidential uses are generally avoided and residential density
may be reduced. In addition, the design may set aside one or more
areas for more concentrated multifamily housing.
(2) Core area: Generally, the plan will concentrate mixed uses and
nonresidential uses within the core area, to be served by on-street
parking, scattered parking lots, and residential uses utilizing alleys
as the primary means of access.
§ 224-99 TOWING SERVICES § 224-99
210:1147
(3) Perimeter residential area: Generally, the plan will provide
primarily for residential uses (some with alley access as
topographical conditions may justify, and some areas with frontage
access) within the perimeter residential area.
(4) Pedestrian access: The plan will provide for sidewalks on both sides
of all streets within the core area. Sidewalks within the core area
shall be a minimum of four feet six inches in width and, where
provided within the perimeter residential zone, shall also be a
minimum of four feet six inches in width. In addition, pathways
within open space areas are encouraged.
(5) Install and maintain street trees at an average interval of 50 feet
along both sides of all streets; install and maintain internal
landscaped courtyard areas where space permits; provide a mix of
pocket parks within both the core area and the perimeter
residential area.
(6) Lighting: no trespass glare above 0.5 footcandles at the property
line.
(7) Utilities: place new utilities underground.
(8) Staging/phasing: provide plan and development schedule.
(9) Setback and build-to lines: Mixed-use and nonresidential use
buildings may be located immediately adjacent to the sidewalk
along its frontage; residential buildings shall be located a minimum
of six feet back from the edge of the frontage sidewalk. In the core
area, residential buildings shall have a maximum setback of 15 feet
therefrom. Single-family attached, single-family semidetached and
single-family detached dwellings are encouraged to have front
porches at the build-to line.
(10) Architectural design: Concurrently with the view of the applicant's
land development plans, the applicant shall present suggested
architectural design approaches for discussion, as part of the
Manual of Design Guidelines as referenced in Subsection F(1)(i)
below. Final decisions pertaining to architectural design shall
remain within the purview of the applicant, after full consideration
of suggestions from municipal review agencies, including the
Planning Commission and City Council.
(11) Parking: The applicant shall plan for adequate parking to serve the
HND development. Generally, a combination of garage, driveway,
scattered parking lot and on-street parking shall be calculated and
considered as a whole for determination of adequacy. Unless the
applicant can demonstrate the validity of reduction based upon
shared parking arrangements (i.e., evening peak for restaurant
uses versus daytime peak for retail uses), the following standards
shall be met:
§ 224-99 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-99
210:1148
(a) Individual dwelling units, with the exception of apartments:
two spaces per unit.
(b) Apartments: one space for one-bedroom units, and 1 1/2 spaces
for two- or three-bedroom units.
(c) Offices: two spaces per 1,000 square feet.
(d) Retail: 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
(e) Restaurant: one space per three seats within the dining area
(but not including any bar seating).
(12) The design and use of streets and alleys shall adhere to the
following standards:
(a) Streets shall be designed to calm traffic speeds and pedestrian
movement. Streets with no off-street parking shall be at least
18 feet wide; streets with parking on one side shall be at least
26 feet wide; streets with parking on both sides shall be at
least 32 feet wide.
(b) To the extent practical, particularly in the core area, alleys
shall be provided to move vehicular access to the rear of the
residences and principal nonresidential and mixed-use
structures.
(c) Where provided, one-way alleys shall be at least 12 feet in
width and two-way alleys shall be at least 15 feet in width
where no parking is permitted, or at least 20 feet in width
where parallel parking is permitted on one side thereof.
(13) Landscape and streetscape design. All lands not utilized to provide
for permitted impervious cover shall be left in their natural state or
landscaped with appropriate vegetation or other suitable landscape
material. Streetscape, landscaping and pedestrian amenities shall
be provided as reasonably related to the intensity of proposed
development, particularly within the core area. The applicant shall
consider inclusion, where appropriate, of the following amenities:
(a) Public trash receptacles.
(b) Public seating areas along sidewalks and at appropriate
intervals and locations within pocket park areas.
(c) Bike racks located in areas where the sidewalk can
accommodate such features.
(d) Planting inserts within sidewalk areas.
(e) Traditional-appearing light standards, not to exceed 18 feet in
height in the core area, nor 25 feet in height within the
perimeter residential area.
§ 224-99 TOWING SERVICES § 224-99
210:1149
F. Procedures for approval of development in the HND Overlay District.
(1) The applicant shall follow the preliminary and final plan application
requirements of the City of Coatesville Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and shall include the following
information:
(a) Building locations. The proposed building program shall
indicate the proposed locations of principal and accessory
uses, the approximate gross square footages of all uses, and
the building heights. The total lot coverage, existing and
proposed shall be indicated.
(b) Street, alley, and streetscape. The proposed interconnected
street and alley network, including all street widths, shall be
depicted.
(c) Pedestrian access. The proposed interconnected network for
pedestrian access, including sidewalks and other pathways,
shall be depicted.
(d) Staging/phasing. The proposed staging or phasing of the land
development shall be depicted.
(e) Landscape/hardscape plan. A separate plan sheet shall be
submitted to depict all proposed landscape/hardscape.
(f) Parking. The proposed surface and deck parking shall be
depicted, including a list of the number of parking spaces
proposed in relation to the proposed use(s).
(g) Signage:
[1] The provisions of Article XIV, Signs (§ 224-73A as to
residential uses and § 224-73C as to nonresidential uses)
shall apply.
[2] All proposed signage for all wall, window and freestanding
signs shall be depicted, including any proposed banners,
directional, and way-finding signs.
[3] A promotional sign up to 64 square feet may be installed to
identify a development or facility. However, such sign shall
be considered as a temporary sign that shall be removed
within 14 days of receipt of a certificate of occupancy.
(h) Utilities. The locations of all proposed utilities shall be shown.
(i) Manual of design guidelines. At the time of land development
plan submission for each phase or stage of development, a
manual of design guidelines shall be submitted to illustrate the
proposed design excellence, architectural excellence, and
related construction excellence for the proposed architectural,
§ 224-99 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-99
210:1150
streetscape, and landscape features. (Applicants are
encouraged to submit components of the design guidelines
as interim work products and sketches prior to formal
submission.) Said manual shall be consistent with the
applicable General Design Principles set forth in Exhibit B of
Article XVIII274 and shall be submitted for approval by City
Council, which approval shall not be unreasonably denied
provided it complies with the applicable aforementioned
general design principles.
(j) Declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions. A
declaration shall be submitted to the City and shall be in such a
form as deemed satisfactory to the City Solicitor.
G. The following provisions shall apply in the case of a development
pursuant to this article which is proposed to be constructed over a
period of years, in order to encourage the flexibility of housing density,
intensity and type of nonresidential uses, as intended by this article:
(1) Pursuant to the staging/phasing plan, each phase or section may
vary from the density, intensity of use, and/or permitted uses
established for the entire HND development.
(2) A greater concentration of density or intensity of land use is
permitted within separate phases or sections, irrespective of
whether such phases are earlier or later in the development than
others.
(3) The developer, with approval of City Council, shall also have the
right to revise the location of open spaces so that flexibility of
development, which is a prime objective of this article, can be
maintained.
274. Editor's Note: Exhibit B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 224-99 TOWING SERVICES § 224-99
210:1151

ARTICLE XX
Steel Museum District
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
§ 224-100. Steel Museum District (SMD) Overlay District.
A. Purpose. Provisions for the SMD Overlay District has been enacted to:
(1) Implement the Tier I "Revitalization Plan 2002," dated August 23,
2002, and in particular the Revitalization Guidelines and Best
Practices.
(2) Implement the Tier II "Urban Center Revitalization Plan," dated
December 23, 2002.
(3) Foster redevelopment of the area adjoining the Central Business
District (CBD).
(4) Promote the revitalization and redevelopment of the City as a
compact, mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented place.
(5) Provide for the interpretive design of new structures and
development and adaptive reuse of the existing remaining historic
industrial buildings.
B. Description of the Steel Museum (SMD) District and conditions of
eligibility.
(1) The SMD District shall extend from First Avenue on the east, to
Brandywine Creek on the west, to the City boundary on the south,
as shown in the Zoning Overlay Districts Map, Exhibit A, dated/
revised January 11, 2005.275
(2) The SMD District overlays the I-2 Districts in the area described
above.
C. General design principles. The overarching principles for SMD design
and development shall be consistent with the Revitalization Guidelines
and Best Practices in the Tier I "Revitalization Plan 2002" with
particular emphasis on:
(1) Adaptive reuse of an existing building.
(2) Building height/width/proportion.
(3) Building location.
(4) Building placement (setback).
(5) Building separation distances.
(6) Building size.
275. Editor's Note: Said Map is on file in City offices.
§ 224-100 TOWING SERVICES § 224-100
210:1153
(7) Building types.
(8) Buildings: vertical form.
(9) Build-to line.
(10) Curb cuts.
(11) Deck parking structure.
(12) First floor/ground floor use.
(13) Infill development.
(14) Landscaping.
(15) Mixed use.
(16) Parking: off-street.
(17) Parking: on-street.
(18) Parking lots — private.
(19) Parking lots — public.
(20) Sidewalks, walkways, and pedestrian links.
(21) Street and alley network.
(22) Street lights.
(23) Street trees/shade trees.
(24) Street wall.
(25) Streetscape.
D. Permitted uses and structures. The following uses and structures may
be permitted, and shall not be subject to Article IX and Article XI:
(1) New uses permitted in the SMD Overlay District may include any
uses permitted in the I-2 Districts, or any combination thereof.
(2) Mixed uses, or any combination thereof, shall also be permitted,
especially in a vertical arrangement, such as a live-work unit.
(3) Uses within existing structures, includes those listed in Subsection
D(1) and (2) above and also include:
(a) Retail uses.
(b) Museum.
(c) Convention center or assembly use.
(d) Performing arts venue.
§ 224-100 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-100
210:1154
(e) Parking.
(f) Other complementary, associated, or similar use.
E. Lot area, width, coverage, yard and height requirements.
(1) Lot area:
(a) One thousand two hundred square feet minimum per dwelling
unit, and 2,000 square feet minimum for each nonresidential
use.
(b) For live/work units, the minimum lot areas shall be computed
as a nonresidential use.
(2) Lot width: 16 feet minimum.
(3) Lot coverage: 98% maximum, subject to the provisions of
§ 224-100F(5)(b) for the other 2% of lot coverage.
(4) Yards: front, zereo; side, zero; rear, zero feet minimum, provided
the primary facades of buildings are located at the edge of the
sidewalk facing a street or on a pedestrian promenade between the
fronts of two buildings.
(5) Building height:
(a) Two stories minimum.
(b) Five stories or 75 feet maximum.
F. Development standards. In addition to the standards in § 224-100C (and
Appendix A), the following shall apply:
(1) The design of the project will incorporate sound design principles,
although, through interpretive design, the layout may reflect the
development pattern of the original industrial development.
(2) Parking: build and maintain in rear of buildings, in deck parking
structure, or in parking garage.
(3) Pedestrian access: build and maintain sidewalks on both sides of all
streets. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet six inches in
width.
(4) Signage: as appropriate to identify development or facility, up to 64
square feet as a promotional sign. However, such sign shall be
considered as a temporary sign that shall be removed within 14
days of receipt of a certificate of occupancy.
(5) Landscape/hardscape:
(a) Install and maintain street trees at an average interval of 40
feet along both sides of all streets where there are no existing
street trees.
§ 224-100 TOWING SERVICES § 224-100
210:1155
(b) Install and maintain internal landscaped courtyard areas, roof
gardens and/or green areas.
(6) Lighting: no trespass glare above 0.5 footcandles at the property
line.
(7) Utilities: place new utilities underground.
G. Procedures for approval of development in the SMD Overlay District.
(1) All applicants are encouraged to submit sketch plans for all SMD
proposals.
(2) The applicant shall follow the preliminary and final plan application
requirements of the City of Coatesville Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and shall include the following
information:
(a) Building plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to
depict the proposed building program. Said plan shall indicate
the proposed principal and accessory uses, the gross square
footages of all uses, and the building heights. The building plan
shall also indicate the total lot coverage, existing and
proposed.
(b) Street, alley, streetscape and pedestrian plan. A separate plan
sheet shall be submitted to depict the proposed street network.
Such plan shall indicate all street widths and pedestrian
pathway network.
(c) Staging/phasing plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted
to depict proposed staging or phasing of the land development.
(d) Landscape/hardscape plan. A separate plan sheet shall be
submitted to depict all proposed landscape/hardscape.
(e) Parking plan.
[1] A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict
proposed surface and deck parking. Such plan shall list the
number of parking spaces proposed in relation to the
proposed use(s).
[2] On-street parking spaces may be counted toward the
overall parking requirement whenever such parking is
located along the frontage of the property that is proposed
for development.
[3] Off-street deck parking may be counted toward the overall
parking requirement whenever such parking is located
within 400 feet of the property proposed for development.
(f) Signage plan.
§ 224-100 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-100
210:1156
[1] The provisions of Article XIV, Signs, shall apply.
[2] A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict all
proposed signage for all wall, window and freestanding
signs.
[3] Such plan shall also depict any proposed banners,
directional, and way-finding signs.
(g) Utilities plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to
depict all proposed utilities.
(h) Manual of design guidelines. At the time of land development
plan submission for each phase or stage of development, a
manual of design guidelines shall be submitted to illustrate the
proposed design excellence, architectural excellence, and
related construction excellence for the proposed architectural,
streetscape, and landscape features. Said manual shall be
consistent with the applicable General Design Principles set
forth in Exhibit B of Article XVIII, and shall be submitted for
approval by City Council, which approval shall not be
unreasonably denied provided it complies with the applicable
aforementioned general design principles.
(i) Declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions. A
declaration shall be submitted to the City and shall be in such a
form as deemed satisfactory to the City Solicitor.
§ 224-100 TOWING SERVICES § 224-100
210:1157

ARTICLE XXI
Specially Planned District
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
§ 224-101. Specially Planned District (SPD) Overlay District.
A. Purpose. It shall be the purpose of the Specially Planned District to
provide for the orderly development of a major business and commerce
area of the City of Coatesville, in accordance with the objectives,
policies, and proposals of the Comprehensive Plan and other approved
City redevelopment plans. Another purpose of this District is to
redevelop the northern entrance to the City through the design and
orderly arrangement of buildings, land uses, and parking areas. In
addition, this District is intended to encourage a mix of uses, and
additional employment opportunities.
B. Overlay district. The overlay district shall be as shown on the Zoning
Overlay District Map, Exhibit A, dated/revised January 11, 2005.
C. Use regulations. The following uses and structures may be permitted,
and shall not be subject to Article IX and Article XI. A building may be
erected, altered or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the
following uses and no other.
(1) Permitted uses and structures.
(a) Office building.
(b) Bank or other financial institution.
(c) Hotel/motel and meeting room facilities when ancillary and
subordinate to the hotel/motel.
(d) Retail establishment.
(e) Restaurant.
(f) Personal service shop.
(g) Fitness center, health club, or racquet club.
(h) Public or private parking lot.
(i) Parking garage.
(j) Recreation, river-oriented recreation, and open space.
(k) Municipal building or community facility.
(2) The following uses shall be permitted by conditional use:
(a) Day-care center.
(b) Helistops. Application can be made for a helistop, upon the
approval of the City Council, subject to the provisions listed
§ 224-101 TOWING SERVICES § 224-101
210:1159
below. Said application shall include plans and data
demonstrating compliance with the following provisions:
[1] The proposed helistop will not be detrimental to the
health, safety, and welfare of persons and properties
neighboring the area of use.
[2] The proposed helistop is licensed by the Bureau of Aviation
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
[3] Fencing which does not interfere with the landing of the
helicopters shall be required by the City Council whenever
necessary to restrict pedestrian access to the landing area.
[4] No helistop shall be located closer than 100 feet from the
property line of the parcel on which it is to be located or
200 feet from a residential district.
(c) Any use of the same general character as any of the above
uses.
D. Height regulations.
(1) All principal buildings shall be at least two stories in height.
(2) The maximum principal building height shall be 250 feet in height.
E. Lot area, coverage, and setback regulations.
(1) The minimum lot area of the commercial district shall be one acre.
(2) The maximum building coverage shall be 35% of the gross lot area.
(3) Principal buildings shall be set back at least 10 feet from a street
right-of-way.
F. Development regulations. At least 5% of all parking areas shall be
landscaped in accordance with a landscape plan to be approved by the
City.
G. Parking regulations. The following regulations apply only to the SPD
District.
(1) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply only to the SPD
District:
(a) Loading space: An off-street space or berth, abutting upon a
street or way or other appropriate means of access, intended
for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials, not to include
the space reserved or used for trash storage and compaction,
which space or berth is not less than 10 feet in width and
sufficient in length to ensure that no motor vehicle using the
§ 224-101 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-101
210:1160
space shall extend beyond a lot line, but in no case less than 20
feet in length.
(b) Parking stall (90° parking):
[1] Standard size: a space in a garage or parking area not less
than 8 1/2 feet wide clear dimension and 18 feet long clear
dimension, reserved for the parking of only one motor
vehicle.
[2] Compact size: a space in a garage or parking area not less
than 7 3/4 feet wide clear dimension and 16 feet long clear
dimension, reserved for the parking of only one compactsize
motor vehicle.
[3] Handicap size: a space in a garage or parking area not less
than 13 feet wide and 18 feet long clear dimension,
reserved exclusively for a motor vehicle registered with
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with handicapped
license plates or displaying an official commonwealthissued
handicapped placard or similar out-of-state placard/
identification.
[4] Drive aisle width: 24 feet.
(c) Alternate dimensions:
Drive Aisle Width
Angle of
Parking
Parking
Space Size One-Way Two-Way
(degrees) (feet) (feet) (feet)
65 9 by 21 18 20
45 9 by19 14 18
(2) Required off-street parking, Specially Planned District. At the time
of the erection of any principal building or at the time any principal
building is enlarged in capacity, the following minimum off-street
motor vehicle parking spaces, including required number of
parking stalls, shall be provided.
Use in SPD Number of Parking Stalls Required
Hotel 1 for each hotel room designed
primarily for the purpose of overnight
accommodations; shared parking with
other uses is permitted
Restaurant or assembly
hall
1 for every 200 square feet of floor area
§ 224-101 TOWING SERVICES § 224-101
210:1161
Retail business 1 for every 250 square feet or 1 for
every 100 square feet of floor area for
retail establishments that collectively
occupy more than 30%, by area of the
building in which they are situated
Bank, professional office,
or business office
3 for every 1,000 square feet of floor
area. In addition, where a drive-in
facility and/or automated banking
machine is to be included, 6 in-line
motor vehicles waiting spaces for each
bank teller or remote teller station or
window; shared parking with other
uses is permitted
Bus or railroad
passenger terminal
1 for every 500 square feet of floor area
Personal Service Shops 1 for every 150 square feet of floor area
Meeting room facilities 1 for every 5 seats provided.
Fitness center, health
club, racquet club
1 for every 100 square feet of floor area
Where two or more uses or separate establishments are located
within the same structure, parking space shall be provided for
use or separate establishment according to the above
requirements.
(3) In a parking garage or parking area with at least 25 spaces,
designation and use of a maximum of 35% of the parking stalls in a
garage or parking area as compact size may be provided.
(4) For the purpose of this section, "floor area" means the gross floor
area of the structure excluding the gross floor area of parking
garages and loading facilities.
(5) The number of handicapped parking spaces required shall conform
to the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards. The locations of the
handicapped spaces shall be as close as possible to accessible
building entrances.
(6) Off-street loading. Every auditorium, convention, or exhibit hall,
hotel, office building, restaurant, municipal or community facility
shall provide loading spaces in accordance with the following table.
Square Feet of Aggregate
Gross Floor Area Devoted to
Such Use
Number of Loading Spaces
Required
Up to and including 100,000 1
Over 100,000 up to and
including 200,000
2
§ 224-101 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-101
210:1162
Square Feet of Aggregate
Gross Floor Area Devoted to
Such Use
Number of Loading Spaces
Required
Over 200,000 up to and
including 500,000
3
For each additional 200,000 or
fraction thereof
1 additional
(7) Parking/off-street loading exceptions.
(a) Erection, alteration, enlargement, or use of a structure or
portion thereof, with modifications without loading space as
required in Subsection G(6) may be permitted by special
exception, provided that the applicant provides the Zoning
Hearing Board with verifiable technical information, including
truck delivery data and traffic counts substantiating that the
volume of vehicular service will not require compliance with
the space provisions of such section and that such volume will
not cause undue interference with the use of streets or ways
nor imperil general safety.
(b) Under the procedure to obtain an occupancy permit and in
accordance with the following provisions, use of the same
parking stalls at different times in order to meet the parking
requirements of two or more principal users may be authorized
by special exception granted by the Zoning Hearing Board:
[1] The applicant shall substantiate to the Zoning Hearing
Board the degree to which the normal operations hours of
the users served do not conflict;
[2] A properly drawn legal instrument shall be executed by
the parties concerned for such use of the garage or
parking area, which instrument duly approved by the City
Solicitor shall be filed with the application for occupancy
permit.
(c) Utilization of valet parking for required motor vehicle parking
spaces, provided:
[1] A motor vehicle shall be retrievable from its parking space
with the movement of a maximum of two additional
vehicles;
[2] The Zoning Hearing Board, with the assistance of the
Codes Department, certifies that the valet parking
operation as submitted by the applicant will not cause
interference with the public use of streets or ways or
imperil the public safety.
§ 224-101 TOWING SERVICES § 224-101
210:1163
(8) Continuation of facilities. Whenever an occupancy permit has been
issued and the plans so approved contain motor vehicles parking
and loading space provisions, the subsequent use of such property
shall be conditional upon the continuance and availability of the
parking and loading space provisions contained in such plans. Any
other use of such property shall be a violation of this article. Should
the owner or occupant of any structure as to which any occupancy
permit has been issued containing motor vehicle parking or loading
space requirements so change the use to which such structure is
put as to increase motor vehicle parking or loading space
requirements under this article, it shall be unlawful and a violation
of this Zoning Ordinance to begin or maintain such altered use until
such time as the increased motor vehicle parking or loading
provisions of the article are complied with and an amended
certificate of occupancy from the Zoning Officer has been issued.
H. Signs.
(1) All Identification signs shall have text and letter height large
enough to be legible from the maximum distance required to safely
guide the reader to the identified location or perform the function
on the sign.
(2) A promotional sign up to 64 square feet may be installed to identify
a development or facility. However, such sign shall be considered as
a temporary sign that shall be removed within 14 days of receipt of
a certificate of occupancy.
I. Procedures for approval of development in the SPD Overlay District.
(1) All applicants are encouraged to submit sketch plans for all SPD
proposals.
(2) The applicant shall follow the preliminary and final plan application
requirements of the City of Coatesville Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and shall include the following
information:
(a) Building plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to
depict the proposed building program. Said plan shall indicate
the proposed principal and accessory uses, the gross square
footages of all uses, and the building heights. The building plan
shall also indicate the total lot coverage, existing and
proposed.
(b) Street and pedestrian plan. A separate plan sheet shall be
submitted to depict the proposed street network. Such Plan
shall indicate all street widths and pedestrian pathway
network.
(c) Staging/phasing plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted
to depict proposed staging or phasing of the land development.
§ 224-101 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-101
210:1164
(d) Landscape/hardscape plan. A separate plan sheet shall be
submitted to depict all proposed landscape/hardscape.
(e) Parking plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to
depict proposed surface and deck parking. Such plan shall list
the number of parking spaces proposed in relation to the
proposed use(s).
(f) Signage plan.
[1] The provisions of Article XIV, Signs, shall apply.
[2] A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict all
proposed signage for all wall, window and freestanding
signs.
[3] Such plan shall also depict any proposed banners,
directional, and way-finding signs.
(g) Utilities plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to
depict all proposed utilities.
(h) Declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions. A
declaration shall be submitted to the City and shall in such a
form as deemed satisfactory to the City Solicitor.
§ 224-101 TOWING SERVICES § 224-101
210:1165

ARTICLE XXII
Flats Redevelopment District
[Added 4-11-2005 by Ord. No. 1247-2005]
§ 224-102. Flats Redevelopment District (FRD) Overlay District.
A. Purpose. Provisions for the FRD Overlay District have been enacted to:
(1) Implement the Tier I "Revitalization Plan 2002," dated August 23,
2002, and in particular the Revitalization Guidelines and Best
Practices.
(2) Implement the Tier II "Urban Center Revitalization Plan," dated
December 23, 2002.
(3) Foster redevelopment of the area known as "The Flats," adjoining
the Central Business District (CBD).
(4) Promote the revitalization and redevelopment of the City as a
compact, mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented place.
B. Description of the Flats Redevelopment (FRD) Overlay District and
conditions of eligibility.
(1) The FRD Overlay District shall extend from First Avenue on the
east, to Lincoln Highway on the south, to the City boundary on the
north, as shown in the Zoning Overlay Districts Map, Exhibit A,
dated/revised January 11, 2005.
(2) The FRD Overlay District overlays the I-2 and RN-5 Districts in the
area described above.
C. General design principles. The overarching principles for FRD design
and development shall be consistent with the Revitalization Guidelines
and Best Practices in the Tier I "Revitalization Plan 2002" with
particular emphasis on:
(1) Building location.
(2) Building placement (setback).
(3) Building separation distances.
(4) Building types.
(5) Buildings: vertical form.
(6) Build-to line.
(7) Curb cuts.
(8) Deck parking structure.
(9) First floor/ground floor use.
§ 224-102 TOWING SERVICES § 224-102
210:1167
(10) Infill development.
(11) Landscaping.
(12) Mixed use.
(13) Parking: off-street.
(14) Parking: on-street.
(15) Parking lots — private.
(16) Parking lots — public.
(17) Sidewalks, walkways, and pedestrian links.
(18) Street and alley network.
(19) Street lights.
(20) Street trees/shade trees.
(21) Street wall.
(22) Streetscape.
D. Permitted uses and structures. The following uses and structures may
be permitted and shall not be subject to Article IX and Article XI.
(1) New uses permitted in the FRD Overlay District may include any
uses permitted in the RN-5, C-1, C-2, and I-2 Districts, or any
combination thereof.
(2) Mixed uses, or any combination thereof, shall also be permitted,
especially in a vertical arrangement, such as a live-work unit.
E. Lot area, width, coverage, yard and height requirements.
(1) Lot area:
(a) Four hundred fifty square feet minimum per dwelling unit and
1,800 square feet minimum for each nonresidential use.
(b) For live/work units, the minimum lot areas shall be computed
as a nonresidential use.
(2) Lot width: 16 feet minimum.
(3) Lot coverage: 98% maximum, subject to the provisions of
§ 224-102F(4)(b) for the other 2% of lot coverage.
(4) Yards: front, zero; side, zero; rear, zero feet minimum, provided the
primary facades of buildings are located at the edge of the sidewalk
facing a street or on a pedestrian promenade between the fronts of
two buildings.
§ 224-102 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-102
210:1168
(5) Building height:
(a) Two stories minimum.
(b) The maximum principal building height shall be 250 feet in
height.
F. Development standards. In addition to the standards in § 224-102C (and
Appendix A), the following shall apply:
(1) Parking: build and maintain in rear of buildings or in deck parking
structure/parking garage.
(2) Pedestrian access: build and maintain sidewalks on both sides of all
streets. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet six inches in
width.
(3) Signage: to identify the development or facility, up to 64 square
feet as a promotional sign. However, such sign shall be considered
as a temporary sign that shall be removed within 14 days of receipt
of a certificate of occupancy.
(4) Landscape/hardscape:
(a) Install and maintain street trees at an average interval of 40
feet along both sides of all streets where there are no existing
street trees.
(b) Install and maintain internal landscaped courtyard areas, roof
gardens and/or green areas.
(5) Lighting: no trespass glare above 0.5 footcandles at the property
line.
(6) Utilities: place new utilities underground.
G. Procedures for approval of development in the FRD Overlay District.
(1) All applicants are encouraged to submit sketch plans for all FRD
proposals.
(2) The applicant shall follow the preliminary and final plan application
requirements of the City of Coatesville Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and shall include the following
information:
(a) Building plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to
depict the proposed building program. Said plan shall indicate
the proposed principal and accessory uses, the gross square
footages of all uses, and the building heights. The building plan
shall also indicate the total lot coverage, existing and
proposed.
§ 224-102 TOWING SERVICES § 224-102
210:1169
(b) Street, alley, streetscape and pedestrian plan. A separate plan
sheet shall be submitted to depict the proposed street network.
Such plan shall indicate all street widths and pedestrian
pathway network.
(c) Staging/phasing plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted
to depict proposed staging or phasing of the land development.
(d) Landscape/hardscape plan. A separate plan sheet shall be
submitted to depict all proposed landscape/hardscape.
(e) Parking plan:
[1] A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict
proposed surface and deck parking. Such plan shall list the
number of parking spaces proposed in relation to the
proposed use(s).
[2] On-street parking spaces may be counted toward the
overall parking requirement whenever such parking is
located along the frontage of the property that is proposed
for development.
[3] Off-street deck parking may be counted toward the overall
parking requirement whenever such parking is located
within 400 feet of the property proposed for development.
(f) Signage plan:
[1] The provisions of Article XIV, Signs, shall apply.
[2] A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to depict all
proposed signage for all wall, window and freestanding
signs.
[3] Such plan shall also depict any proposed banners,
directional, and way-finding signs.
(g) Utilities plan. A separate plan sheet shall be submitted to
depict all proposed utilities.
(h) Manual of design guidelines. At the time of land development
plan submission for each phase or stage of development, a
manual of design guidelines shall be submitted to illustrate the
proposed design excellence, architectural excellence, and
related construction excellence for the proposed architectural,
streetscape, and landscape features. Said manual shall be
consistent with the applicable General Design Principles set
forth in Exhibit B of Article XVIII and shall be submitted for
approval by City Council, which approval shall not be
unreasonably denied provided it complies with the applicable
aforementioned general design principles.
§ 224-102 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-102
210:1170
(i) Declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions. A
declaration shall be submitted to the City and shall be in such a
form as deemed satisfactory to the City Solicitor.
§ 224-102 TOWING SERVICES § 224-102
210:1171

ARTICLE XXIII
Mixed Use Development (MU) Overlay District
[Added 6-13-2016 by Ord. No. 1476-2016]
§ 224-103. Mixed Use Development Overlay District.
A. Purposes. The Mixed Use Development Overlay District provides an
alternative set of provisions for development of certain properties in the
C-1, C-2, I-1, I-2 and PS Districts. These provisions are intended to allow
for compatible mixtures of commercial, cultural and residential
development within downtown Coatesville. The resulting development
will increase local tax revenues and job opportunities, provide services
for local residents, and attract a larger customer base for other
downtown businesses. These areas are prime for redevelopment, and
will be more accessible because of investments in passenger rail service
infrastructure. This type of development is intended to allow people to
work, reside, dine, and enjoy recreation within the same area. The
intent is to encourage development where residents can walk, bicycle,
use public transit or take a short drive to reach places of employment
and commercial businesses. Reductions in parking requirements are
proposed in recognition of the availability of public transit, the
walkability of the area, the provision of public parking, and the
availability of on-street parking.
B. Applicability.
(1) A project that is submitted and subsequently approved under the
Mixed Use Development Overlay District provisions shall be known
as a "mixed-use development." A mixed-use development shall
include at least two types of uses, provided that at least one of
those uses shall be a business use. In order to be eligible for these
provisions, the minimum lot size shall be 8,000 square feet. A
parking structure of two or more levels shall also be allowed to use
these Overlay District provisions.
(2) Compliance with other provisions. All other provisions of City
development regulations shall continue to apply to a mixed-use
development, except for provisions that are specifically modified by
this § 224-103 to be more restrictive or more permissive for an
approved mixed-use development. Where a conflict exists between
a provision of this § 224-103 and a provision of another City
development regulation, the provision of this § 224-103 shall
prevail.
(a) If a mixed-use development is approved under this MU Overlay
District, then the provisions of § 224-60C shall not apply.
(b) Application of the Historic Overlay District to a mixed-use
development approved under the MU Overlay District.
§ 224-103 TOWING SERVICES § 224-103
210:1173
[1] The provisions of the Historic Overlay District shall remain
in full effect for: a) "Class I" historic resources, and b)
other buildings that are included on the Chester County
Planning Commission's 2013 Historic Resources Map,
which includes buildings that have been determined to be
eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
[2] The provisions of the Historic Overlay District shall not
apply to buildings that were built after January 1, 1940.
[3] For other structures controlled by the Historic Overlay
District:
[a] Any existing provisions for review and approval of a
building demolition shall continue in effect; and
[b] For activities other than a building demolition, any
provisions for required review by the Historic and
Architectural Review Board (HARB) shall continue to
apply, but action by City Council to approve a
certificate of appropriateness shall not be required.
[4] For the purposes of this section, any required review by a
HARB shall be conducted by the Coatesville Historical
Commission, until such time as any HARB may be
appointed and be actively in place.
[5] Changes to a building shall only be subject to the Historic
Overlay District provisions if they are visible from a public
street.
(3) Where any application is subject to the MU Overlay District, the
final subdivision or land development plan shall clearly specify the
landowner or entity that will be responsible to complete, own and
maintain any required improvements over time.
C. Uses.
(1) Within the MU Overlay District, the following uses shall be
permitted by right:
(a) Mass transit station.
(b) Multifamily residential uses, provided that on a lot that is
adjacent to the Lincoln Highway, new multifamily residential
uses shall only be allowed in a building that, at a minimum,
includes business or office uses along the entire length of the
street-level frontage of the Lincoln Highway, and 1st Avenue,
2nd Avenue and 3rd Avenue. This street level provision shall
apply for a depth of at least 80 feet from the front of the
building.
§ 224-103 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-103
210:1174
(c) Retail stores, which may include a farmers market or a
convenience store, but which shall not allow gasoline sales.
(d) Offices, including, but not limited to, a doctor's or dentist office
or an urgent care medical center.
(e) Day care.
(f) Hotel or motel.
(g) Restaurants (which may include fast food), taverns or
nightclubs, and which may include an outdoor cafe, banquet
halls, a brewpub, a microbrewery, a microdistillery, or a limited
distillery.
(h) Financial institution.
(i) Movie theater.
(j) Playhouse, cultural center, community center, museum, live
theater, conference center or special events center.
(k) Meeting places of civic, veterans or similar organizations.
(l) Church/religious use.
(m) Parking lots and structures.
(n) Commercial/trade school or college.
(o) Residential conversion, but not including the conversion of an
existing single-family building into two or more dwelling units.
(p) Health/recreation spa or fitness center.
(q) Indoor recreation, which may be commercial in nature.
(r) Group home within a lawful dwelling unit.
(s) A restaurant (which may include fast-food), pharmacy or
financial institution, may include drive-through service,
provided a new drive-through window does not face onto the
Lincoln Highway.
(t) Retail service business, such as a hair salon, photocopy shop,
travel agent or state-licensed massage therapist.
(u) Live-work units that combine a dwelling unit with an office,
personal service or artist's studio that is operated primarily by
a resident of the dwelling unit.
(v) Accessory uses that are customarily incidental and subordinate
to allowed uses.
(2) Specifically prohibited uses. The following uses are specifically
prohibited in an approved mixed-use development: adult
§ 224-103 TOWING SERVICES § 224-103
210:1175
entertainment use, arcade/amusement hall, junkyard, sexually
oriented business, wagering and gambling establishment,
commercial kennels, auto service business, auto sales, trucking
terminals, crematoriums, and in-patient or out-patient drug and
alcohol treatment centers.
(3) Uses per building. A building or lot may include more than one
allowed type of use.
D. Dimensional and supplementary requirements. The following
dimensional requirements shall apply to an approved mixed-use
development, in place of the provisions of the table entitled "224
Attachment 5:"
(1) Coverage. Maximum building coverage: 100%. Maximum lot
coverage: 100%.
(2) Yards. A minimum building setback is not required. A new principal
building located adjacent to the Lincoln Highway shall have a
maximum building setback from the right-of-way of the Lincoln
Highway of 15 feet, except where a pedestrian plaza or outdoor
cafe will be located or where a greater setback is needed for
adequate sight distances.
(3) Minimum tract area: 8,000 square feet.
(4) Minimum lot width: 30 feet.
(5) Buffer. A landscaped buffer yard with a minimum width of eight feet
shall be provided where the side or rear yard of a new commercial
development is proposed abutting to or directly across an alley
from an existing principal dwelling in a R-1 or R-2 District. A buffer
yard is not required in other cases.
(6) Height. The maximum building height within a mixed-use
development shall be seven above-ground stories or 90 feet,
whichever is more restrictive, except as follows:
(a) On lots in the C-1 District that are not adjacent to an industrial
district, the maximum height shall be four stories or 50 feet,
whichever is more restrictive;
(b) In the C-2, I-1 or I-2 District, a parking structure in a district
within the MU Overlay District may include a maximum of
seven above-ground levels;
(c) This height restriction shall not apply to decorative peaked
roofs, mechanical areas that are not occupied by persons,
parking level(s) that are placed primarily under the street level
floor or other height exceptions provided in § 224-48D;
§ 224-103 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-103
210:1176
(d) City Council may approve an additional two stories and 30 feet
in height as a conditional use, if City Council determines the
added height would be compatible with the surroundings; and
(e) A minimum height of two building stories shall apply for new
building construction on a lot that is adjacent to the Lincoln
Highway.
(7) Dwellings. The minimum average square feet of lot area per
dwelling unit shall be 400 square feet.
(a) The minimum indoor building floor area for each dwelling unit
in a mixed-use development shall be 550 square feet.
(b) An architectural elevation of each proposed new principal
building shall be provided to the City for review and approval
at the time of, or prior to, the submittal of a final land
development application for the building.
(c) Major customer and resident pedestrian entrances to buildings
shall include a roof overhang, awning, canopy, inverted
entrance or roof extension to provide protection from
inclement weather.
(8) Development and architectural standards.
(a) A minimum of 20% of the front facade facing onto the Lincoln
Highway of a new commercial building (other than a parking
structure) below a height of less than 10 feet shall be
comprised of glass or similar transparent materials.
(b) Conveniently located decorative trash receptacles shall be
provided along the front facade of a building of more than
10,000 square feet of floor area. The design of outdoor trash
receptacles shall be consistent with the overall architectural
design, and shall meet City standards.
(c) The front facade of any new building (other than a parking
structure) that is more than 70 feet in length shall include
architectural features that provide variations in the design,
such as decorative cornices, decorative parapet walls, Juliet or
regular balconies, a clock tower, a turret, the appearance of
varying roof-lines as viewed from the front, variation in colors
or building materials, offsets, projections, variations in relief,
awnings, canopies, variations in setbacks, and/or decorative
light fixtures that extend from the building. For a parking
structure of two or more levels, the front facade facing onto a
public street shall include an architectural facade that has the
appearance of brick or similar architectural masonry and that
is mostly solid in appearance, as opposed to allowing
unobstructed views from the street of most of the parked
vehicles.
§ 224-103 TOWING SERVICES § 224-103
210:1177
(d) Prohibited exterior building materials for building sides that
face directly onto a public street shall include the following:
T-1-11 wood siding; painted concrete masonry units that are
not shot-blast or ground-face; prefabricated metal panels; or
aluminum siding.
(e) Rooftop heating and air conditioning equipment shall be
screened from view from public streets by parapet walls,
architectural screens, roof slopes or similar features.
(f) A set of architectural and design standards for the entire
mixed-use development shall be submitted by the applicant at
the time of the first land development plan submission within
the development. The standards shall be subject to review by
City officials and approval by City Council. These standards
shall become binding upon the development of the lots, as a
condition of land development approval, as a recorded deed
restriction or declaration of covenants and restrictions,
through a developer's agreement, or through another method
acceptable to the City. These standards shall become binding
prior to any lot being sold to a different entity.
[1] The architectural and design standards shall address the
following matters, at a minimum: prohibited exterior
building materials, requirements for variations and
architectural features in building facades; consistency in
the design of parking lot lighting poles and any street
lighting poles, consistency in commercial signs, styles of
designs of signs, placements of signs with typical sizes and
materials of tenant signs, and provision of site furnishings.
A master sign plan shall also be submitted at the same
time to describe typical locations, designs and materials of
signs.
[2] After the architectural and design standards are legally
established under this section, any later changes or
modifications shall require approval by resolution of the
City Council or through another City-approval process
acceptable to the City.
(9) Loading.
(a) The existing off-street loading requirements of § 224-65 shall
only apply to a lot with a mixed-use development including
more than 25,000 square feet of business building floor area.
(b) For a mixed-use development that is not regulated by
Subsection D(9)(a) above, the applicant shall prove to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Officer, after a review by the City
Engineer, that there is an acceptable system of addressing
loading and unloading needs for the proposed uses, which may
include one or two of the following:
§ 224-103 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-103
210:1178
[1] A suitable off-street loading location;
[2] An alternative approved under § 224-65D;
[3] Occasional short-term loading and unloading of trucks
along a commercial building, provided it will not block
traffic along a public street and does not occur during
peak hours of parking demand; or
[4] City approval of an appropriate on-street loading area.
(c) If an option under Subsection D(9)(b) is utilized, the applicant
shall submit a written policy restricting the sizes of vehicles
and the times of delivery, and the Zoning Officer may require
that the applicant enter into an agreement allowing
enforcement by the City or its Parking Authority of the loading
limitations, and which enforces any time limits or restrictions
on the maximum sizes of trucks through leases.
E. Bicycles. A bicycle rack shall be provided adjacent to a new building of
more than 10,000 square feet of building floor area, unless provisions
are made for indoor or enclosed shelter of bicycles for such a building.
F. Dumpster screening. Trash dumpsters shall be screened from view of
public streets by architectural masonry walls, changes in grades, solid
decorative fences with a solid gate, and/or landscaping with a minimum
height of five feet.
G. Landscaping.
(1) Deciduous shade trees shall be planted adjacent to public streets,
unless one of the following conditions are met: 1) existing trees will
be maintained along the same segment, 2) the applicant proves to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that shade trees are not
feasible because of the narrow width of the right-of-way or
obstructions from utilities, or 3) PennDOT does not approve the
placement of shade trees within a state road right-of-way. Where
required, an average of one deciduous shade tree shall be located
for each 60 feet of lot-line length along the right-of-way. The
locations and species of such trees shall be subject to approval by
the City.
(2) A minimum average of one deciduous shade tree on a lot shall be
planted for every 20 required off-street surface parking spaces.
Landscaped islands are not required within parking areas.
H. Signs. See Subsection D(8)(f) above concerning architectural standards
for signs. The following sign maximum sign areas shall apply to each
side of a two-sided sign. No sign shall have more than two sides. In a
mixed-use development, the following sign provisions shall apply:
(1) A mixed-use development shall include a maximum of one ground
or freestanding sign which shall be allowed facing each public
§ 224-103 TOWING SERVICES § 224-103
210:1179
street with a maximum total sign area of 32 square feet on each of
two sides, and a maximum height above the ground level of eight
feet. Decorative stone and cornice areas and structural elements
that do not include a message shall not be considered part of the
sign area.
(2) Each street level business establishment may have one projecting
sign per street frontage with a maximum sign area of 16 square
feet and a maximum total height of 16 feet above the ground level,
and which meets the minimum sidewalk clearance height in the
Construction Code.
(3) In addition, a maximum of one projecting sign per mixed-use
development shall be allowed to have a maximum sign area of 90
square feet and a maximum height above the ground of 40 feet. The
detailed design and location of this larger projecting sign shall be
specifically addressed within the architectural and design
standards to result in an architecturally distinctive landmark sign.
(4) Wall signs, awning signs, window and canopy signs. [Amended
5-14-2018 by Ord. No. 1504-2018]
(a) Except as provided herein at § 224-103H(4)(b), all wall signs,
awning signs, window and canopy signs attached to a building
shall have a maximum total sign area of one square foot for
each foot of building length along the side upon which the
signs are attached. However, individual temporary
nonilluminated signs of less than 1.5 square feet each (such as
menus) that are attached to windows and doors shall not be
regulated.
(b) Notwithstanding § 224-103H(4)(a), for any mixed use
development building with a minimum gross floor area of
30,000 square feet, and also with street frontage on both Route
30/Lincoln Highway and Route 82, all wall signs, awning signs,
window and canopy signs attached to a building shall have a
maximum total sign area of one square foot for each foot of
building length, per each floor, limited to two total floors of
signage allowance, and allocated evenly by floor, along the side
upon which the signs are attached. This sign calculation shall
apply in measuring allowable signage for each of floor, limited
to two total floors of signage allowance, and allocated evenly
by floor. However, individual temporary nonilluminated signs
of less than 1.5 square feet each (such as menus) that are
attached to windows and doors shall not be regulated.
(5) Projecting signs and awning or canopy signs may project into the
public right-of-way, provided they do not project over more than 1/3
of the width of a public sidewalk, and provided the signs also are
set back a minimum of six feet from the street or alley curbline.
§ 224-103 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-103
210:1180
(6) A new sign attached to a building wall shall not be constructed
using a rectangular metal box with a plastic face. However, this
provision shall not prohibit internally lit signs that only display
company logos.
(7) If an artistic mural is painted on or adhered onto the side of a
building, only the portion of the mural that includes a commercial
message shall be regulated as a sign. This type of mural shall not be
internally illuminated.
(8) Flashing signs, signs with moving or animated images, and signs
with scrolling words are prohibited.
(9) A restaurant drive-through lane may include one menu board sign
with a maximum sign area of 80 square feet and a maximum height
of 10 feet.
(10) Directional and wayfinding signs shall also be allowed, with a
maximum sign area of six square feet per sign side and a maximum
height of six feet.
I. Parking.
(1) Size. All parking spaces may have a minimum size of nine feet by 18
feet, except that a maximum of 30% of the required parking spaces
may be compact car parking spaces of nine feet by 16 feet. Such
signs shall be marked as "Compact Cars Only." See requirements
for parking for persons with disabilities in the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance (SALDO).276
(2) Number of parking spaces. Uses within a mixed-use development
shall provide off-street parking at a minimum rate of one space per
500 square feet of leasable nonresidential building floor area, plus
one parking space per dwelling unit. The resulting minimum
amount of off-street parking may be reduced by 40% if: a) a publicly
owned parking lot or parking structure with a minimum capacity of
40 parking spaces will be available within a five-hundred-foot
radius of the building that generates the parking demand, and b)
the applicant submits a written parking study showing existing
usage of available public and on-street spaces in the vicinity during
a peak period and that estimates parking demand from the new
uses. If a public parking lot or parking structure has been approved
and is actively under construction at the time of the occupancy of
the uses, it shall be considered to be available. In addition, 40% of
the existing lawful on-street parking spaces that are within a fivehundred-
foot radius of the building that generates the parking
demand may count towards the parking requirement for a mixeduse
development.
276. Editor's Note: See Ch. 197, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 224-103 TOWING SERVICES § 224-103
210:1181
J. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided adjacent to public streets, but
shall not be required along an alley. A sidewalk shall have a minimum
width of 12 feet along the Lincoln Highway, eight feet along another
state highway, and five feet along other streets.
K. Access. A mixed-use development shall be allowed to have vehicle
access from and onto streets as approved under the City and PennDOT
access approval processes, which shall include not more than one
vehicle access point onto the Lincoln Highway.
§ 224-103 COATESVILLE CODE § 224-103
210:1182
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No. 990-95 5-22-1995 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 79
Ord. No. 992-95 6-26-1995 Littering Ch. 190, Part 3
Ord. No.
1001-95
9-11-1995 Curfew amendment Ch. 92
Ord. No.
1004-95
12-11-1995 General revenue tax
amendment
Ch. 203, Art. IV
Ord. No.
1005-95
10-23-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218, Part 1
Ord. No.
1006-95
12-11-1995 Appropriations NCM
Ord. No.
1007-95
12-11-1995 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
1008-95
12-11-1995 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1009-95
12-11-1995 Occupation privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 203, Art. III
Ord. No.
1010-96
3-25-1996 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1011-96
3-25-1996 Loitering Ch. 153
Ord. No.
1012-96
5-28-1996 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No.
1013-96
3-25-1996 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1014-96
4-22-1996 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1015-96
4-22-1996 Solid waste collection
and disposal
amendment
Ch. 190, Part 2
§ 224-103 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1183
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1016-96
5-13-1996 Solid waste collection
and disposal
amendment
Ch. 190, Part 2
Ord. No.
1017-96
5-13-1996 Residential permit
parking amendment
Ch. 218, Part 2
Ord. No.
1018-96
5-13-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218, Part 1
Ord. No.
1019-96
7-8-1996 Parks amendment Ch. 169
Ord. No.
1020-96
5-28-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218, Part 1
Ord. No.
1021-96
5-28-1996 Downtown Improvement
District Authority
amendment
Ch. 12, Art. IV
Bill No. 13 Land acquisition NCM
Ord. No.
1023-96
6-10-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218, Part 1
Bill No. 15 Land acquisition NCM
Ord. No.
1025-96
6-10-1996 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
1026-96
10-28-1996 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 79
Ord. No.
1027-96
7-8-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218, Part 1
Ord. No.
1028-96
8-26-1996 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
1029-96
10-28-1996 Use registration
amendment
Ch. 214
Ord. No.
1030-96
8-26-1996 Animals amendment Ch. 72
Ord. No.
1031-96
8-26-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218, Part 1
Bill No. 23 Number has not yet
been used
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1184
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1033-96
9-9-1996 Adoption of Code;
Assessments; Historical
Commission; Pensions;
Building construction;
Licensing of building
contractors; Electrical
standards; Fees;
Firearms, weapons and
fireworks; Fire
protection and
prevention; Life-safety
standards; Mechanical
standards; Plumbing;
Property maintenance;
Shopping carts; Solid
waste; Streets and
sidewalks; Taxation; and
Cable television
amendments
Chs. 1, Art. I; 9;
27; 38; 82; 84;
102; 108; 112;
115; 151; 156;
176; 180; 187;
190; 193; 203;
207
Ord. No.
1034-96
10-28-1996 Emergency
management
Ch. 19
Ord. No.
1035-96
11-4-1996 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1036-96
12-19-1996 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1037-96
12-19-1996 General tax revenue
amendment
Ch. 203, Art. IV
Ord. No.
1038-96
12-19-1996 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1039-96
12-19-1996 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1040-96
12-19-1996 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1041-96
12-19-1996 Parks and Recreation
Commission
Ch. 33
Ord. No.
1042-97
1-27-1997 Solid waste collection
and disposal
amendment
Ch. 190
Ord. No.
1043-97
1-27-1997 Building Code
amendment
Ch. 82, Art. II
Ord. No.
1044-97
2-10-1997 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 218
§ DL-1 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1185
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1045-97
2-24-1997 Building Code
amendment
Ch. 82, Art. II
Ord. No.
1046-97
4-28-1997 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1047-97
4-28-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Bill No. 7-97 Number has not yet
been used
Ord. No.
1049-97
3-10-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1050-97
7-28-1997 Housing standards
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 108; 136
Ord. No.
1051-97
11-24-1997 Salaries amendment NCM
Ord. No.
1052-97
10-13-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1053-97
10-27-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1054-97
11-24-1997 Licensing of building
contractors amendment
Ch. 84
Ord. No.
1055-97
11-24-1997 Land acquisition NCM
Ord. No.
1056-97
10-27-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1057-97
11-24-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1058-97
11-24-1997 Openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 193, Art. I
Ord. No.
1059-97
11-24-1997 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 172
Ord. No.
1059.1-97
12-8-1997 General tax revenue
amendment
Ch. 203, Art. IV
Ord. No.
1060-97
12-8-1997 Appropriations NCM
Ord. No.
1061-97
12-8-1997 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
1062-97
12-8-1997 Fees amendment Ch. 108
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1186
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1063-98
1-12-1998 Retirement income plan Ch. 38, Art. II
Ord. No.
1064-98
1-26-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1065-98
2-9-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1066-98
2-23-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1067-98
3-9-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1068-98
3-9-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1069-98
4-13-1998 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
1070-98
4-13-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1071-98
4-13-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1072-98
5-11-1998 Technology Commission Ch. 58
Ord. No.
1073-98
5-11-1998 Keeping of animals Ch. 72, Art. II
Ord. No.
1074-98
7-13-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1075-98
7-13-1998 Technology Commission
amendment
Ch. 58
Ord. No.
1076-98
7-13-1998 Human Services
Commission
Ch. 30
Ord. No.
1077-98
8-10-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1078-98
8-10-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1079-98
8-10-1998 Animals: excessive noise Ch. 72, Art. III
Ord. No.
1080-98
8-10-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch 218
Ord. No.
1081-98
8-10-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1082-98
8-10-1998 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 180
§ DL-1 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1187
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1083-98
NCM
Ord. No.
1084-98
9-28-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1085-98
9-28-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1086-98
9-28-1998 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 197
Ord. No.
1087-98
11-9-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1088-98
11-9-1998 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
1089-98
11-9-1998 Curfew amendment Ch. 92
Ord. No.
1090-98
11-9-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1094-98
12-28-1998 Solid waste amendment Ch. 190, Part 2
Ord. No.
1094.1-98
12-28-1998 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1095-99
1-25-1999 Charter amendment Ch. 2
Ord. No.
1096-99
2-22-1999 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1097-99
2-22-1999 Retirement Income Plan
amendment
Ch. 38, Art. II
Ord. No.
1098-99
2-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1099-99
4-12-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1105-99
7-12-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1106-99
8-9-1999 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1107-99
NCM
Ord. No.
1108-99
8-9-1999 Laundries and drycleaning
establishments
Ch. 149
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1188
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1109-99
8-23-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1110-99
NCM
Ord. No.
1111-99
NCM
Ord. No.
1112-99
11-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1113-99
12-13-1999 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1114-99
12-13-1999 Appropriations NCM
Ord. No.
1115-99
12-13-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1116-99
12-27-1999 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
NCM
Ord. No. 1117 NCM
Ord. No.
1118-2000
1-24-2000 Police Pension Fund
amendment; Retirement
Income Plan amendment
Ch. 38, Art. I,
Art. II
Ord. No.
1119-2000
NCM
Ord. No.
1120-2000
NCM
Ord. No.
1121-2000
NCM
Ord. No.
1122-2000
2-28-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1123-2000
2-28-2000 Drugs: towing and
storage of vehicles used
in drug transactions
Ch. 97, Art. II
Ord. No.
1124-2000
2-28-2000 Reserve Trust Fund
Commission
Ch. 49
Ord. No.
1125-2000
NCM
Ord. No.
1126-2000
2-28-2000 Retirement Income Plan
amendment
Ch. 38, Art. II
Res. 2-28-2000 Fees amendment Ch. 108
§ DL-1 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1189
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1129-2000
5-22-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1130-2000
5-22-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1133-2000
7-10-2000 Solid waste: collection
and disposal
amendment
Ch. 190, Part 2
Ord. No.
1134-2000
7-10-2000 Solid waste: collection
and disposal
amendment
Ch. 190, Part 2
Ord. No.
1135-2000
7-10-2000 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
1138-2000
7-24-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Res. No.
2000-24
8-14-2000 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. 8-14-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1143-2000
9-25-2000 Vacant Property Review
Committee
Ch. 61
Ord. No.
1145-2000
11-13-2000 Parks amendment Ch. 169
Ord. No.
1146-2000
11-13-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1147-2000
11-13-2000 Solid waste amendment Ch. 190
Res. No.
2000-34
11-13-2000 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Res. No.
2000-35
11-13-2000 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1149-2000
11-27-2000 Parks and Recreation
Commission
Ch. 33
Ord. No.
1150-2000
12-11-2000 Animals: general
provisions amendment
Ch. 72, Art. I
Ord. No. 1154-1 1-22-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1155-2001
2-12-2001 Solid waste: recycling
amendment; collection
and disposal
amendment
Ch. 190, Parts 1
and 2
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1190
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. 1-22-2001 Solid waste: collection
and disposal
amendment
Ch. 190, Part 2
Ord. No.
1156-2001
2-12-2001 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
1157-2001
2-12-2001 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 197
Ord. No.
1158-2001
2-12-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1159-2001
2-26-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1160-2001
2-26-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1161-2001
3-12-2001 Billboards Ch. 193, Art. VII
Res. No. 2001-6 3-12-2001 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1162-2001
4-9-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1163-2001
5-14-2001 Use registration Ch. 214
Ord. No.
1164-2001
5-29-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Res. No.
2001-15
6-25-2001 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1165-2001
7-9-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1169-2001
7-23-2001 Buildings and land with
substantial violations
Ch. 87
Ord. No.
1170-2001
7-23-2001 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
1171-2001
8-13-2001 Amendments to various
construction codes
Chs. 82, 102,
115, 151, 156,
176 and 180
Ord. No.
1175-2001
10-22-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1180-2001
12-10-2001 Taxation amendment Ch. 203, Arts. II,
IV and VI
Res. No.
18-2002
3-11-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 108
§ DL-1 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1191
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1185-2002
1-28-2002 Special events Ch. 192
Ord. No.
1188-2002
3-11-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1189-2002
4-8-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1198-2002
7-22-2002 Fire protection
amendment
Ch. 115, Part 1
Ord. No.
1199-2002
8-12-2002 Police pension fund
amendment
Ch. 38
Ord. No.
1201-2002
9-23-2002 Charter amendment § 2-209
Ord. No.
1203-2002
9-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1207-2002
12-9-2002 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1210-2003
2-24-2003 Solid waste: collection
and disposal
amendment
Ch. 190, Part 2
Ord. No.
1214-2003
2-24-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Res. No. 2003-8 2-24-2003 Fees amendment; solid
waste: collection and
disposal amendment
Chs. 108; 190,
Part 2
Ord. No.
1216-2003
3-24-2003 Pension amendment Ch. 38
Ord. No.
1217-2003
5-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1219-2003
6-9-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1223-2003
10-27-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1224-2003
11-24-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1227-2003
12-8-2003 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1230-2004
3-8-2004 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 180
Ord. No.
1232-2004
4-26-2004 Uniform Construction
Code
Ch. 212
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1192
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1233-2004
5-10-2004 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 197
Ord. No.
1234-2004
5-10-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1238-2004
12-13-2004 General revenue tax
amendment
Ch. 203, Art. IV
Ord. No.
1239-2004
12-13-2004 2005 budget
appropriations
NCM
Ord. No.
1240-2004
12-13-2004 Salaries and wages NCM
Ord. No.
1241-2005
1-10-2005 Verizon aerial grant NCM
Ord. No.
1242-2005
1-10-2005 Valley View Park shared
facilities agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
1243-2005
2-14-2005 PAWC Ash Park
easement
NCM
Ord. No.
1244-2005
3-14-2005 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 193
Ord. No.
1245-2005
3-28-2005 Enactment of PAWC
sewer use rules and
regulations
NCM
Ord. No.
1246-2005
3-28-2005 Temporary easement for
removal of railroad
bridge, Route 340
NCM
Ord. No.
1247-2005
4-11-2005 Zoning amendment:
TND Overlay District
Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1248-2005
6-13-2005 Special events
amendment
Ch. 192
Ord. No.
1249-2005
6-27-2005 Sale and transfer of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
1250-2005
6-27-2005 Sale and transfer of
property (rescinded)
NCM
Ord. No.
1251-2005
7-11-2005 Sale and transfer of
property (rescinded)
NCM
Ord. No.
1252-2005
8-8-2005 Sale and transfer of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
1253-2005
8-8-2005 Curfew amendment Ch. 92
§ DL-1 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1193
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1254-2005
8-8-2005 Sale and transfer of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
1255-2005
8-22-2005 Emergency
authorization of
withdrawal from City
Reserve Trust Fund
NCM
Ord. No.
1256-2005
9-26-2005 Grant of easement NCM
Ord. No.
1257-2005
10-24-2005 Hotel and office complex
tax increment project
NCM
Ord. No.
1258-2005
10-24-2005 Third Avenue Towers tax
increment project
NCM
Ord. No.
1259-2005
10-24-2005 Townhomes tax
increment project
NCM
Ord. No.
1260-2005
10-24-2005 Grant of right of way NCM
Ord. No.
1261-2005
12-12-2005 Sale and transfer of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
1262-2005
12-12-2005 2006 budget
appropriations
NCM
Ord. No.
1263-2005
12-12-2005 Salaries and wages NCM
Ord. No.
1264-2005
12-12-2005 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1265-2005
12-22-2005 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1266-2005
12-22-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1267-2005
12-22-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1268-2005
12-22-2005 Firemen's Pension Fund Repealed by
Ord. No.
1304-2008
Ord. 1269-2005 12-22-2005 Fire protection
amendment
Ch. 115, Part 1
Ord. No.
1270-2005
12-22-2005 Authorization for
withdrawal from City
Reserve Trust Fund
NCM
Ord. No.
1271-2005
12-22-2005 Solid waste: collection
and disposal
amendment
Ch. 190, Part 2
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1194
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1272-2005
12-22-2005 Authorization of 2005
operating budget
amendments
NCM
Ord. No.
1273-2005
12-22-2005 Authorization of 2005
capital budget
amendments
NCM
Ord. No.
1274-2005
3-27-2006 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
1275-2006
3-27-2006 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
1276-2006
5-22-2006 Sale and transfer of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
1277-2006
9-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1278-2006
10-23-2006 Building construction:
floodplain district
requirements
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 82, Art. I;
224
Ord. No.
1279-2006
9-25-2006 Authorization of
quitclaim deed to PAWC
NCM
Ord. No.
1280-2006
10-23-2006 Authorization of 2006
operating budget
amendments
NCM
Ord. No.
1281-2006
12-11-2006 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1282-2006
12-11-2006 2007 budget
appropriations
NCM
Ord. No.
1283-2007
1-22-2007 Salaries and wages NCM
Ord. No.
1284-2007
1-22-2007 Sale and transfer of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
1285-2007
5-27-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1286-2007
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1287-2007
6-25-2007 Curfew amendment Ch. 92
Ord. No.
1288-2007
9-24-2007 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 180
§ DL-1 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1195
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1289-2007
9-24-2007 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
1290-2007
10-8-2007 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 38, Art. I
Ord. No.
1291-2007
12-10-2007 Plumbing amendment Ch. 176
Ord. No.
1292-2007
12-10-2007 Electrical standards
amendment
Ch. 102
Ord. No.
1293-2007
12-10-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1294-2007
12-10-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1295-2007
12-10-2007 Sale and conveyance of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
1296-2008
1-28-2008 2008 budget
appropriations
NCM
Ord. No.
1297-2008
1-28-2008 Authorization of 2007
operating budget
amendments
NCM
Ord. No.
1298-2008
1-28-2008 Salaries and wages NCM
Ord. No.
1299-2008
1-28-2008 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1300-2008
3-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1301-2008
3-24-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1302-2008
4-28-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1303-2008
4-28-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1304-2008
5-12-2008 Fire Fighters' Pension
Fund
Ch. 38, Art. III
Ord. No.
1305-2008
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1306-2008
5-27-2008 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1307-2008
8-25-2008 Building construction:
vacant premises
Ch. 82, Art. IV
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1196
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1308-2008
8-25-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1309-2008
8-25-2008 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 180
Ord. No.
1310-2008
10-13-2008 Curfew amendment Ch. 92
Ord. No.
1311-2008
10-13-2008 Curfew amendment Ch. 92
Ord. No.
1312-2008
12-8-2008 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 180
Ord. No.
1313-2008
12-8-2008 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1314-2008
12-15-2008 Salaries and wages NCM
Ord. No.
1315-2008
12-15-2008 2009 budget
appropriations
NCM
Ord. No.
1316-2009
1-26-2009 Declaration of state of
emergency
NCM
Ord. No.
1317-2009
2-23-2009 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
1318-2009
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1319-2009
2-23-2009 Use registration
amendment
Ch. 214
Ord. No.
1320-2009
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1321-2009
2-9-2009 Curfew amendment Ch. 92
Ord. No.
1322-2009
4-13-2009 Buildings & land with
substantial violations
amendment
Ch. 87
Ord. No.
1323-2009
4-13-2009 Authorization of 2009
operating budget
amendments
NCM
Ord. No.
1324-2009
9-14-2009 Multi-municipal
planning agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
1325-2009
10-12-2009 Conversion of line of
credit into commercial
time note
NCM
§ DL-1 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1197
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1326-2009
11-9-2009 Withdrawal and use of
principal from City
Reserve Trust Fund
NCM
Ord. No.
1327-2009
12-14-2009 Withdrawal of principal
from City Reserve Trust
Fund to pay outstanding
balance on line of credit
NCM
Ord. No.
1328-2009
12-14-2009 2010 budget
appropriations
NCM
Ord. No.
1329-2009
12-14-2009 Salaries and wages NCM
Ord. No.
1330-2009
12-14-2009 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1331-2010
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1332-2010
2-22-2010 Lease of property NCM
Ord. No.
1333-2010
4-12-2010 Solid waste: collection
and disposal
amendment
Ch. 190, Part 2
Ord. No.
1334-2010
6-28-2010 2010 budget
appropriations
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
1335-2010
8-9-2010 Acquisition of property NCM
Ord. No.
1336-2010
9-27-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1337-2010
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1338-2010
9-27-2010 Curfew amendment Ch. 92
Ord. No.
1339-2010
9-27-2010 Special events
amendment
Ch. 192
Ord. No.
1340-2010
10-25-2010 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1341-2010
10-25-2010 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1342-2010
12-13-2010 2011 budget
appropriations
NCM
Ord. No.
1343-2010
12-13-2010 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1198
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1344-2010
12-13-2010 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1345-2011
1-24-2011 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 35
Ord. No.
1346-2011
1-24-2011 Licensing of building
contractors amendment
Ch. 84
Ord. No.
1347-2011
3-28-2011 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 38, Art. I
Ord. No.
1348-2011
3-28-2011 Fees amendment;
special events
amendment
Chs. 108; 192
Ord. No.
1349-2011
4-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1350-2011
6-27-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1351-2011
4-25-2011 Sale and transfer of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
1352-2011
5-9-2011 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
1353-2011
4-25-2011 Lease of property NCM
Ord. No.
1354-2011
Adoption
pending
Ord. No.
1355-2011
6-27-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1356-2011
6-27-2011 Lease of property NCM
Ord. No.
1357-2011
7-11-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1358-2011
8-22-2011 Solid waste: recycling
amendment; collection
and disposal
amendment; littering
amendment
Ch. 190, Parts 1,
2 and 3
Ord. No.
1359-2011
8-22-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1360-2011
9-12-2011 Emergency withdrawal
and use of principal
from City Reserve Trust
Fund
NCM
§ DL-1 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1199
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1361-2011
10-10-2011 2011 municipal budget
amendment and
appropriations
NCM
Ord. No.
1362-2011
10-10-2011 Fees amendment;
special events
amendment
Chs. 108; 192
Ord. No.
1363-2011
10-10-2011 Purchase of property NCM
Ord. No.
1364-2011
10-10-2011 Reenactment of
emergency withdrawal
and use of principal
from City Reserve Trust
Fund
NCM
Ord. No.
1365-2011
10-10-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1366-2011
11-14-2011 Building construction:
vacant premises
amendment
Ch. 82, Art. IV
Ord. No.
1367-2011
11-14-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1368-2011
11-14-2011 Easement conveyance NCM
Ord. No.
1369-2011
11-28-2011 Acceptance of deeds of
dedication for public
improvements
NCM
Ord. No.
1370-2011
12-12-2011 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1371-2011
12-12-2011 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1372-2011
12-12-2011 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1373-2012
2-13-2012 Planning Commission
amendment
Ch. 41
Ord. No.
1374-2012
3-26-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1375-2012
2-27-2012 Acceptance of easement NCM
Ord. No.
1376-2012
3-12-2012 Lease of parking lot NCM
Ord. No.
1377-2012
3-12-2012 Lease of parking lots NCM
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1200
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1378-2012
3-26-2012 Intergovernmental
cooperation agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
1379-2012
3-26-2012 Trees Ch. 79
Ord. No.
1380-2012
4-9-2012 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
1381-2012
4-9-2012 Fees amendment;
municipal liens
Chs. 108; 182
Ord. No.
1382-2012
4-30-2012 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 38, Art. I
Ord. No.
1383-2012
4-30-2012 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 38, Art. I
Ord. No.
1384-2012
6-11-2012 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 38, Art. I
Ord. No.
1385-2012
6-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1386-2012
7-9-2012 Cable franchise
agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
1387-2012
7-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1388-2012
8-13-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1389-2012
8-13-2012 Fees amendment;
streets and sidewalks
amendment
Chs. 108; 193
Ord. No.
1390-2012
8-13-2012 Residency
requirements: City
Manager
Ch. 50, Art. I
Ord. No.
1391-2012
11-13-2012 2012 budget
appropriations
NCM
Ord. No.
1392-2012
10-8-2012 Withdrawal from City
Reserve Fund
NCM
Ord. No.
1393-2012
10-8-2012 Council of Governments Ch. 16
Ord. No.
1394-2012
11-13-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1395-2012
11-13-2012 Reapproving withdrawal
from City Reserve Fund
NCM
§ DL-1 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1201
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1396-2012
11-13-2012 Authorization of
declaration of state of
emergency
NCM
Ord. No.
1397-2013
1-14-2013 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 115, Part 2
Ord. No.
1398-2013
1-14-2013 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 115, Part 2
Ord. No.
1399-2012
12-10-2012 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1400-2012
12-10-2012 2013 budget
appropriations
NCM
Ord. No.
1401-2012
12-10-2012 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1402-2013
1-14-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1403-2013
4-8-2013 Lease agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1404-2013
4-22-2013 Amendments to various
boards, commissions
and committees
Chs. 27; 33; 38;
41; 49; 58; 61;
115; 136; 190;
212; 214; 224
Ord. No.
1405-2013
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1406-2013
5-13-2013 Authorizing sale of
property
NCM
Ord. No.
1407-2013
6-24-2013 Withdrawal from City
Reserve Fund
NCM
Ord. No.
1408-2013
6-24-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1409-2013
6-24-2013 Residential real estate
disclosure
Ch. 184
Ord. No.
1410-2013
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1411-2013
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1412-2013
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1413-2013
9-9-2013 Procurement and
purchasing amendment
Ch. 47
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1202
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1414-2013
9-23-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1415-2013
10-28-2013 Building construction:
water supply
Ch. 82, Art. V
Ord. No.
1416-2013
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1417-2013
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1418-2013
10-28-2013 Solid waste amendment Ch. 190
Ord. No.
1419-2013
12-9-2013 Stormwater
management and
erosion and sediment
control
Ch. 194
Ord. No.
1420-2013
12-9-2013 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1421-2013
12-9-2013 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1422-2013
12-9-2013 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1423-2014
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1424-2014
2-5-2014 Declaration of state of
emergency
NCM
Ord. No.
1425-2014
2-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 218, Part 1
Ord. No.
1426-2014
2-10-2014 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1427-2014
3-24-2014 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
1428-2014
4-14-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1429-2014
4-14-2014 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
1430-2014
8-11-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1431-2014
4-14-2014 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 136
§ DL-1 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1203
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1432-2014
6-9-2014 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
1433-2014
6-23-2014 Solid waste amendment Ch. 190
Ord. No.
1434-2014
7-14-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1435-2014
10-13-2014 Emergency borrowing NCM
Ord. No.
1436-2014
10-27-2014 Solid waste: collection
and disposal
amendment
Ch. 190, Part 2
Ord. No.
1437-2014
10-27-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1438-2014
10-27-2014 Pensions: Nonuniformed
Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 38, Art. II
Ord. No.
1439-2014
10-27-2014 Pensions: Nonuniformed
Pension Plan
amendment
Ch. 38, Art. II
Ord. No.
1440-2014
12-29-2014 2014 budget
appropriations
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
1441-2015
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1442-2015
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1443-2015
12-29-2014 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1444-2015
2-23-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1445-2015
2-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 218, Part 1
Ord. No.
1446-2015
2-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 218, Part 1
Ord. No.
1447-2015
3-23-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1448-2015
3-23-2015 Parks amendment Ch. 169
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1204
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1449-2015
3-23-2015 2015 appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1450-2015
3-23-2015 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1451-2015
3-23-2015 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1452-2015
4-27-2015 Procurement and
purchasing amendment
Ch. 47
Ord. No.
1453-2015
6-8-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1454-2015
5-11-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1455-2015
5-11-2015 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
1456-2015
5-26-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1457-2015
6-8-2015 Lease agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1458-2015
6-22-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1459-2015
8-24-2015 Fees amendment Ch 108
Ord. No.
1460-2015
9-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1461-2015
9-28-2015 Purchase of property NCM
Ord. No.
1462-2015
10-12-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1463-2015
10-26-2015 Lease agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1464-2015
10-26-2015 Authorization of
emergency withdrawal
from City Reserve Trust
Fund
NCM
Ord. No.
1465-2015
12-14-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1466-2015
12-14-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1467-2015
12-17-2015 2016 budget
appropriations
NCM
§ DL-1 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1205
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1468-2015
12-17-2015 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1469-2015
12-17-2015 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord No.
1470-2016
1-21-2016 Declaration of state of
emergency
NCM
Ord No.
1471-2016
2-22-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1472-2016
3-28-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1473-2016
4-11-2016 Lease agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1474-2016
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1475-2016
5-23-2016 Lease agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1476-2016
6-13-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1477-2016
6-13-2016 General obligation note NCM
Ord. No.
1478-2016
8-22-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1479-2016
11-14-2016 Acquisition of property
by eminent domain
NCM
Ord. No.
1480-2016
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1481-2016
10-10-2016 Authorizing tax
exemptions, deductions,
abatements and credits
in Keystone Opportunity
Zone
NCM
Ord. No.
1482-2016
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1483-2016
12-27-2016 2017 budget
appropriations
NCM
Ord. No.
1484-2016
12-12-2016 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1485-2016
12-12-2016 Salaries and wages NCM
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1206
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1486-2016
12-12-2016 Fire Fighters' Pension
Fund amendment
Ch. 38, Art. III
Ord. No.
1487-2017
2-27-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1488-2017
7-10-2017 Olivet Methodist
parking lot lease
NCM
Ord. No.
1489-2017
3-27-2017 Lease of property NCM
Ord. No.
1490-2017
3-27-2017 Lease of property NCM
Ord. No.
1491-2017
3-27-2017 Use of City property NCM
Ord. No.
1492-2017
4-10-2017 Lease agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1493-2017
4-22-2017 Declaration of stat of
emergency;
authorization of
emergency purchases
NCM
Ord. No.
1494-2017
6-12-2017 Property maintenance
amendment; streets and
sidewalks amendment
Ch. 180; Ch. 193
Ord. No.
1495-2017
8-28-2017 Lease agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1496-2017
8-28-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1497-2017
11-27-2017 Solid waste: collection
and disposal
amendment
Ch. 190, Part 2
Ord. No.
1498-2017
11-27-2017 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1499-2017
11-13-2017 Use of City Reserve
Trust Fund
NCM
Ord. No.
1500-2017
12-11-2017 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1501-2017
12-11-2017 Taxation amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1502-2017
12-11-2017 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1503-2018
2-26-2018 Taxation Amendment Ch. 203
§ DL-1 TOWING SERVICES § DL-1
210:1207
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1504-2018
5-14-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1505-2018
4-23-2018 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
1506-2018
4-23-2018 Dedication of Right-of-
Way; Easements
NCM
Ord. No.
1507-2018
5-14-2018 Lease Agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1508-2018
Easement NCM
Ord. No.
1509-2018
5-29-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1510-2018
5-28-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 218
Ord. No.
1511-2018
7-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 224
Ord. No.
1512-2018
8-27-2018 Renaming of Street NCM
Ord. No.
1513-2018
8-13-2018 Lease Agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1514-2018
8-13-2018 Street Vacation NCM
Ord. No.
1516-2018
10-22-2018 Loan Agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1517-2018
11-26-2018 Reserve Trust Fund
Commission Repealer
Ch. 49,
reference only
Ord. No.
1518-2018
12-18-2018 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1519-2018
12-18-2018 Taxation Amendment Ch. 203
Ord. No.
1520-2018
12-18-2018 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1521-2019
2-25-2019 Lease-Purchase
Agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
1522-2019
4-8-2019 All-Terrain Vehicles and
Dirt Bikes
Ch. 70
§ DL-1 COATESVILLE CODE § DL-1
210:1208

ZONING
224 Attachment 2
City of Coatesville
Table of
Residential Neighborhood District Lot Area, Bulk and Coverage Requirements
[Amended 6-9-2003 by Ord. No. 1219-2003]
Minimum Lot Minimum Yard Setbacks Building Lot Building
Area Lot Width (feet) Coverage Coverage Height
Uses District (square feet) (feet) Front Side Rear (percent) (percent) (feet)
Single-family detached dwelling RN-1 6,000 60 20 15 40 30% 45% 36
RN-2 5,400 40 20 7.5 40 30% 45% 36
RN-3 4,800 40 15 5 30 40% 60% 36
RN-4 4,800 40 10 3 20 40% 60% 36
RN-5 See § 224-12E.
Single-family semidetached dwelling RN-1 4,000 35 20 15 40 35% 50% 36
(twin) RN-2 3,000 25 20 7.5 40 40% 60% 36
RN-3 2,500 25 15 5 30 50% 65% 36
RN-4 2,500 20 10 3 20 50% 65% 36
RN-5 See § 224-12E.
Single-family attached dwelling
(rowhouse) RN-4 1,800 18 10 0 20 60% 70% 36
RN-5 See § 224-12E.
Multifamily (apartments) RN-4 10,0001
70 10 15 20 40% 65% 50
RN-5 See § 224-12E.
Multiplex (over-and-under units) RN-5 See § 224-12E.
Accessory uses and structures RN-1 N/A N/A N/A 5 5 N/A N/A 36
RN-2 N/A N/A N/A 5 5 N/A N/A 36
RN-3 N/A N/A N/A 5 5 N/A N/A 36
RN-4 N/A N/A N/A 2 2 N/A N/A 36
RN-5 See § 224-12E.
NOTE:
1
 The area of 10,000 square feet is the minimum lot area for the multifamily building. The maximum permitted density for multifamily development in the
RN-4 District is 24 dwelling units per acre.
224 Attachment 2:1 04 - 15 - 2007
COATESVILLE CODE
224 Attachment 2:2 00 - 00 - 0000

ZONING
224 Attachment 3
City of Coatesville
Table of
Residential Conservation District Lot Area, Bulk and Coverage Requirements
Minimum Required
Minimum
Lot Area
Lot
Width
Yard Setbacks
(feet)
Building
Coverage
Lot
Coverage
Open
Space1
Building
Height
Uses (square feet) (feet) Front Side Rear (percent) (percent) (percent) (feet)
Single-family detached dwelling
(conventional lot design)
8,000 60 20 15 40 25% 40% N/A 36
Single-family detached dwelling
(cluster lot design)
4,000 30 15 5 30 50% 65% 50% 36
NOTE:
1
 Open space requirements for cluster lot designs are listed as a percentage of the entire tract.
224 Attachment 3:1 04 - 15 - 2007

