Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Township Name Change
[Adopted 1-6-1997 by Ord. No. 94]
§ 1-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Township Change of Name Ordinance."
§ 1-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to substitute "Chadds Ford Township" for
"Township of Birmingham" and/or "Birmingham Township" wherever the
terms "Birmingham Township" or "Township of Birmingham" appear in the
Township's codes, ordinances, resolutions, rules and/or regulations and
to rename all of the Township's boards, commissions, authorities and
committees in light of the Township's change of name from Birmingham
Township to Chadds Ford Township, which was made effective on December
11, 1996, by order of the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County, a copy
of which order is attached hereto as Exhibit A.1
§ 1-3. Name substitution in legislation and other regulations.
"Chadds Ford Township" shall be and is hereby substituted for "Township
of Birmingham" and/or "Birmingham Township" in all Township codes,
ordinances, resolutions, rules and/or regulations.
§ 1-4. Name substitution for municipal entities.
"Chadds Ford Township" shall be and is hereby substituted for "Township
of Birmingham" and/or "Birmingham Township" in the name of all Township
boards, commissions, authorities and committees.
§ 1-5. Rights and obligations.
All rights and obligations of Birmingham Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, are and shall be the rights and obligations of Chadds Ford
Township.
§ 1-6. Authority to implement.
The Township's officers and/or staff are authorized and directed to take all
reasonable steps necessary to implement the Township's change of name.
1. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 122]
§ 1-7. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53 P.S. § 66601(d)] of the Second Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for Chadds
Ford Township, County of Delaware, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by
General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 135, together with an
Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single
ordinance of Chadds Ford Township, which shall be known and is hereby
designated as the "Code of Chadds Ford Township," hereinafter referred to
as the "Code."
§ 1-8. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township, and it is the intention of
said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-9 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-12 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-21 below.
§ 1-9. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of Chadds Ford Township which is
not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in
full force and effect.
§ 1-10. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-9 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-9 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to January 6, 2009.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Township or other instruments or evidence
of the Township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-10 CHADDS FORD CODE § 1-10
1:6
§ 1-11. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-10A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-12. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation;
new provisions.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Township.
S. Any building code requirements more restrictive than the UCC which
may still be in effect.
T. Ordinance No. 66A, adopted August 6, 1986, regulating contractors'
disposal of construction trash. (Said ordinance was adopted as an
amendment to Ord. No. 66, which was later repealed by Ord. No. 104;
however, it was unclear whether the Board of Supervisors intended to
also repeal Ord. No. 66A.)
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it
is the intent of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be
adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed had
previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes and
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:7
§ 1-13. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-14. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the
Code specified in § 1-21.2
C. Nomenclature.
(1) Throughout the text of the Code, references to "Township of
Birmingham" or "Birmingham Township" (the former name of the
Township) are revised to read "Chadds Ford Township."
(2) Throughout the Code, references to the following agencies or
officials are updated as indicated:
(a) "Department of Environmental Resources" or "DER" to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "DEP."
(b) "Department of Community Affairs" or "DCA" to "Department
of Community and Economic Development" or "DCED."
(c) "Justice of the Peace," "District Magistrate" and "District
Justice" to "Magisterial District Judge."
(3) Throughout the Code, references to "U.S. Route 202" or "Route
202" are changed to "Wilmington - West Chester Pike."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-12B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced by the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 12-14-2009 by Ord. No.
122." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Township offices.
§ 1-12 CHADDS FORD CODE § 1-14
1:8
§ 1-15. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Township Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-16. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-17. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Township Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code
and all legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the
effective date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-18. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction of the Code in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township. The enactment and application of this
ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice of introduction, the
availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public and
the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the county, as required
by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication
of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:9
§ 1-19. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Township
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Township
before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township
in the enforcement of this ordinance. No judgment shall be imposed until
the date of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of
Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 1-20. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Board of Supervisors that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-21. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after January 15, 2009.
§ 1-19 CHADDS FORD CODE § 1-21
1:10
Chapter 5
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 95.
§ 1-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:11

ARTICLE I
Sewer Authority
[Adopted 11-15-1988 by Ord. No. 78]
§ 5-1. Intent.
The Board of Township Supervisors hereby signifies its intention and desire
to organize an authority under the provisions of the “Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945,” as amended.3
§ 5-2. Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Township Supervisors are
hereby authorized and directed to execute on behalf of Chadds Ford
Township Articles of Incorporation for said Authority, in substantially the
following form.4
§ 5-3. Publication of notice.
The Township Secretary is hereby directed to cause a notice of the
substance of this article, including the substance of the above Articles of
Incorporation, to be published once in the “Delaware County Daily Times,”
a daily newspaper published and of general circulation in the County of
Delaware, and in the Delaware County Legal Journal, the legal journal
designated by the Rules of Court for the publication of legal notices in said
county, as required by the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.
§ 5-4. Filing requirements.
The Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Township Supervisors are
directed to file said Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary
proofs of publication, with the Secretary of the Commonwealth, and to do all
other acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation
of Chadds Ford Township Sewer Authority.
§ 5-5. Initial project.
The initial project to be undertaken by said Authority is to study the sewage
situation in Chadds Ford Township and, if necessary, to acquire, hold,
construct, improve, maintain, operate, own, lease either in the capacity
of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof, and sewage
treatment works, including works for treating and disposing of industrial
waste, for Chadds Ford Township and of such other territory as it may be
authorized to serve.
3. Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 was repealed 6-19-2001 by P.L.
287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: The original Articles of Incorporation for the Sewer Authority are on file in
the Township offices.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-6
1:13
§ 5-6. Original members of Authority Board.
The following named persons be and they hereby are appointed as the
first members of the Board of the Authority, whose terms of office shall
commence on the date of appointment and shall be computed from January
1 next succeeding the date of incorporation:
Name Address
Term
(years)
William Dieter Webb Road 5
Robert Hobbs Ring Road 4
Barry C. Morlock Ring Road 3
Maurice Todd Harvey Lane 2
Edward Brooking Harvey Lane 1
§ 5-6 CHADDS FORD CODE § 5-6
1:14
Chapter 10
FIRE MARSHAL
§ 10-1. Offices of Fire Marshal and Deputy Fire Marshal created.
The offices of Fire Marshal and Deputy Fire Marshal are hereby created in
Chadds Ford Township, such officers to be appointed by and report to the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 10-2. Qualifications.
The person(s) appointed to the office of Fire Marshal or Deputy Fire
Marshal shall be qualified by having proper training and experience. Such
experience may include prior experience as a police officer with completion
of PA Act 120 municipal training; prior experience as a fire fighter who has
held an officer's rank of lieutenant or higher; completion of the training
deemed appropriate for arson investigation and/or safety inspections; or
other qualifications and/or experience deemed sufficient by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 10-3. Appointment.
The person(s) appointed to the office of Fire Marshal and/or Deputy Fire
Marshal shall be appointed as soon as practicable after the adoption of
this chapter and shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors.
Subsequent appointments shall be made annually to serve until their
respective successors have been duly appointed and qualified. The
aforesaid appointment was made for the unexpired portion of the term.
If for any reason the office of Fire Marshal is not separately filled by
appointment of, and with the approval and consent of, the Board of
Supervisors, any duly appointed Deputy Fire Marshal shall perform the
duties of the Fire Marshal until the office of Fire Marshal is filled. If the
offices of both Fire Marshal and Deputy Fire Marshal are not filled, the Fire
Chief shall be deemed the ex officio Fire Marshal and shall have all the
powers and duties hereinafter given to or imposed upon the Fire Marshal.
§ 10-4. Compensation.
Compensation of the Fire Marshal and Deputy Fire Marshal shall be fixed
from time to time by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to resolution.
§ 10-5. Powers and duties.
A. The Fire Marshal shall perform all duties and shall have and exercise all
powers prescribed by law. These duties and responsibilities shall
include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain liaison with and keep the Board of Supervisors informed
of the capabilities and needs of all fire companies serving the
Township, and serve as liaison between local, state and federal
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-5
1:15
§ 10-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in an action brought before a Magisterial District Judge,
be subject to a fine not more than $1,000 for each violation of this chapter.
Chapter 14
emergency services departments, personnel and/or officials and
Chadds Ford Township;
(2) Initiate, with the appropriate law enforcement officials, investigate
and take appropriate action on any suspicious fires where criminal
activity may reasonably by suspected, and submit written reports
on same to the Board of Supervisors in a timely fashion;
(3) Maintain records of fire alarms, EMS and fire calls, organized by
type and location, and submit to the Board a monthly report on all
fires, investigations, inspections and other activities, and provide a
verbal report at the monthly Board of Supervisors meeting;
(4) Assist the Township Building Inspector, when requested by such
officer, in inspections for violations of regulations where firesafety
or fire prevention matters are involved;
(5) Inspect for, investigate, and enforce violations of this chapter and/
or any fire code adopted by the Board of Supervisors;5
(6) Monitor and inspect Township traffic light preemption devices, fire
hydrants, fire lanes, fire hazards and other fire-related devices or
conditions;
(7) Monitor drought conditions to determine if water and/or burning
restrictions are warranted;
(8) Ensure proper training for the Deputy Fire Marshal and/or such
other assistants to the Fire Marshal as the Board may authorize;
(9) Submit reports to the Board of Supervisors on Township conditions
or occurrences related to firesafety;
(10) Respond and assist the Fire Department and emergency services
personnel on scene; and
(11) Perform such other public safety duties as may be assigned to the
Fire Marshal by the Board of Supervisors.
B. The Deputy Fire Marshal shall report to and assist the Fire Marshal
with the above duties and shall perform the duties of the Fire Marshal
in the Fire Marshal's absence.
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 59, Construction Codes.
§ 10-5 CHADDS FORD CODE § 10-6
1:16
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION
§ 10-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-6
1:17

ARTICLE I
Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 6-3-1981 by Ord. No. 50]
§ 14-1. Participation authorized.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act6 by becoming a settlor
of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (“the Trust”) and
entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference with
the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a copy
of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this article
was adopted.
§ 14-2. Authority to purchase and redeem shares.
This municipality is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from time
to time with available municipal funds, and to redeem some or all of those
shares from time to time, as funds are needed for municipal purposes.
These actions are to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose,
pursuant to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting
the article.
§ 14-3. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this
municipality's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in the
Trust.
§ 14-4. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 14-1;
B. This municipality's participation in the Trust shall be terminable at any
time by ordinance;
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this municipality's funds in obligations which are
otherwise legal investments as part of a pooled arrangement with other
governmental units, thereby achieving economic and other advantages
of pooled investments;
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the purchase of shares in the Trust;
6. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 14-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-4
1:19
E. The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein; and
F. Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as this
municipality may determine to be necessary or appropriate to meet its
cash investment requirements.
§ 14-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 14-4
1:20
ARTICLE II
Risk Management Pool
[Adopted 11-15-1988 by Ord. No. 79]
§ 14-5. Participation authorized.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act7 by becoming a member
of the Association8 and entering into the intergovernmental contract which
was adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been set out
verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes
of the meeting at which this article was adopted.
§ 14-6. Implementation.
This municipality is authorized to enter into the intergovernmental contract
for the purposes contained therein. These actions are to be taken by the
member(s) or employee(s) of this municipality designated for this purpose,
pursuant to general or specific instructions by the governing body adopting
this article.
§ 14-7. Custody of funds.
The Association is designated as having official custody of this
municipality's funds, which are invested by the Association pursuant to the
terms of the intergovernmental contract.
§ 14-8. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the intergovernmental
contract referred to in § 14-5;
B. This municipality's participation in the Association shall be terminable
at any time by ordinance;
C. The purposes and objectives of the agreement are set forth hereinabove
and the intergovernmental contract and actions contemplated thereby
and purposes and objectives contained therein are otherwise legal as
part of a pooled arrangement with other governmental units, thereby
achieving economic and other advantages of intergovernmental
cooperation;
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the contribution of this municipality's
7. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
8. Editor's Note: The prefatory clauses of this ordinance defined this as the “Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Risk Management Association.”
§ 14-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-8
1:21
basis rate (as such term is defined in the intergovernmental contract)
to the Association;
E. The Association shall be managed by a Board of Commissioners or
Executive Committee as set forth in the bylaws of said Association, a
copy of which has been provided for review in connection with the
adoption of this article;
F. All property, real or personal, shall be acquired, managed or disposed of
by the Association in accordance with the terms of the
intergovernmental contract.
§ 14-8 CHADDS FORD CODE § 14-8
1:22
ARTICLE III
Brandywine Valley Scenic Byway Commission
[Adopted 3-1-2006 by Ord. No. 113]
§ 14-9. Authorization to enter into agreement.
The Board of Supervisors hereby ordains to enter into the agreement
establishing the Commission between Chadds Ford Township and the
above-named Townships9 to study, advocate for, seek funding for, and
implement Township-approved plans for the improvement and protection of
the Byway, as well as exercise any necessary power implied by statute. The
conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement referred to in
the preamble hereof.10
§ 14-10. Terms of agreement.
In accordance with Section 2307 of the Intergovernmental Cooperation
Act,11 the Board of Supervisors hereby declares that:
A. The agreement provides that the Commission shall be created to have
the responsibility and authority to study, advocate for, seek funding for,
and implement approved plans for the improvement and protection of
the Byway, as well as exercise any necessary power implied by statute.
The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the agreement referred
to in § 14-9.
B. The agreement shall have a term that runs from the date of execution of
this article and shall remain in effect until December 31, 2007; and it
shall thereafter be automatically renewed for successive five-year
terms commencing on January 1, 2008, unless terminated by the
townships in accordance with the terms of the agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the Commission include, but are not
limited to:
(1) Study and recommend a corridor management plan;
(2) Educate the townships, their residents, and visitors on the scenic,
historical, cultural, recreational, and natural importance of the
Byway;
(3) Application for, receipt of, and disbursement of funds for use in
conjunction with the Byway; and
(4) Research to provide guidance for the continuing enhancement of
the Byway.
9. Editor's Note: The preamble to this ordinance named Chadds Ford Township and the
townships of Birmingham, East Bradford, East Marlborough, Kennett, Pennsbury and
Pocopson.
10.Editor's Note: The preamble to this ordinance, and the agreement adopted hereunder, are
on file in the Township offices.
11.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2307.
§ 14-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-10
1:23
§ 14-11. Amendments to agreement.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township hereby ordains that it may
execute such amendments to the agreement as may be necessary from time
to time to time to carry out the purposes of this article and the agreement
adopted thereby.
D. The Township shall pay an initial annual contribution of $500. The
amount to be paid in succeeding years shall be determined every two
years as recommended by the Commission and approved through the
Commission budget approval process. Each township contribution will
be subject to the individual township's Board of Supervisors' approval.
All additional funding will be applied for, secured, acquired and
received from municipal, state, federal, private or other sources.
E. The agreement will be implemented by the formation of the Brandywine
Valley Scenic Byway Commission. The Commission shall be managed as
set forth in the agreement and the bylaws developed by the
Commission.
F. The Commission shall have the authority to enter into contracts for
policies of group insurance and employee benefits.
§ 14-10 CHADDS FORD CODE § 14-11
1:24
ARTICLE IV
Delaware Valley Health Trust
[Adopted 11-4-2015 by Ord. No. 142]
§ 14-12. Authorization to execute agreement.
The Board of Supervisors, on behalf of Chadds Ford Township, hereby
authorizes the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors, Frank Murphy, to
execute the Trust Agreement and any other agreements necessary for
Chadds Ford Township's participation in the Delaware Valley Health Trust.
The Delaware Valley Health Trust Agreement is attached hereto as Exhibit
A and incorporated herein by reference.12 The Trust Agreement attached
hereto is on file for inspection and review at the Offices of Chadds Ford
Township at 10 Ring Road, Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania 19317. This Trust
Agreement may be subsequently modified or amended but in no event shall
such amendments or modifications materially adversely affect the right of
Chadds Ford Township to participate in the Delaware Valley Health Trust.
§ 14-13. Participation authorized.
The participation of Chadds Ford Township in the Delaware Valley Health
Trust is authorized for the purpose of obtaining high quality health benefits
at the most reasonable cost to Chadds Ford Township and its employees,
retirees and their dependents.
§ 14-14. Conditions of participation.
As set forth in the Trust Agreement and as otherwise stated herein, the
following conditions apply to the participation of Chadds Ford Township in
the Delaware Valley Health Trust:
A. That each Trust participant must meet the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein;
B. That each Trust participant agrees to pay all contributions when due as
provided in the Trust Agreement and any bylaws adopted by the Trust;
C. That each Trust participant uses its best efforts to provide
appropriations for the payment of any contributions required to achieve
the purposes and objectives of the Trust;
D. That each Trust participant cooperate fully in achieving the purposes
and objectives of the Trust; and
E. That each Trust participant comply with all other terms and conditions
of the Trust Agreement.
12.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Township offices.
§ 14-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-15
1:25
§ 14-15. Term of participation; withdrawal.
Chadds Ford Township agrees to participate in the Delaware Valley Health
Trust for a minimum of three years, commencing November 1, 2015, and
thereafter may withdraw for any reason whatsoever provided that it has
fulfilled all the applicable conditions in the Trust Agreement and satisfies all
its financial obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
§ 14-16. Effective date of participation.
The effective date of the participation of Chadds Ford Township in the
Delaware Valley Health Trust will be November 1, 2015.
§ 14-17. Organization.
The organizational structure of the Trust consists of a Board of Trustees and
Executive Committee selected by the Board of Trustees in accordance with
the Trust Agreement.
§ 14-18. Delegation of powers.
Chadds Ford Township delegates to the Board of Trustees of the Delaware
Valley Health Trust those powers enumerated in the Trust Agreement.
§ 14-19. Funding.
§ 14-20. Power to enter into contracts.
The Delaware Valley Health Trust is empowered to enter into contracts
for policies of group insurance and employee benefits for the Township's
employees.
§ 14-21. Compliance with terms and conditions.
As a condition of participating in the Delaware Valley Health Trust, Chadds
Ford Township agrees to comply with all the terms and conditions in the
attached Trust Agreement.
§ 14-22. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, as amended, 53 Pa.C.S. §§ 2301 et seq.
A. All contributions paid by Chadds Ford Township shall be made with
funds appropriated by Chadds Ford Township for that purpose.
B. The funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by
the Trust participants through annual appropriations.
§ 14-15 CHADDS FORD CODE § 14-22
1:26
ARTICLE V
PSATS Unemployment Compensation Group
[Adopted 12-7-2016 by Ord. No. 148]
§ 14-23. Authorization to adopt agreement.
§ 14-24. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the Trust is authorized for the purpose
of pooling resources for the purpose of providing unemployment
compensation insurance for participating employers at a reasonable cost.
§ 14-25. Conditions for participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the Restated Trust Agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the Trust:
§ 14-26. Agreement to participate; withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the Trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
§ 14-27. Effective date of agreement.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
Restated Trust Agreement and the participation of the Township in the
A. The Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township is hereby
authorized to adopt the Restated Trust Agreement and any other
agreements necessary for the Township's participation in the Trust.
B. The Restated Trust Agreement is on file inspection and review at the
Township's offices at 10 Ring Road, Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania 19317.
The Restated Trust Agreement may be subsequently modified or
amended in accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such
modifications or amendments divert any of the trust funds from the
purposes of the Trust. The Township may withdraw from the Trust in
accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement, including if the Board
of Supervisors determines the modifications or amendments are not in
the best interests of the Township.
A. That each participating employer must meet the admission and
eligibility requirements set forth therein;
B. That each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when
due as provided in the Restated Trust Agreement or as otherwise
established by the Board of Trustees; and
C. That each participating employer complies with all other conditions of
the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 14-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-27
1:27
Trust pursuant to the terms of the Restated Trust Agreement will be January
1, 2017.
§ 14-28. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 14-29. Organization.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees. Under the Restated Trust Agreement, the Board of Trustees is
authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to
perform various services necessary of the administration of the Trust.
§ 14-30. Funding.
The funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 14-31. Power to enter into contracts.
The Trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the Trust, if any.
§ 14-32. Compliance with terms and conditions.
As a condition of participating in the Trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 14-33. Copy of provisions to Board.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the Trust.
§ 14-34. Authority to take other actions.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized to take any
and all such other actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry
out the purposes of this article and comply with the requirements of the
attached Restated Trust Agreement and any duly adopted amendments
thereto.
§ 14-35. Term of participation.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the Trust and
obligations under Restated Trust Agreement shall continue until withdrawal
from the Trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of the
Restated Trust Agreement.
§ 14-27 CHADDS FORD CODE § 14-36
1:28
§ 14-36. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
§ 14-37. Effect on prior rights or liabilities.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to affect any rights or liabilities
of the Township, or to affect any cause of action, existing prior to the
enactment of this article.
§ 14-38. When effective; statutory authority.
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the Restated Trust Agreement incorporated by reference
herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the Trust in accordance with the
Restated Trust Agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees in accordance with the terms of the Restated Trust
Agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated Restated Trust
Agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the agreement are that:
(1) Funds to implement the Township's obligations under the
agreement shall come from the normal and usual budgeted
amounts for Township employee compensation and employee
benefits; and
(2) No borrowing is anticipated to be required.
E. The Trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the Restated Trust Agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be title to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the Trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the Restated Trust
Agreement.
G. The Trust in accordance with the Restated Trust Agreement shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligibility employee and dependents.
A. This article shall become effective immediately upon its enactment.
§ 14-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-38
1:29
B. This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972,
No. 180, as amended, 53 Pa.C.S. § 2301 et seq.
§ 14-38 CHADDS FORD CODE § 14-38
1:30
Chapter 19
MANAGER
§ 19-1. Creation of office.
The Code of Chadds Ford Township is hereby amended so as to create the
office of Township Manager.
§ 19-2. Appointment; removal.
The Manager shall be appointed by a majority of the Board of Supervisors.
The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors, and
he/she may be removed at any time by a majority vote of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 19-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of the office as
herein outlined.
§ 19-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his/her duties, the Manager shall give bond to the
Township, with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the Board of
Supervisors, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the
office, the premium for said bond to be paid by the Township. The amount of
said bond may be changed and determined from time to time by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 19-5. Compensation.
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 19-6. Powers and duties.
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Township
and shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors as a whole for the
proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Township. The
powers and duties of administration of all Township business shall be
vested in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by
statute upon other Township officers. The powers and duties of the
Township Manager shall include the following:
(1) To supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments.
(2) To suspend any employee under the Manager's supervision,
provided that the Manager shall report, at the next meeting
§ 14-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-6
1:31
thereafter of the Board of Supervisors, the circumstances
surrounding the suspension.
(3) The Township Manager can hire and/or discharge any employee
after first conferring with the Board of Supervisors.
(4) To make recommendations and seek Board approval to fix wages
and salaries of all personnel under the Manager's supervision.
(5) To see to the proper enforcement of ordinances and regulations of
the Township.
(6) To prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors, before the close
of each fiscal year, a budget for the next fiscal year and an
explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget, the
Manager or an officer designated by the Manager shall obtain,
from the head of each department, agency or board or any qualified
officer thereof, estimates of revenues and expenditures and such
other supporting data as required. The Manager shall review such
estimates and may revise them before submitting the budget to the
Board of Supervisors.
(7) To be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Board of Supervisors.
(8) To develop, in conjunction with the preparation of the yearly
budget, long-range fiscal plans for the municipality, such plans to
be presented annually to the Board of Supervisors for its review
and adoption.
(9) To hold such other municipal offices and head such municipal
departments as the Board of Supervisors may from time to time
direct.
(10) Shall attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors and may
attend Township committee meetings with the right to take part in
discussions and to receive notice of all special meetings of the
Board of Supervisors and its committees.
(11) To prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of
Supervisors and supply facts pertinent thereto.
(12) To keep the Board of Supervisors informed as to the conduct of
Township affairs; submit periodic reports on the condition of the
Township finances and such other reports as the Board of
Supervisors requests; and make such recommendations to the
Board of Supervisors as he/she deems advisable.
(13) To submit to the Board of Supervisors, as soon as possible after the
close of the fiscal year, a complete report of the finances and the
administrative activities of the Township for the preceding year.
§ 19-6 CHADDS FORD CODE § 19-6
1:32
§ 19-7. Procedural limitations on Board of Supervisors.
Neither the Board of Supervisors nor its committees shall dictate or
influence or attempt to dictate or influence the suspension of any person
from municipal employment by the Manager, and no Township employee,
commission member, committee member, and/or volunteer shall give
orders, publicly or privately, to any subordinate of the Manager, unless so
directed by the Township Manager.
§ 19-8. Disability or absence.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Township, the
Manager shall designate one qualified member of the staff to perform the
duties of the Manager during the Manager's absence or disability. The
person so designated shall not perform these duties for a period longer than
two weeks without the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
Chapter 22
(14) To see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the Township are observed.
(15) To employ, by and with the written approval of the Board of
Supervisors, experts and consultants to perform work and to advise
in connection with any of the functions of the Township.
(16) To attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he/she
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed by statute upon
some other Township officer.
(17) To see that all money owed the Township is promptly paid and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all
the Township's claims.
(18) To be the purchasing officer of the Township, and he/she shall
purchase, in accordance with the provision of the Second Class
Township Code, all supplies and equipment for the agencies,
boards, departments and other offices of the Township. He/she
shall keep an account of all purchases and shall, from time to time,
or when directed by the Board of Supervisors, make a full written
report thereof. He/she shall also issue rules and regulations,
subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors, governing the
procurement of all municipal supplies and equipment.
B. All complaints regarding Township services shall be referred to the
office of the Manager. He/she, or an officer designated by him/her, shall
investigate and dispose of such complaints, and the Manager shall
report thereon to the Board of Supervisors. Short-term complaints shall
be reported after having been satisfied. In the case of complaints
requiring more time, progress reports shall be filed biweekly.
§ 19-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-8
1:33
OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
110.
§ 22-1. Establishment.
A committee to be known as the "Open Space Committee of Chadds Ford
Township" is hereby created and established.
§ 22-2. Composition; terms of office; vacancies; compensation.
The said Open Space Committee shall consist of an odd number of members
with a minimum of three members and a maximum of seven members,
all residents of Chadds Ford Township, who shall be appointed by the
Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township. The members shall serve for a term
of two years and until a successor shall be appointed by the Supervisors of
Chadds Ford Township. Vacancies in such Committee occurring otherwise
than by expiration of term shall be for the unexpired term, and shall be
filled by the Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township. The members of the
Open Space Committee shall serve without compensation. All persons so
appointed shall serve their full term unless voluntarily resigned or removed
by the Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township.
§ 22-3. Authority.
The said Open Space Committee shall have the authority to identify existing
open space, develop an open space plan and identify properties suitable
for open space, conservation and wetland use, and passive recreation use,
including hiking/bike trails, and advise the Township Supervisors as to ways
and means to implement open space initiatives and the public dedication of
land in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code13 and Chapter 110, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 22-4. Officers; use of consultants; powers and duties.
The first Chairman of the Open Space Committee shall be appointed by
the Board of Supervisors. The initial Secretary and other necessary officers
shall be elected by the members of the Open Space Committee. Thereafter,
the Committee shall elect its own Chairman, Secretary and other officers
on an annual basis. The Committee may, with the prior approval of the
Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township, retain necessary consultants to
assist it in carrying out the duties of the Open Space Committee. The said
Open Space Committee shall have powers to adopt rules and regulations
for the conduct of all business within the jurisdiction of the Committee. The
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 19-8 CHADDS FORD CODE § 22-4
1:34
said Committee shall submit an annual report to the Supervisors of Chadds
Ford Township, including an analysis of the open space, conservation,
wetland, and passive recreation land in the Township, with particular
references to the extent and adequacy thereof.
§ 22-5. Restrictions.
The Open Space Committee shall have no authority to commit Township
funds for any purpose.
§ 22-6. Recommendations for land acquisition.
Said Open Space Committee shall make recommendations to the
Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township, if timely and appropriate, for the
acquisition and/or purchase of lands suitable for open space, conservation,
wetland use and passive recreation use, and any contracts and agreements
for the acquisition and purchase thereof shall be entered into by the
Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township. The Board of Supervisors may refer
the Committee's recommendations to the Chadds Ford Township Planning
Commission for review and recommendation to the Supervisors.
Chapter 27
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
110.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 27-1. Establishment.
A Planning Commission consisting of five members is hereby created and
established for Chadds Ford Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania,
pursuant to the provisions of Article II, Section 201, of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as established by the Municipalities Planning
Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.), as amended and reenacted.
§ 27-2. Composition; terms of office.
The Planning Commission shall be comprised of five members who shall be
appointed for terms of office of four years, except that the terms of office for
the members first appointed shall be so fixed that no more than two shall be
reappointed or replaced during any future calendar year.
§ 27-3. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties conferred
and imposed upon it as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
§ 22-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-3
1:35
Code (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.), established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted.
Chapter 33
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 39
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 27-3 CHADDS FORD CODE § 27-3
1:36
ARTICLE I
Display of Lewd Films
[Adopted 10-19-1977 by Ord. No. 39]
§ 39-1. Public showing or display prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person with knowledge to openly or publicly
show, exhibit or display, or aid or assist in showing, exhibiting or displaying,
any lewd motion-picture film at any place or drive-in motion-picture theater,
as defined, on a billboard, window, wall, display board, viewing screen,
motion-picture screen, marquee or similar place, in such a manner that the
lewd motion-picture film is visible to and without solicitation by any member
of the traveling public, or to the public at large who is lawfully in or on any
building, state highway, Township road, facility, vehicle or area proximate to
and in the environs of said display.
§ 39-2. Definitions.
As used in § 39-1, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
given to them in this section:
COMMUNITY — For the purpose of applying the “contemporary community
standards” in this section, “community” means the Township of Chadds
Ford, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
KNOWLEDGE or KNOWING — Having knowledge of the contents and
character of the patently offensive sexual conduct, or demonstration, which
appears in such lewd film, or reason to know or believe or grounds for
belief, which warrants further inspection or inquiry of the character and
content of the lewd film described therein which is reasonably susceptible
of examination by the person.
LEWD FILM — Any motion-picture film:
MOTION-PICTURE FILM — Includes any:
Which the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the
prurient interest; and
A.
Which depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct
of a type described herein; and
B.
The subject matter of which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political, educational or scientific value.
C.
A. Film or plate negative;
B. Film or plate positive;
C. Film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition;
Films, glass slides or transparencies, either a negative or a positive
form designed for exhibition by projection on a screen; and
D.
§ 39-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-2
1:37
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, its
officers or other legal entity, as well as ticket seller, ticket taker, usher,
motion-picture projection machine operator, manager, owner, or any other
person connected with or employed by any place as defined herein located
in Chadds Ford Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
PLACE — Includes, but is not limited to, any building, structure or place,
or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the
ground itself, or any drive-in motion-picture theater, wherein the display
of such lewd film is visible to and without solicitation by any member of
the public at large who is lawfully in or on any building, state highway,
Township road, facility, vehicle or area proximate to and in the environs of
said display of such lewd motion-picture film.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, and patently
offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, sexual conduct
such as female and/or male masturbation, fellatio, cunnilingus, anal sodomy,
seminal ejaculation, sadomasochistic abuse, heterosexual intercourse and
other excretory functions and lewd exhibition of the genitals.
§ 39-3. Violations and penalties.14
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District
Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day
or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
Videotape or any other medium used to electronically reproduce images
on a screen.
E.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 39-2 CHADDS FORD CODE § 39-3
1:38
ARTICLE II
Abatement of Lewd Films
[Adopted 10-19-1977 by Ord. No. 40]
§ 39-4. Purpose and effect.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Chadds Ford finds that the
crass commercial exploitation of explicit sexual conduct through the public
exhibition of lewd films constitutes a debasement and distortion of a
sensitive key relationship of the human existence, central to family life,
community welfare and the development of the human personality; it is
indecent and offensive to the senses and interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property, in that such interferes with the interest of
the public and the quality of life and total community environment, the
tone of commerce in the Township of Chadds Ford, property values and
the public safety; and that the continued operation of such activities is
detrimental to the best health, safety, convenience, good morals and general
welfare of the Township of Chadds Ford, and of the residents, citizens,
inhabitants and businesses thereof. The Township of Chadds Ford hereby
declares such activities to be a public nuisance, and herein establishes
procedures for the abatement thereof. This article shall apply to existing
establishments including drive-in theaters, which are presently engaged in
the type of activity herein declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 39-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KNOWLEDGE or KNOWLEDGE OF SUCH NUISANCE — Having knowledge
of the contents and character of the patently offensive sexual conduct or
demonstration which appears in such lewd film, or reason to know or
belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry
of, the character and content of the lewd film described therein which is
reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant.
LEWD FILM — Any motion-picture film:
MOTION-PICTURE FILM — Includes any:
Which the average person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the
prurient interests; and
A.
Which depicts or describes patently offensive representations or
descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of
the genitals or genital area. Nothing herein contained is intended to
include or proscribe any film which, when considered as a whole, and
in the context in which it is used, possesses serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
B.
§ 39-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-5
1:39
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PLACE — Includes, but is not limited to, any building, structure, or place,
or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the
ground itself, or any drive-in theater.
§ 39-6. Lewd films and theaters exhibiting same declared nuisance.
§ 39-7. Knowledge of nuisance; responsibility; abatement.
A. Film or plate negative.
B. Film or plate positive.
C. Film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition.
Films, glass slides or transparencies, either a negative or a positive
form designed for exhibition by projection on a screen; and
D.
Videotape or any other medium used to electronically reproduce images
on a screen.
E.
A. Any and every place in the Township of Chadds Ford, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, where lewd films are publicly exhibited or possessed for
the purpose of such exhibition, and any and every place in the Township
of Chadds Ford, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, where a lewd film is
publicly or repeatedly exhibited, or possessed for the purpose of such
exhibitions, is a public nuisance.
B. Any and every lewd film which is publicly exhibited or possessed for
such purpose at a place which is a public nuisance under Subsection A
above is a public nuisance per se.
C. From and after service on the theater, or its manager or acting
manager, or person then in charge of such place, of a true and correct
copy of this article and a true and correct copy of the resolution and
order of summary abatement provided for in § 39-8 hereof, all monies
paid thereafter as admission price to such exhibitions are also declared
to be a public nuisance, as personal property used in conducting and
maintaining a declared public nuisance.
A. Upon and after receiving notice through service of a true and correct
copy of this article and of a true and correct copy of the resolution, an
order of summary abatement provided for in § 39-8 hereof, any and
every person who shall own, legally or equitably, lease, maintain,
manage, conduct or operate a place in the Township of Chadds Ford,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, which is declared to be a public
nuisance as set forth and stated in § 39-6A of this article, is deemed to
be a person who has knowledge of such nuisance for the purpose of this
article, and is, thereafter, responsible for its maintenance, and shall be
liable therefor.
§ 39-5 CHADDS FORD CODE § 39-7
1:40
§ 39-8. Action to be taken by Supervisors.
Upon a specific finding that a public nuisance, as defined in § 39-6 of
this article, exists in the Township of Chadds Ford, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, the Board of Supervisors in applying the provisions of this
article to such nuisance, shall provide for the following resolution:
B. The place and subject matter declared to be a public nuisance under
§ 39-6 shall be abated as provided for herein.
A. Declare the fact that such nuisance exists.
B. Set forth the description or legal description and street address of the
place which constitutes a nuisance.
C. Set forth the facts considered by the Board of Supervisors of Chadds
Ford Township in arriving at its factual determination on which a
nuisance is based.
(1) In the case of a motion-picture film or films, such shall include the
recitation of a particular sexual conduct and acts which the Board
of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township finds are patently
offensive, and the basis for the finding by the Board of Supervisors,
that:
(a) Such films are publicly exhibited the course of business; or that
(b) Such film is publicly or repeatedly exhibited, or held for such
exhibition at the place declared to be a nuisance.
D. Order all persons described in § 39-7A hereof to summarily abate such
public nuisance within 24 hours of service of such order by terminating
the exhibition of such lewd film or films, or causing the same to be
terminated, then to notify the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of
Chadds Ford Township by sworn affidavit as ordered by the action of
the Township of Chadds Ford in such resolution.
E. Order the Township Solicitor to proceed as directed in § 39-9 of this
article, and do all things necessary to abate such public nuisance
through judicial proceedings and to conclude such proceedings as
expeditiously as is permissible under the law, including requesting the
court to advance such proceedings on the calendar of the court.
F. Inform and give notice to persons designated in § 39-7A that:
(1) The Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township, Delaware
County, Pennsylvania, has determined that a public nuisance
presently exists at such place and address subject to court
confirmation, and that, under § 39-7A of said article, they are
deemed to have knowledge thereof and are responsible therefor.
(2) In the event the order of the Township of Chadds Ford is not
complied with within 24 hours, the Township of Chadds Ford has
§ 39-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-8
1:41
§ 39-9. Action to be taken by Township Solicitor.
Upon a specific finding by resolution of the Township of Chadds Ford of
the fact that a public nuisance exists at a particular location, the Township
Solicitor shall:
ordered the Township Solicitor, provided for under § 39-9 hereof,
to commence necessary legal proceedings naming such persons
as defendants in a civil action to abate the same judicially under
§ 39-8 of this article, and that the costs of abatement of such
civil abatement action filed, including investigative costs, court
costs, attorneys' fees and other expenses, may be made a special
assessment against the parcel of land upon which such nuisance
is being maintained and, upon their determination in such court
action, will, by separate legal procedure, be made a lien against
such property and a personal obligation against any person,
persons, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or other entity
deemed to be in violation of this article.
(3) All lewd motion-picture films being used in conducting or
maintaining such public nuisance are considered to be contraband
and the subject of forfeiture; and
(4) From and after service on the place or its manager or acting
manager, or person then in charge of such place, by a certified copy
of this article and a certified copy of such resolution, any and all
monies paid as admission price to or for the exhibition or
exhibitions of such lewd motion-picture films are considered to be a
public nuisance, as personal property used in conducting and
maintaining such nuisance, and that a forfeiture of the same will be
requested in the judicial proceedings required herein.
G. Order that a true and correct copy of said resolution and a true and
correct copy of this article be delivered forthwith in any manner
normally used to effectuate personal service of process to all persons of
record having any legal or equitable interest in the real property, and to
the regular or acting manager or persons in charge of the place therein
declared to be a public nuisance.
A. Not later than five days after passage of said resolution, commence
legal proceedings by the filing of a civil action seeking the following
relief:
(1) A declaratory judgment or an order that the matter named by the
Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township is lewd, as defined herein.
(2) A declaratory judgment or an order that the matter found to be
lewd is or are public nuisances per se under this article and such
resolution.
§ 39-8 CHADDS FORD CODE § 39-9
1:42
§ 39-10. Violations and penalties.15
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District
Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day
or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
(3) A declaratory judgment or an order that each place named by the
Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township is a public nuisance under
this article and such resolution.
(4) An accounting of all monies paid as admission price to or for the
exhibition or exhibitions of such lewd motion-picture films, from
and after the time the persons maintaining said nuisance receive a
copy of the resolution of the Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford
Township that a public nuisance exists, and a judgment that such
monies are a public nuisance.
(5) An order that all admission price monies or valuable consideration
received and enumerated and the court-ordered accounting be
forfeited to the general fund of the Township of Chadds Ford as
contraband, or as property belonging to the Township of Chadds
Ford.
(6) An injunction enjoining and restraining all persons maintaining
such nuisance from exhibiting in public the named lewd films at any
time in the future in the Township of Chadds Ford, and such other
injunctive relief as the court may order.
(7) An order that all positive prints of the named lewd film, or copies or
reproductions thereof, be forfeited as contraband under this
article.
(8) Judgment for the Township of Chadds Ford for all costs therein
expended, including investigative costs, court costs, reasonable
attorneys' fees, and such other expenses as provided for herein.
(9) All other relief as the court may deem proper.
15.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 39-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-10
1:43

ARTICLE III
Pornography
[Adopted 12-6-1995 by Ord. No. 88]
§ 39-11. Authority and purpose.
Pursuant to the authority granted in the Second Class Township Code16 to
prohibit nuisances; to promote the health, cleanliness, comfort and safety
of the citizens of Chadds Ford Township and the authority of political
subdivisions of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to enact local
ordinances to regulate, inter alia, the sale, distribution, display and
exhibition of and activities concerning obscene and other sexual material
as provided for in 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903(k) and as upheld by the United
States District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, in Brown
v. Pornography Commission of Lower Southampton Township, 620 F.Supp
1199 (1985), the Township of Chadds Ford enacts the following article.
§ 39-12. Offenses defined.
No person, knowing the obscene character of the materials or performances
involved, shall, within the Township of Chadds Ford:
A. Display or cause or permit the display of any explicit sexual materials as
defined in § 39-14A in or on any window, showcase, newsstand, display
rack, billboard, display board, viewing screen, motion-picture screen,
marquee or similar place in such manner that the display is visible from
any public street, highway, sidewalk, transportation facility or other
public thoroughfare, or in any business or commercial establishment
where minors, as a part of the general public or otherwise, are or will
probably be exposed to view all or any part of such materials;
B. Sell, lend, distribute, exhibit, give away or show any obscene materials
to any person 18 years of age or older or offer to sell, lend, distribute,
exhibit or give away or show, or have in his possession with intent to
sell, lend, distribute, exhibit or give away or show, any obscene
materials to any person 18 years of age or older, or knowingly advertise
any obscene materials in any manner;
C. Design, copy, draw, photograph, print, utter, publish or in any manner
manufacture or prepare any obscene materials;
D. Write, print, publish, utter or cause to be written, printed, published or
uttered any advertisement or notice of any kind giving information,
directly or indirectly, stating or purporting to state where, how, from
whom, or by what means any obscene materials can be purchased,
obtained or had;
E. Produce, present or direct any obscene performance or participate in a
portion thereof that is obscene or that contributes to its obscenity; or
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 39-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-12
1:45
§ 39-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given to them in this section:
COMMUNITY — For the purpose of applying the “contemporary community
standards” in this article, “community” means the state.
KNOWING — As used in § 39-12, “knowing” means having general
knowledge of, or reason to know or a belief or ground for belief which
warrants further inspection or inquiry of, the character and content of any
material or performance described therein which is reasonably susceptible
of examination by the person charged with violation of this article.
MATERIAL — Any literature, including any book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, storypaper, bumper sticker, comic book or writing; any figure,
visual representation, or image, including any drawing, photograph,
picture, videotape or motion picture.
NUDE — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area
or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or showing the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below
the top of the nipple.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance, if:
PERFORMANCE — Any play, dance or other live exhibition performed
before an audience.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — In a sexual context, flagellation or torture
by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments, a mask or in
a bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of one who is nude or so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
sexual intercourse, anal or oral sodomy and sexual bestiality; and patently
offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory
functions, sadomasochistic abuse and lewd exhibitions of the genitals.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Any conveyance, premises or place used
for or in connection with public passenger transportation, whether by air,
F. Hire, employ, use or permit any minor child to do or assist in doing any
act or thing mentioned in this section.
The average person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest;
A.
The subject matter depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct of a type described in this article; and
B.
The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, educational or scientific value.
C.
§ 39-12 CHADDS FORD CODE § 39-13
1:46
rail, motor vehicle or any other method, including aircraft, watercraft,
railroad cars, buses, and air, boat, railroad and bus terminals and stations.
§ 39-14. Dissemination to minors.
A. No person shall knowingly disseminate, by sale, loan, or otherwise,
explicit sexual materials to a minor. “Explicit sexual materials,” as used
in this section, means materials which are obscene, or:
(1) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture film,
video tape or similar visual representation or image of a person or
portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or
sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or
(2) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however
reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter
enumerated in Subsection A(1), or explicit and detailed verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual
conduct, or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is
harmful to minors.
B. Admitting minor to show. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly
to exhibit for monetary consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to
a minor an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a minor for a
monetary consideration to premises whereon there is exhibited a
motion-picture show or other presentation or performance which, in
whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct, or sadomasochistic
abuse and which is harmful to minors, except that the foregoing shall
not apply to any minor accompanied by his parent.
C. Definitions. As used in Subsections A and B of this section, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HARMFUL TO MINORS — That quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse, when it:
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a
belief or ground for belief, which warrants further inspection or inquiry
of both:
Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful, or morbid
interest of minors; and
(1)
Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community
as a whole with respect to what is suitable materials for minors;
and
(2)
Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political,
educational or scientific value for minors.
(3)
§ 39-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-14
1:47
§ 39-15. Requiring sale as condition of business dealings.
No person shall knowingly require any distributor or retail seller as a
condition to sale or delivery for resale or consignment of any literature,
book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, storypaper, paper, comic book,
writing, drawing, photograph, video tape, figure or image, or any written
or printed matter, or any article or instrument to purchase or take by
consignment for purposes of sale, resale or distribution any obscene
literature, book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, storypaper, paper, comic
book, writing, drawing, photograph, video tape, figure or image, or any
written or printed matter of an obscene nature or any article or instrument
of an obscene nature.
§ 39-16. Exemption.
Nothing in this article shall apply to any recognized historical society or
museum accorded charitable status by the federal government, any county,
city, borough, township or town library, any public library, any library of any
school, college or university or any archive or library under the supervision
and control of the commonwealth or a political subdivision.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing
of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is clad in undergarments, a mask or in bizarre costume
or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual
intercourse, sexual bestiality or physical contact with a person's clothed
or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a
female, breast.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female
genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
The character and content of any material or performance
described herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by
the person charged with violation of this article; and
(1)
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake
shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the person
charged with violation of this article made a reasonable bona fide
attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
(2)
§ 39-14 CHADDS FORD CODE § 39-17
1:48
§ 39-17. Violations and penalties.17
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial District
Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may
be sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day
or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this article that is
violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 39-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-17
1:49

ARTICLE IV
Establishments Serving Alcoholic Beverages
[Adopted 12-6-1995 by Ord. No. 89; amended in its entirety at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 39-18. Findings.
A. Certain businesses or commercial establishments located in the
Township of Chadds Ford dealing in alcoholic beverages provide adult
entertainment for their patrons, including but not limited to nude or
nearly nude dancing, and permit certain sexual conduct.
B. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Chadds Ford determines
that such activities and conduct in establishments dealing in alcoholic
beverages contribute to undesirable behavior and create disturbances
that are injurious to the citizens of the Township of Chadds Ford.
C. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Chadds Ford believes that
this article is necessary:
(1) To enhance the quality of life within the Township;
(2) To promote a climate conducive to the harmonious growth and
development of the Township and to the soundness of the economic
base of the Township;
(3) To preserve and stabilize the Township's neighborhoods;
(4) To protect property values;
(5) To prevent blight and the deterioration of the Township's
neighborhoods; and
(6) To decrease the incidence of crime, disorderly conduct and other
secondary effects of adult entertainment when occurring in
establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages, which secondary
effects adversely impact on the health, safety and general welfare
concerns of the Township of Chadds Ford.
D. The Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States of
America gives the states, including the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
(the “commonwealth”), broad powers to regulate alcohol and, in such
regulation of alcohol, confers more than the normal state authority over
public health, welfare and morals.
E. The commonwealth's broad powers under the Twenty-First Amendment
to regulate alcohol apply to, inter alia, alcoholic liquors, alcohol and
malt brewed beverages; amending, revising, consolidating and
changing the laws relating thereto; regulating and restricting the
manufacture, purchase, sale, possession, consumption, importation,
transportation, furnishing, holding in bond, holding in storage, traffic in
and use of alcoholic liquors, alcoholic and malt brewed beverages and
§ 39-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-18
1:51
§ 39-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOL — Ethyl alcohol of any degree of proof, originally produced by
the distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted with
or without water, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall include
synthetic ethyl alcohol but shall not mean nor include ethyl alcohol, whether
or not diluted, that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for
beverage purposes.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE —
the persons engaged or employed therein; and providing for local
option and repealing existing laws.
F. The commonwealth's broad powers under the Twenty-First Amendment
extend equally to establishments that are licensed by the
commonwealth to sell alcoholic beverages and to establishments that
are not licensed by the commonwealth which deal in alcoholic
beverages.
G. The commonwealth has delegated certain of its powers under the
Twenty-First Amendment to municipalities, cities, boroughs,
incorporated towns or townships of this commonwealth, including the
Township of Chadds Ford.
H. Among the certain powers of the commonwealth under the Twenty-First
Amendment delegated to the Township of Chadds Ford are the powers
to:
(1) Prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages within Township limits
pursuant to a vote of the local electorate; and
(2) Prohibit any and all amusements in establishments licensed by the
commonwealth to sell alcoholic beverages.
I. The commonwealth's power of prohibition under the Twenty-First
Amendment that has been delegated to the Township of Chadds Ford
includes the lesser power to regulate.
J. Nothing in the commonwealth's Liquor Code, 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.,
shall be construed to preempt the right of the Township of Chadds Ford
to enforce any local ordinances and codes dealing with health and
welfare issues.
Any liquor, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented or other alcoholic
beverage or combination of liquors and mixed liquor, a part of which
is spirituous, vinous, fermented or otherwise alcoholic, including all
drinks or drinkable liquids, preparations or mixtures, and reused,
recovered or redistilled denatured alcohol usable or taxable for
A.
§ 39-18 CHADDS FORD CODE § 39-19
1:52
ESTABLISHMENTS DEALING IN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any
business or commercial establishment (whether open to the public at large
or where entrance is limited by cover charge or membership requirement),
including those licensed by the commonwealth for sale and/or service of
alcoholic beverages, and any bottle club; hotel; motel; restaurant;
nightclub; country club; cabaret; meeting facility utilized by any religious,
social, fraternal or similar organization; business or commercial
establishment where a product or article is sold, dispensed, served or
provided with the knowledge, actual or implied, that the same will be
or is intended to be mixed, combined with or drunk in connection or
combination with an alcoholic beverage on the premises of said business or
commercial establishment; or business or commercial establishment where
the consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted. A private residence,
whether permanent or temporary in nature, is not an establishment dealing
in alcoholic beverages.
PERSON — A natural person, association or corporation. Whenever used
in a clause prescribing or imposing a fine, imprisonment or both, the
term “person,” as applied to an association, shall mean the partners or
members thereof and, as applied to a corporation, shall mean the officers
thereof, except as to incorporated clubs, the term “person” shall mean such
individual or individuals who, under the bylaws of such club, shall have
jurisdiction over the possession and sale of alcoholic beverages therein.
§ 39-20. Prohibited acts.
beverage purposes which contains more than 1/2 of 1% alcohol by
volume.
Any malt or brewed beverage, beer, lager beer, ale, porter or similar
fermented malt beverage, containing 1/2 of 1% or more alcohol by
volume, by whatever name such beverage may be called.
B.
Any whiskey or alcoholic distillate from a fermented mash of grain,
capable of being used for beverage purposes.
C.
A. No person shall expose to public view his or her genitals, including,
without limitation, the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, even if covered; pubic area; vulva; anus; anal cleft or cleavage;
buttocks; or any simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in
alcoholic beverages. For purposes of this subsection, the term
“buttocks” shall include the area at the rear of the body which lies
between two imaginary lines running parallel to the ground when a
person is standing, the first or top such line drawn at the top of the
cleavage of the nates (i.e., the prominence formed by the muscles
running from the back of the hip to the back of the leg) and the second
or bottom line drawn at the lowest visible point of this cleavage or the
lowest point of the curvature of the fleshy protuberance, whichever is
lower, and between two imaginary lines on each side of the body, which
lines are perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines
described above and which perpendicular lines are drawn through the
§ 39-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-20
1:53
point at which each nate meets the outer side of each leg. This article
would be violated, therefore, if any portion of this area is visible from
any vantage point.
B. No female shall expose to public view any portion of the breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola, at its highest point, or
simulation thereof, in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages.
This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breast but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the
human breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, opaque leotard,
bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided that the areola is not
exposed or visible in whole or in part.
C. No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing
in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any person to expose to
public view his or her genitals, including, without limitation, the human
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered; pubic area;
vulva; anus; anal cleft or cleavage; buttocks, as defined in Subsection A
hereinabove; or any simulation thereof within the establishment
dealing in alcoholic beverages.
D. No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing
in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any female person to
expose to public view any portion of her breasts, as defined in
Subsection B hereinabove, or any simulation thereof within the
establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages.
E. No person shall engage in and no person maintaining, owning or
operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer
or permit any sexual intercourse; masturbation; sodomy; bestiality; oral
copulation; flagellation; sexual act which is prohibited by law; the
touching, caressing or fondling of the female breast, as that term is
defined in Subsection B hereinabove, buttocks, as that term is defined
in Subsection A hereinabove, anus or genitals, including, without
limitation, the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
covered; or the simulation thereof within an establishment dealing in
alcoholic beverages.
F. No person shall cause and no person maintaining, owning or operating
an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit
the exposition or availability of any graphic presentation, including
photographs, pictures or the projection of film, which depicts human
genitals, including, without limitation, the human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if covered; pubic area; vulva; anus; anal
cleft or cleavage; buttocks, as that term is defined in Subsection A
hereinabove; female breast, as that term is defined in Subsection B
hereinabove; sexual intercourse; masturbation; sodomy; bestiality; oral
copulation; flagellation; any sexual act prohibited by law; the touching,
caressing or fondling of the female breast, as that term is defined in
Subsection B hereinabove, buttocks, as that term is defined in
Subsection A hereinabove, anus or genitals, including, without
§ 39-20 CHADDS FORD CODE § 39-20
1:54
§ 39-21. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
limitation, the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if covered; scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are
employed to depict or drawings are employed to portray any of the
prohibited activities described in Subsections A through F, inclusive,
hereinabove; or any simulation thereof within any establishment
dealing in alcoholic beverages.
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial
District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense, and each section of this article that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense.18
B. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in this article.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 39-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-21
1:55
Chapter 45
ANIMALS
§ 45-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ANIMAL — Wild or domesticated animal(s) of all species, including dogs,
cats and other household pets.
OWNER — When applied to an animal, includes any person or persons
having a right of property in such animal; and/or any person or persons who
keeps or harbors such animal and/or has cared for it; and/or any person or
persons who permits such animal to be on or about any premises owned
and/or occupied by him.
RUN AT LARGE or RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway,
street, alley, park, or any other public land, or upon property of another
person other than the owner, and not being accompanied by or under the
control of the owner or any other person having custody of said animal.
§ 45-2. Animal control officers: appointment and powers.
One or more animal control officer(s) may be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors or hired pursuant to a contract approved by the Board of
Supervisors to serve at the pleasure of the Board or for the term of said
contract. Such animal control officer(s) along with any police officer, as
defined in the Pennsylvania Dog Law, 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq., shall have
concurrent responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter and of the
Pennsylvania Dog Law, provided that the animal control officer shall not
have the power to make arrests under said Act of Assembly or any other Act
of Assembly or any ordinance of Chadds Ford Township.
§ 45-3. Running at large prohibited.
§ 45-4. Animal control procedures.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow or permit such
animal to run at large in Chadds Ford Township.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow or permit such
animal to leave and/or deposit waste, including urine and/or feces, from
such animal on any property not owned by the owner of such animal,
unless the owner of such animal has permission from the property
owner for such leaving and/or depositing of waste.
A. Call to duty. The animal control officer(s) shall be available for call 24
hours per day and may be called to duty at the discretion of any
member of the Board of Supervisors, the Code Enforcement Officer, or
any Chadds Ford resident.
§ 39-21 CHADDS FORD CODE § 45-4
1:56
§ 45-5. Fees for animal control officer.
B. Transportation of animals. If it is determined that the transportation of
an animal is necessary, the animal control officer(s) shall have the
authority to transport the animal or have said animal transported.
C. Seizure of animals. The animal control officer may seize any animal
found running at large and cause that animal to be detained or
otherwise dealt with as authorized by the Pennsylvania Dog Law.
D. Injured or dead animals. Upon the report of an injured or dead animal
in Chadds Ford Township, an animal control officer may be notified and
directed to report to the scene and assume responsibility for the animal.
Dead animals located on Township property, where the owner of the
animal is unavailable, may be removed by the animal control officer.
PennDOT may be notified to remove dead animals from state roadways.
E. Dangerous or vicious animals. Upon report of a animal that has either
bitten another person or has threatened another person while running
at large, an animal control officer may be requested to report to the
scene by any member of the Board of Supervisors, the Code
Enforcement Officer, or any Chadds Ford Township resident. If the
owner of the animal is unavailable or unknown, the animal control
officer may use a tranquilizer gun or other approved method to subdue
the animal and/or take appropriate action to protect the safety of
persons who were bitten or threatened. An animal determined to be
dangerous under Section 502-A of the Pennsylvania Dog Law, 3 P.S.
§ 459-502A, shall be restrained or otherwise kept or disposed of in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Dog Law. Animals may be killed only
in accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Dog Law.
F. Release to SPCA or other licensed kennel. When any animal is detained
by an animal control officer, said animal will be released to an SPCA or
other licensed kennel, if possible, and the animal control officer must
inform the SPCA or licensed kennel personnel of the specific period of
time for which the animal is to be held and to whom the animal is to be
released.
G. Wild animals. For complaints involving wild animals and protected
animals, an animal control officer may be notified to respond to the
request or complaint unless the animal control officer determines that a
state game official is better suited to respond to the complaint, and the
animal control officer notifies such an official of the same.
H. An animal control officer may perform such other duties which he is
authorized to perform pursuant to the Pennsylvania Dog Law.
A. The animal control officer is authorized to charge a fee to the party
requesting his/her call to duty based on a schedule that has been
approved by the Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township.
§ 45-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-5
1:57
§ 45-6. Violations and penalties.
The first two times an owner of an animal is issued a citation and is found to
have violated the provisions of this chapter, the owner of such animal shall
pay a fine in an amount up to $100 to Chadds Ford Township as well as any
fees and/or costs incurred by the Township or its animal control officer for
responding to the request or complaint and to keep the animal in a kennel
or other structure, for pickup and transporting the animal to the Delaware
County SPCA or other facility, and for enforcement proceedings. For each
and every violation of this chapter other than for the first two times an
animal is seized for running at large or for any other reason as provided in
the chapter, the owner of the animal involved shall, upon conviction by the
Magisterial District Judge, be guilty of a summary offense and subject to a
fine of not more than $1,000; and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed
90 days.
Chapter 50
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
110.
§ 50-1. Building numbering system adopted.
The Comprehensive Building Renumbering List dated August 7, 2002,
prepared by Kelly Engineers, and the Comprehensive Building
B. If the requester is a Supervisor of Chadds Ford Township or its Code
Enforcement Officer, the fee of the animal control officer will be paid by
Chadds Ford Township.
C. If the requester is a resident of Chadds Ford Township, the resident will
be responsible for paying the fee of the animal control officer for the
requested service.
D. The animal control officer will advise the requester of what the fee to
respond will be prior to performing the requested service.
E. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, however, if the animal
control officer issues a citation to an owner of an animal as a result of
the requested service, this chapter authorizes the judge conducting the
hearing on the citation to, at his discretion and in addition to any other
penalties, fines and/or costs, order the owner of the animal to pay to the
animal control officer the animal control officer's call-to-duty fee for
such service, in which case the animal control officer will reimburse the
requester of such service for such amount.
§ 45-5 CHADDS FORD CODE § 50-1
1:58
Renumbering Plan dated September 12, 1997, last revised August 7, 2002,
copies of which are attached hereto and made a part hereof,19 are hereby
approved and adopted.
§ 50-2. Responsibility for numbering buildings.
On or after the passage and approval of this chapter, it shall be the duty
of each and every owner, trustee, lessee, agent and occupant of each and
every house, building or other structure in Chadds Ford Township to cause
the same to be numbered in accordance with this chapter, and the List and
Plan hereby adopted and approved.
§ 50-3. Notices of violations.20
The Township Board or any officer or employee of the Township designated
thereby for the purpose is hereby authorized to give written notice, by
personal service or by United States mail, to the owner or occupant, as
the case may be, of any premises whereupon the address identification
number at the premises is not posted as required by the provisions of this
chapter, directing and requiring such owner or occupant to post the address
identification number so as to conform to the requirements of this chapter
within 15 days after issuance of such notice. In case any owner, owners or
occupants shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice within the
period of time stated herein, the Township authorities may post a street
number on the premises and collect the cost thereof, together with any
additional penalty authorized by law, from such owner, owners or occupant
in the manner provided by law.
§ 50-4. Violations and penalties.21
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment
shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by
the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
Chapter 53
BURNING, OPEN
19.Editor's Note: Said documents are on file in the Township offices.
20.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
21.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 50-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-1
1:59
§ 53-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate burning in the R-1 and R-2 Zoning
Districts; to restrict the location and types of material to be burned; and to
establish regulations governing outdoor fires.
§ 53-2. Burning prohibitions.
§ 53-3. Regulations for permitted burning.
§ 53-4. Temporary burning bans.
The Board of Supervisors may, by public notice, prohibit open burning of
any kind during unsafe periods caused by drought, dry conditions, wind, or
any other unfavorable condition.
A. No person or persons shall set or maintain any fire upon any public
street, sidewalk, right-of-way, alley or public ground in the Township of
Chadds Ford, or burn or cause to be burned thereon any paper, boxes,
rubbish or other material or substance of any kind.
B. Burning household trash, garbage, and similar refuse is prohibited.
C. Burning of treated lumber and construction debris is prohibited.
D. Open burning that causes smoke or ash to annoy adjoining residential
property owners is prohibited. In addition, open burning on January 1,
Easter, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve
and Christmas Day is prohibited.
A. Open burning, when not prohibited by this chapter, shall be permitted
from sunrise to sunset. Open burning of any kind is prohibited from
sunset to sunrise and any open fires burning during the period from
sunrise to sunset shall either be burned out or extinguished by sunset.
B. Fire extinguishing materials, including at least water adequate to
control the fire, must be present and accessible by the person or
persons conducting the open burning at all times during the time the
open burning is occurring. The person or persons conducting the open
burning must be present and may not leave the fire unattended until the
fire is burned out or extinguished.
C. Open burning is permitted herein and may occur a maximum of 12 days
a year and no more than once per calendar month on any one property.
D. No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit burning of
appropriate fuels in residential fireplaces (indoor or outdoor),
barbecues, grills, small fires for cooking, or small recreational "camp
fires."
§ 53-1 CHADDS FORD CODE § 53-5
1:60
§ 53-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply
with any order issued pursuant to any section hereof shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $500 for the first offense
and $1,000 for each subsequent offense. Each day a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 55
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
§ 55-1. Granting of franchises; terms and conditions.
In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the terms,
conditions and reservations hereinafter specified, the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Chadds Ford, hereinafter referred to as "Township,"
grants a nonexclusive franchise to such applicants as shall be designated by
resolution from time to time, hereinafter referred to as "company," to install,
construct, own, operate and maintain a community antenna cable television
system, said entire system to have two-way transmission capabilities as
hereinafter set forth, and to erect, maintain and operate television
transmission and distribution facilities, and additions thereto, in, under,
over, along, across and upon the streets, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys,
bridges and other public places in the Township of Chadds Ford, Delaware
County, Pennsylvania, for the purpose of the transmission and distribution
of audio and visual impulses and television energy in accordance with
the laws and regulations of the United States of America and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, appropriate agencies, and the Federal
Communications Commission Rules and Regulations, and the ordinances
and regulations of the Township of Chadds Ford now in effect or hereafter
enacted. The company shall observe the following conditions and terms:
A. No poles or wires shall be erected, constructed or maintained by the
company along public highways which contain neither aerial telephone
nor aerial electric facilities or from which both aerial telephone and
aerial electric facilities are hereafter removed. Where all other utilities
are underground, company's cable facilities shall be placed
underground.
B. Where the wires and other aerial facilities of the company are erected,
constructed, maintained or operated along or over public highways
which contain an aerial electric or telephone pole line or a joint use
electric and telephone pole line, the wires and other facilities of the
company shall be supported by attachment to such pole line; but
nothing in this paragraph shall relieve the company of the duty of
securing the consent of such attachment of the owner of such pole line.
C. Poles, ducts and other facilities of the company shall be so erected,
constructed and maintained as not to interfere with the traffic over the
§ 53-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-1
1:61
public highways. No new poles shall be erected without prior approval
of the Township, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. No
new poles of the company shall be located upon private property and
no damage shall be inflicted to private property without the knowledge
and consent of the private property owner.
D. Poles, lines, cables, ducts and other facilities of the company shall be
removed by the company when no longer used or useful for their
intended purpose or whenever required by the Township in connection
with any public improvements or other reasonable cause at company's
expense.
E. Any public highways, sidewalks, and abutting property disturbed or
damaged in the erection, construction, maintenance, or operation of the
facilities of the company shall be promptly repaired by the company to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Township Engineer, but in no case
less than 10 days from disturbance to final repair.
F. The company's rights and privileges shall be subordinated to any prior
lawful use or occupancy of the streets or other public property and shall
be so exercised as not to interfere with existing improvements or with
new improvements the Township may deem proper to make, or to
hinder or obstruct the lawful use of the streets, alleys, bridges, or other
public property. In the event any equipment or facilities of company
shall so interfere with any such existing improvement or improvement
intended to be made by the Township, company shall, upon notice from
Township, forthwith relocate said equipment and facilities at company's
expense so as to eliminate said interference.
G. Construction and maintenance of the transmission distribution system
shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical
Safety Code, Sixth Edition, or any amendments or revisions thereof, and
"The Standards and Practice Code" of the National Cable Television
Association, and in compliance with any applicable rules, regulations or
orders now in effect or hereafter issued by any federal or state
commission or any other public authority having jurisdiction.
H. All installations of equipment shall be durable and of a permanent
nature, and installed in accordance with good engineering practices as
outlined by the National Bureau of Standards, American Institute of
Electrical Engineers and American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
and "The Standards and Practice Code" of the National Cable Television
Association. The company shall comply with all federal and state laws
and ordinances and regulations of the Township now existing or
hereafter enacted, and so as not to interfere with the rights of the
public or individual property owners and so as not to unduly interfere
with the rights of the public during the construction, repair or removal
of its equipment.
I. In the installation of its equipment and the maintenance thereof, and in
the operation of its business, the company shall comply with all
§ 55-1 CHADDS FORD CODE § 55-1
1:62
§ 55-2. Commencement of work.
The company shall commence installation of its equipment and facilities
within the Township within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter, and
shall substantially complete the installation of its equipment and facilities
within the Township within 12 months thereafter. An energized trunk cable
shall be extended to at least 20% of the franchised area within four months
of the effective date of this chapter, and shall be extended to an additional
20% of the franchised area within each two-month period thereafter, with
the entire franchised area being so extended to all Township residents
within 12 months of the effective date of this chapter. There shall be no
charge for cable installation for the first 250 feet from the nearest utility
access. Any line in excess of 250 feet shall be at company's cost.
§ 55-3. Term.
The duration of the rights, privileges, and authorities hereby granted shall
be 15 years from the date of adoption of this chapter. The company shall
have the option of extending this franchise, for an additional period of
five years upon application by the company not later than three years
prior to the expiration date of the initial fifteen-year franchise, unless the
Township shall have given to the company at least three years' written
notice of its intent not to renew this franchise. The renewal of this franchise
is specifically conditioned upon review and approval by the Township, at
a public proceeding, of the company's qualifications and performance of
the future cable-related Township needs and interests, the adequacy of the
franchise provisions, and its consistency with the rules and regulations of
the Federal Communications Commission, and any other regulatory body.
§ 55-4. Acceptance of franchise.
This franchise is conditioned and contingent upon the company filing with
the Township its unconditional acceptance of this franchise as set forth in
this chapter and the company's promise to comply with and abide by all
the provisions, terms and conditions of this chapter, and the execution by
the company of a franchise agreement acceptable to the Township. Such
acceptance and promise and agreement shall be in writing duly executed
and sworn to by and on behalf of the company before a notary public or
other officer authorized by law to administer oaths and delivered to the
Secretary of the Township within 30 days after passage of this chapter.
requirements of the Township ordinances, resolutions, rules, and
regulations heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. The
Township shall have the right, at the expense of the company, to employ
experts of its selection to determine the company's compliance with the
installation and maintenance requirements of this chapter.
J. The granting of the franchise by this chapter does not eliminate the
necessity for the company to secure any other franchise, license or
permit which may be required by law, or ordinance or regulation.
§ 55-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-5
1:63
§ 55-5. Liability and indemnification.
A. The company shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the Township,
its agents, officers, servants and employees from and against any and
all costs, expenses (including reasonable counsel fees), liabilities,
losses, damages, suits, actions, fines, penalties, claims or demands of
any kind asserted by or on behalf of any person or governmental agency
or authority arising out of or in any way connected with any of the
following, and the Township, its agents, servants, officers and
employees shall not be liable to the company on account of any of the
following:
(1) Any failure by the company to abide by, keep, or perform any of the
terms, conditions or provisions of this franchise; or
(2) Any failure by the company to comply with any statutes,
ordinances, regulations, or orders of any governmental authority;
or
(3) Any bodily injury (including death) or property damage arising out
of the installation, operation or maintenance of the equipment or
the facilities of the company, or out of the conduct of its community
antenna cable television system; or
(4) Any act or activity relating to the granting of this franchise to the
company or to the operations conducted thereunder; or
(5) The granting of this franchise.
B. In connection with any suit or other proceeding in which the Township,
its agents, servants, officers and employees shall be made a part,
involving this franchise or any act, omission or activity conducted there
under or relating thereto and which may have any direct or indirect
affect upon the Township, its agents, servants and employees, the
company upon the written request of the Township, shall appear in and
defend such suit on behalf of the Township, its agents, servants and
employees and shall bear all of the costs and expenses relating thereto
and shall pay any verdict, or judgment rendered or settlement arrived
at.
C. Insurance.
(1) The company shall provide and continuously maintain throughout
the term of this franchise and any renewals thereof general liability
insurance insuring the Township and the company with regard to
all liabilities and contingencies mentioned in Subsection A herein
in the minimum amounts of:
(a) For bodily injury or death to any one person: $500,000;
(b) For personal injury in any one single accident: $500,000;
(c) Property damage for any one single accident: $200,000.
§ 55-5 CHADDS FORD CODE § 55-5
1:64
§ 55-6. Operation and maintenance of system.
(2) Excess liability coverage, either straight excess or umbrella excess,
covering excess of Subsection C(1)(a), (b) and (c) above, to be
maintained in force so that the total coverage available under each
of the aforementioned subsections, including this subsection, is not
less than $1,000,000 for any one occurrence and $1,000,000 in the
aggregate per annum for personal injury, and $1,000,000 for any
one occurrence and $1,000,000 in the aggregate per annum for
property damage and $1,000,000 for any one occurrence and
$1,000,000 in the aggregate per annum for copyright infringement.
(3) All such policies shall provide, to the extent obtainable, that
coverage shall not be reduced or cancelled without thirty (30) days'
prior written notice by certified mail to the Township.
(4) The Township shall have the right, from time to time, to employ an
insurance consultant. The policies of insurance required by this
§ 53-5 shall be in such amounts and contain such provisions as
comply with the requirements of § 53-5 or as shall have been
recommended in writing by the insurance consultant, if higher and
ordered by resolution adopted by Township.
D. The company shall maintain throughout the term of this franchise a
performance bond in favor of the Township, with a good and sufficient
surety approved by the Township, in the sum of $50,000 conditioned
upon the company's well and truly performing its several obligations as
set forth in this franchise, and providing that in the event of any failure
by the company to so perform, the Township may proceed against the
surety either to obtain proper performance of such obligations of the
company or to be recompensed for the failure of the company to render
such proper performance.
E. The insurance policies and bond obtained by the company in
compliance with this section shall be issued by responsible insurance or
fidelity bonding companies, acceptable to the Township and any
Township insurance consultant, qualified to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and qualified under the laws of the
commonwealth to assume risks covered by such policies or bond, and
shall be nonassessable, and must be approved by the Township, which
approval shall not unreasonably be withheld. Such insurance policies
and bond shall be filed and maintained with the Township during the
term of this franchise.
F. Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bond accepted by the
Township pursuant thereto, shall be construed as excusing faithful
performance by the company or as otherwise limiting the liability of the
company under its franchise.
A. The company shall so operate its equipment and facilities as to produce
a television picture that is undistorted, free from ghost images and
§ 55-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-6
1:65
§ 55-7. Special service.
The company agrees and, upon request of the Township or the institution
involved, shall extend without charge one primary or standard line and
monthly service to each noncommercial public, governmental and
educational entity as are requested by the Township in the Township. Such
service shall consist of one television outlet within the building or in the
case of a group of buildings, within the main building of the group,
providing service to one television receiver. The company shall not be
required to install additional outlets at its expense but shall at the request
of the Township install such additional outlets or other facilities as may
be requested, and the Township or the institution involved shall pay the
company on a time and material basis for such additional installation and
shall pay the company in accordance with its schedule of rates as set forth
in this chapter for such additional service.
§ 55-8. Safety requirements.
accompanied with proper sound, and as good as the state of the art
permits. The company shall transmit signals of adequate strength to
produce said pictures and sound at all home outlets without interfering
with other electrical or electronic systems or equipment or with
television reception in existence in the area.
B. The company shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and
interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall
occur during minimum use of the system. Upon receipt of a complaint of
the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and similar matters, the
company shall promptly investigate such complaints. Where possible,
the company shall investigate such complaints within 24 hours of their
receipt. Resolution of such service complaints shall be made promptly.
For the purpose of investigation and resolution of regular service
complaints, the company shall maintain an agent or a local business
office within the Township and in operation during normal business
hours. In addition, the company shall maintain a toll-free business
telephone for the receipt of complaints and requests for repairs or
adjustment.
A. In the use and occupation of the surfaces, subsurfaces, space above,
below and adjoining the streets, public ways and places of the
Township, the company's equipment and plant and their construction,
operation and maintenance shall be in accordance with the provisions
of the following:
(1) The National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters, Sixth Edition, or any amendments or revisions
thereto;
(2) "The Standards and Practices Code" of the National Cable
Television Association; and
§ 55-6 CHADDS FORD CODE § 55-8
1:66
§ 55-9. New developments.
It shall be the policy of the Township to liberally amend this franchise,
upon application of the company, when necessary to enable the company
to take advantage of any developments in the field of television and radio
signals which will afford it an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently or
economically service its customers; provided, however, that this § 53-9 shall
(3) Such applicable ordinances, codes, laws and regulations of the
Township of Chadds Ford, County of Delaware, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and the United States of America, which are now in
effect or hereafter enacted.
B. Company's equipment and plant shall be kept and maintained in a safe,
suitable and substantial condition and in good order and repair so as
not to endanger the lives or interfere unreasonably with the rights of
persons, or to cause physical damage to property, or to interfere with
improvements the Township may deem proper, or to hinder or obstruct
unnecessarily pedestrian or vehicular traffic on streets, public ways and
places.
C. Where the Township or a public utility serving the Township desires to
make use of the poles or other wire holding structures of the company
but agreement therefor with the company cannot be reached, the
Township may require the company to permit such use for such
consideration and upon such terms as the Township shall determine to
be just and reasonable if it is determined by the Township that the use
would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere
with the company's operations.
D. Company shall, upon not less than 72 hours' advance notice,
temporarily raise, lower, or relocate its wires and cables to permit the
moving of buildings, or any other item of bulk, and the expenses
incurred by company in such raising, lowering or relocation shall be
paid, in advance, by the person or concern requesting the same.
E. The company shall, at its own cost and expense, replace, restore or
repair any private property, street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved
area destroyed or damaged by the company or its agents, employees, or
servants.
F. If at any time during the term of this franchise the Township shall elect
to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public way, or when required by reason of traffic conditions, public
safety, street vibration, freeway and street construction, installation of
sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or any
other type of structure or improvements, when acting in a
governmental or proprietary capacity, the company upon reasonable
notice by the Township shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own
cost and expense.
§ 55-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-9
1:67
not be construed to require the Township to make any amendment or to
prohibit it from unilaterally changing its policy stated herein.
§ 55-10. Removal or abandonment of property of company.
§ 55-11. Failure to perform street work.
The company shall abide by all applicable ordinances of the Township
relating to street and sidewalk work and shall make application
accompanied by the required fees for permits to perform any and all such
work before commencing same. Upon failure of the company to complete
any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter to be done
in any street within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the
Township, the Township may cause such work to be done and the company
shall pay to the Township the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported
by the Township to the company within 30 days after receipt of such
itemized report.
§ 55-12. Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited.
The company shall not, as to rates, charges, service, facilities, rules,
regulations, or in any other respect, make or grant any preference to
advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any prejudice or
disadvantage.
§ 55-13. Assignment or transfer of franchise.
A. In the event that the use of any part or all of the community antenna
cable television system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous
period of 12 months, or that such system or property has been installed
in any street or public places without complying with the requirements
of this franchise, or that the franchise shall have been terminated,
cancelled, or expired for any reason, the company, upon notice, shall
promptly remove from the streets or public places all such property and
poles of such system other than any which the Township may permit to
be abandoned in such place and shall also remove house distribution
cables and connections. In the event of such removal, the company shall
promptly restore the street or other areas from which such property
has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the Township.
B. Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the company shall
promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of
such subscriber upon his request, without charge to the subscriber.
A. The franchise right given to the company is a privilege to be held in
personal trust by the original grantee. It may not be transferred, leased,
assigned, sold, or disposed of as a whole, or in part by forced sale,
merger, consolidation or otherwise, without the prior consent of the
Township expressed by ordinance, and in such event only in accordance
with such conditions as may be therein prescribed. Such consent shall
not be unreasonably withheld.
§ 55-9 CHADDS FORD CODE § 55-13
1:68
§ 55-14. Filing and communications with regulatory agencies.
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the
company to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and
Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission
or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting community
antenna cable television operations authorized pursuant to this franchise,
shall be made available to the Township at the time of filing or receipt.
§ 55-15. Township rights in franchise.
§ 55-16. Charges.
The company's charges for installation of all television cable connections
and services for all cable service shall be as established by the Township
from time to time and specified in written agreement between the Township
and the company, subject to the requirements and limitations, if any,
imposed by any applicable federal statute, rule or regulation.
§ 55-17. Fee to Township.
B. Any transfer attempted by the company in the absence of such consent
shall be ineffective and the right given hereby shall thereby be
rendered null and void.
A. The right is hereby reserved to the Township to adopt, in addition to the
provisions contained herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such
additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the
police power.
B. The Township shall have the right to inspect the books, records, maps,
plans and other like materials of the company at any time during
normal business hours.
C. The Township shall have the right, during the term of this franchise, to
install and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the company any
wire and pole fixtures necessary for a police/fire alarm system or
lighting fixtures or any other proper Township purpose on the condition
that such wire and pole fixtures do not interfere with the community
antenna cable television operation of the company.
A. For the use of the street and other facilities of the Township for the
operation of the community antenna television system and for the
municipal supervision thereof, the company shall pay to the Township
annually during the term hereof that amount of money which is equal to
5% of the gross revenues received by said company and derived from
the operation of the cable system under this franchise. "Gross
revenues" shall mean any and all compensation and other consideration
received by the company from subscribers from the sale of its services
and facilities within the limits of the Township, and shall include the
§ 55-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-17
1:69
§ 55-18. Township's rights of intervention.
The company agrees not to oppose intervention by the Township in any
suit or proceeding to which the company is a party and which may have a
substantial adverse affect on the company's operations within the Township.
§ 55-19. Channels and programs.
The company shall provide a minimum service offering as follows:
original installation charges, reconnection charges, service charges,
and charges for inspection, repair or modification of installations.
B. The company shall file with the Township within 90 days after the
expiration of any fiscal year of the company during the term of this
franchise, a gross revenue report certified by an independent certified
public accountant, in accordance with Statement on Auditing Standards
No. 14 as issued by the Auditing Standards Executive Committee of the
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, showing in
appropriate detail the total gross revenues, as defined herein, of the
company, its successors or assigns, during the preceding fiscal year. It
shall be the duty of the company to pay to the Township within 15 days
after the time for filing such statements the balance of the specified
sum due for the fiscal year covered by such statement. The auditor of
the Township or his authorized agent or other authorized
representative of the Township shall have the authority to examine the
books and records of the company to verify the accuracy of the
payments made hereunder.
C. The company shall file with the Township quarterly reports within 15
days of the end of each quarter, a gross revenue report certified by a
company officer showing in appropriate detail the total gross revenues
as defined herein, of the company, its successors or assigns, during the
preceding quarter. It shall be the duty of the company to pay to the
Township within 15 days after the time for filing such statement a sum
equal to 90% of the fee due the Township for that quarter, and each
successive quarterly fee shall include the 10% not paid the previous
quarter.
A. Channel capacity. Company shall construct a system with a minimum
channel capacity of 35 television channels and shall maintain a plant
having technical capacity for non-voice return communications.
B. Signals to be carried. Company shall carry on its system the signals of
all stations significantly viewed in the Township of Chadds Ford,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, including all local network and
educational VHF stations and local UHF stations, and the signals of no
less than two distant independent commercial stations as well as the
signals of such distant educational stations as may be feasible and
permitted under the rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission.
§ 55-17 CHADDS FORD CODE § 55-19
1:70
§ 55-20. Regulatory action.
§ 55-21. Right of revocation.
C. Access channels. Company shall maintain all access channels as
required by the Federal Communications Commission. As a minimum,
however, unless prohibited by law, the company shall provide separate
public, governmental and educational channels to the Township not to
be shared by others.
D. The company shall not engage in the sale or rental of television or radio
receivers, the furnishing of television or radio receiver repair service,
or the solicitation or referral to particular persons or classes of persons
for such sale, rental or service. The facilities of the company shall not
be constructed or operated so as to necessitate the use of a receiver of a
unique type for optimum reception of signals. However, nothing
contained herein shall be interpreted to prohibit the use of converters
or descramblers on the community antenna television system.
E. Program origination. Company shall conduct program origination cable
casting as required by the Federal Communications Commission.
A. The performance by the company hereunder is subject to the
limitations, restrictions, or requirements now existing or which may
henceforth be imposed by law, rules or order of the Federal
Communications Commission or any other government, board,
commission or authority of any kind.
B. Should the Federal Communications Commission modify or amend its
rules and regulations pursuant to the Act of October 30, 1984, P.L.
98-549 (47 U.S.C. § 521), such modifications or amendments shall be
incorporated into this franchise within one year of the adoption of the
modification or amendment.
A. The Township shall have the right to rescind or revoke the rights herein
granted upon any violation by the company of any of the obligations and
requirements contained herein after written notice by the Township to
the company.
(1) Such written notice to the company shall specify the manner in
which the company is in violation, failure or default with respect to
the franchise.
(2) The notice given by the Township shall give the company a
specified, reasonable amount of time within which to correct
violation, failure or default, but, in no event, shall the time period
be less than 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice to the
company.
B. The Township shall have the right to rescind or revoke the rights herein
granted in the event the company becomes insolvent, unable or
unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt.
§ 55-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-21
1:71
§ 55-22. Implementation of chapter.
The Township and the proper officers of said Township, and the department
and bureaus of the Township, shall issue to the company in the name of the
Township all permits necessary or convenient to evidence the grant of the
franchise herein and to implement the provisions of this chapter.
§ 55-23. Permit application and fees.
Company shall make application to the Township and pay all fees for any
and all street work permits as required by Township ordinances.
§ 55-24. Certification of compliance.
Company shall supply Township annually with a letter signed by the
president of the company certifying compliance with Federal
Communications Commission regulations and with this chapter.
§ 55-25. When effective.
This chapter and the rights granted to company hereunder shall become
effective upon the execution of a written agreement by and between Chadds
Ford Township and the franchisee providing for the implementation of the
provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 59
CONSTRUCTION CODES
C. The company agrees that it does hereby release the Township from any
and all claims the company might have against the Township by reason
of the rescission or revocation of this franchise.
§ 55-21 CHADDS FORD CODE § 55-25
1:72
ARTICLE I
UCC Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 7-1-2004 by Ord. No. 102]
§ 59-1. Election to administer and enforce.
Chadds Ford Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and all
regulations promulgated thereunder.
§ 59-2. Adoption of provisions by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 to
405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the building code of Chadds Ford Township.
§ 59-3. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within Chadds Ford Township
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Board
of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township from time to time by resolution:
§ 59-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Chadds Ford
Township Board of Supervisors in conformity with the requirements of the
relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board
of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
A. By the designation of a Chadds Ford Township employee to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of Chadds Ford Township;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Chadds Ford Township;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of Chadds Ford
Township; and
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 59-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-5
1:73
§ 59-5. Effect on prior ordinances.
§ 59-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by Chadds Ford Township for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be
established by the Board of Supervisors by resolution from time to time.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Chadds Ford Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.22
B. All building code ordinances, regulations and policies of Chadds Ford
Township not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Chadds Ford
Township not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
22.Editor's Note: More restrictive provisions are still in effect as they apply. The Building
Code is on file in the Township offices.
§ 59-5 CHADDS FORD CODE § 59-6
1:74
ARTICLE II
Certificates of Compliance
[Adopted 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 118]
§ 59-7. Certificate required.
Any individual, partnership, corporation, governmental authority, company,
association, trust, joint venture, unincorporated association, or other entity
which owns improved residential or commercial real property situate within
the Township of Chadds Ford and who desires to sell or lease such property,
and said property is located within 150 feet of a Township sewer line, shall
first obtain a certificate of compliance from the Office of Codes Enforcement
of Chadds Ford Township or other official as designated by the Township
and provide a copy of such certificate to the buyer at settlement or to the
tenant at the time of commencement of the lease.
§ 59-8. Components of certificate.
The Township Office of Codes Enforcement or other official as designated
by the Township shall, when appropriate, issue a certificate of compliance
which shall contain the following certifications: a statement by the Office
of Codes Enforcement, designee (SEO), Township Engineer or other official
as designated by the Township that there are no uncorrected violations of
record of any ordinances, codes or regulations of Chadds Ford Township or
Chadds Ford Township Sewer Authority on the property or leasehold.
§ 59-9. Inspection of properties.
§ 59-10. Correction of violations.
Any violations discovered on a property or leasehold as a result of
inspection must be corrected prior to the issuance of any certificate of
compliance. If the seller or landlord of the property cannot correct all
violations found on the property or leasehold, a certificate of compliance
may be issued by the Office of Codes Enforcement or other official as
designated by the Township only if the Township finds that the following
conditions will be sufficient to guarantee further compliance and insure that
A. All properties being sold or leased and which are located within 150
feet of a Township sewer line will be inspected by the Township Office of
Codes Enforcement or other official as designated by the Township to
determine if the property is in compliance with Chapter 95, Sewers, of
the Code of the Township of Chadds Ford and all rules and regulations
of the Township and the Township Sewer Authority relating thereto.
B. Any commercial, residential or agricultural building located within 150
feet of a Township sewer line must connect to the Township sewer
system prior to issuance of the certificate of compliance, regardless of
the condition of the on-lot sewage system.
§ 59-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-10
1:75
no danger to the health and safety of the residents will be posed by the
issuance of a certificate of compliance:
§ 59-11. Fees.23
A fee for the issuance of the certificate of compliance shall be as set from
time to time by resolution in the fee schedule authorized by the Board of
Supervisors and posted in the Chadds Ford Township Municipal Building.
§ 59-12. Application for issuance of certificate.
A. The seller or landlord must place sufficient funds in an escrow account
to cover, in full, the cost of the required improvements and/or repairs.
The amount of the funds required to be deposited in escrow shall be
determined by the Office of Codes Enforcement or other official as
designated by the Township.
B. The buyer or tenant may sign an agreement with the seller by which the
buyer or tenant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Township,
that the buyer or tenant has the financial ability to correct all of the
violations, either by depositing funds in escrow or by some other means
acceptable to the Office of Codes Enforcement or other official as
designated by the Township.
C. All corrections, improvements and repairs must be completed within 30
days from the date of the issuance of the certificate of compliance. An
extension of time within which to complete such repairs, corrections
and improvements may be granted by the Township Board of
Supervisors upon good cause shown. If the required improvements are
not made within the six-month time period, or any extension thereof
granted by the Township Board of Supervisors, the Township will
pursue legal action against the buyer or tenant and will seek therein
recovery of all legal fees incurred by the Township in such proceedings.
A. An application for issuance of a certificate of compliance shall be
submitted to the Office of Codes Enforcement or other official as
designated by the Township at least two weeks prior to the date of
settlement or the commencement of the lease. The application shall
include the name of the seller or landlord and the address of the
property as well as a description of the current and intended uses of the
property or leasehold.
B. The Township will issue the certificate of compliance as soon as
practicable but no later than two weeks after submission of the
application.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 59-10 CHADDS FORD CODE § 59-13
1:76
§ 59-13. Violations and penalties.
Failure of any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or
governmental unit to comply with the regulations of this article may result
in the following penalties:
§ 59-14. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Office of Codes
Enforcement or other official as designated by the Township.
A. Each violation continuing for a separate day after notice by the
Township and each violation of any provision of this article shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation subject to a separate and
additional fine of $1,000; and
B. Any person or entity who violates or permits the violation of any
provision of this article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by Chadds Ford Township, pay the
fine prescribed by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney fees, incurred by Chadds Ford Township.
§ 59-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 59-14
1:77
Chapter 73
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 89.
§ 73-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as “Chadds Ford Township Firearms
Safety Ordinance of 1963.”
§ 73-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARMS AND SIMILAR WEAPONS — Any rifle, gun, pistol, revolver,
automatic, musket, or shot gun, when used to discharge less than nine
pellets of any kind, regardless of the propulsive power, whether gun powder,
compressed air, gas or springs or any combination of said mechanism. A
shotgun when used to discharge nine pellets or more is not included within
this definition.
§ 73-3. Consent required; exception.
A. No person shall, except as provided herein, fire or discharge a firearm
or similar weapon, as hereinbefore defined, within the Township of
Chadds Ford unless the user thereof has first given his name, address,
and if the request is for permission to hunt, his hunting license number,
to the owner or the lessee in possession of the premises where he
intends to shoot and has obtained the written consent of such owner or
lessee, as the case may be, on the form provided by the Supervisors of
the Township of Chadds Ford. Prior to hunting or discharging a firearm
or similar weapon on such property, duplicate signed copies of said
consent shall be filed with the Township Secretary either in person or
by mail. No registration with the Township or filing fee shall be
required. The consent of the owner or lessee shall continue in effect
until the end of the current hunting season or year in which the consent
is obtained, as will be specified on said written consent, unless prior
thereto the owner or lessee in possession of the land shall revoke such
consent in writing. In granting such consent, the owner or lessee may
stipulate the type of firearm or similar weapon or use for which consent
is granted.
B. This section shall not apply to the use of firearms or similar weapons in
necessary defense of person or property; nor to the use of a firearm or
similar weapon on such property as is owned or lawfully resided upon
§ 59-14 CHADDS FORD CODE § 73-3
1:78
§ 73-4. Permit for target practice; fees.24
The Secretary of the Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized to issue
permits for the use of firearms in target practice only to individual adult
citizens of Chadds Ford Township, after the inspection and approval of the
target range by the Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township. Such target
range shall have a natural earth backstop or a backstop of the type and kind
approved by the National Rifle Association. Such permits shall be good for a
period of one year and the initial fee for such permits, and for each renewal
of said permits thereafter, shall be as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors.
§ 73-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-29-1986 by Ord. No.
16A]
Chapter 77
HELIPORTS AND HELISTOPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
by said user; nor to the use of a firearm or similar weapon on an
approved target range under adult supervision; nor to the use of a
rifle or pistol cartridge of a size not greater than .22 caliber short in
destroying trapped or treed animals such as muskrat or raccoon.
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial
District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense.25
B. Any Township constable or any police officer duly authorized to enforce
the law within the Township of Chadds Ford is hereby authorized to
seize, remove and destroy any firearm or similar weapon which is used
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 73-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-1
1:79
§ 77-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Chadds Ford,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
HELIPORT — An area to accommodate all phases of operation of rotor-wing
aircraft (helicopters) with suitable space to allow development of service
facilities as desired.
HELISTOP — An area on a roof or on the ground to accommodate
touchdown and lift-off of the rotor-wing aircraft (helicopters) for the
purpose of picking up and discharging passengers or cargo with no service
facilities.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Chadds Ford, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 77-2. Helistops permitted; requirements.
Helistops are a permitted use in any district on a parcel of land at least 100
acres under one ownership subject to the following provisions:
A. The proposed helistop would not be detrimental to the health, welfare
and safety of the Township residents and their property.
B. The landing pad must be at least 60 feet square or a circle with a sixtyfoot
diameter. This pad must be paved, level and maintained dirt free.
Rooftop pads shall be free of all loose stone and aggregate.
C. There must be a four-foot fence around the helistop, except for those
helistops on a rooftop. The fence shall be so located as not to obstruct
the glide angle of a helicopter using the helistop.
D. At least two approach lanes to each landing pad shall be provided and
maintained free of obstructions and shall be located not less than 90°
apart. Each approach lane shall be located within 45° left or right of the
prevailing winds and shall fan out at an angle of 10° from the width of
the landing pad to a width of 1,000 feet, and shall have a glide angle
slope of eight to one measured from the outer edge of the pad.
E. Clear areas for emergency landings of the helicopter in the event of
mechanical failure shall be available. These emergency landing areas
shall be located within the normal glide range of the helicopter with one
engine off when operating in the approved takeoff or landing lane from
the helistop.
F. An application for a helistop on a roof shall be accompanied by a
certification by a registered engineer that the loads imposed by the
helicopter will be supported by the structure.
§ 77-1 CHADDS FORD CODE § 77-2
1:80
§ 77-3. Use of helicopters without helistops prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to land, discharge, load or take off in a
helicopter any place within the Township other than at a helistop except:
§ 77-4. Heliports prohibited.
Heliports are not permitted.
§ 77-5. Violations and penalties.26
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment
shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by
the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
Chapter 84
JEWELRY, SECONDHAND
G. The helistop shall be used only for personal or executive use by a firm or
individual.
H. No helicopter over 12,000 pounds gross weight shall use any helistop.
I. Upon the granting of approval by the Board, the Zoning Officer shall
issue a permit for a helistop, and this permit shall be for a one-year
period of time and must be renewed annually. If at any time the
condition of the approval or any other conditions imposed by the Board
are violated, the permit may be revoked by the Zoning Officer.
A. In conjunction with a special event such as an athletic contest, a holiday
celebration, parade or similar activity, after seven days' advance notice
has been given to the Zoning Officer and permission obtained to make
such landing and takeoff.
B. When necessary for law enforcement purposes and for emergencies.
C. In connection with a construction project where a helicopter is to be
used to lift equipment in connection with such project.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 77-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-1
1:81
§ 84-1. License required.
No person shall carry on the business of dealer within the Township without
first obtaining a dealer's license from the Township Secretary.
§ 84-2. License application.
§ 84-3. License expiration.
A dealer's license shall continue in force to December 31 of the year in
which the license is issued.
§ 84-4. License fee.27
Each person applying for a dealer's license shall pay to the Township
Secretary a license fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors, for which the Township Secretary shall give the applicant an
official receipt and, upon approval of Township Supervisors, issue a license
to carry on the trade or business of a dealer within the Township of Chadds
Ford, Delaware County. Said fee may be changed from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 84-5. License valid for one place of business only.
No person licensed as a dealer in the Township shall, by virtue of one
license, keep more than one place of business for receiving or taking goods.
§ 84-6. License revocation.
Any licensed dealer who violates any provision of this article, in addition
to the fine prescribed by § 84-14, shall have his license revoked at the
discretion of the Township Supervisors.
§ 84-7. Doing business at place not covered by license.
No dealer shall at any time take goods at any other place than the place for
which the license was granted.
A. The Township Secretary shall require satisfactory evidence of good
character of an applicant for a dealer's license. Full records check of
dealer and all employees.
B. An applicant for a dealer's license shall state the address where such
business is to be carried on.
C. Approval of Township Supervisors is required.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 84-1 CHADDS FORD CODE § 84-8
1:82
§ 84-8. Transaction record book required.
Every person conducting the business of a dealer shall keep a book in
which shall be recorded at the time of purchase an accurate account and
description of the goods, articles or things purchased, the amount of money
paid therefor, the time purchasing the same, together with the description
of the person selling such goods, articles or things, including color
complexion, color of eyes and hair, stature and general appearance, name,
address, driver's license number, social security number or other valid
means of identification, as well as a photograph of the seller and
photograph of the articles as a unit.
§ 84-9. Police and official inspection.
The book required by § 84-8 shall be subject to periodic inspection and
approval of police and Township officials.
§ 84-10. Daily reports to Township Secretary.
Every dealer shall mail to the Township Secretary, every day before noon, a
sheet, to be furnished by the Township, showing all business transacted on
the previous day, and giving the information required by § 84-8.
§ 84-11. Minimum retention of articles after redemption dates.
No dealer shall sell, melt down or modify any articles until the articles have
been in his possession at least 15 days.
§ 84-12. Dealing with certain classes of people prohibited.
No dealer, or his clerk or employee, shall purchase any article from any
person under twenty-one years of age, anyone intoxicated, any habitual
drunkard, or any person known to be a thief, an associate of thieves or
receiver of stolen property, or any person he has reason to suspect to be
such, and must require that valid identification be presented to the dealer
prior to the transaction of any business.
§ 84-13. Hours of business.
No person licensed as a dealer shall keep his office or place of business
open for the purpose of doing the business of a dealer on Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday or Saturday before 7:30 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m. On
Friday his business may be kept open until 9:00 p.m.
§ 84-14. Violations and penalties.28
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 84-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 84-14
1:83
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment
shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by
the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
Chapter 87
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 39. Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 87-1. Purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, finds that massage establishments used for the purposes
of prostitution are detrimental to the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of Chadds Ford Township.
§ 87-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACCREDITED SCHOOL — Any school wherein the method, profession,
and work of massage is taught, which furnishes a statement of courses
offered, including anatomy and physiology, is accredited by a state unit
of educational accreditation or by the American Massage and Therapy
Association, and furnishes a certificate or diploma of successful completion
of such course of study or learning.
APPLICANT — Any person applying for a license to render massage service,
or to operate a massage establishment, and in addition thereto shall include
and mean all partners in a partnership and all stockholders or members of
a corporation or limited liability company where the controlling interest of
the entity is held by five or fewer persons or legal entities.
EMPLOYEE — Any person over 18 years of age, other than a massagist,
who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage
establishment and receives compensation from the operator of the massage
establishment or patrons.
MASSAGE — The manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing,
stroking, kneading, or tapping, by hand, mechanical device, or other means.
§ 84-14 CHADDS FORD CODE § 87-2
1:84
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any business establishment which provides
the services of massage, unless such business establishment is operated
by a licensed medical practitioner, chiropractor or professional physical
therapist licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in connection with
a professional practice.
MASSAGIST — Any person trained at an accredited school, who, for any
consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined
herein (also a "masseur" or "masseuse").
PATRON — Any person over 18 years of age who receives a massage under
such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay
money or give other consideration therefor.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint stock
company, corporation, limited liability company, or combination of
individuals of whatever form or character.
PROSTITUTION — Engaging in sexual activity for consideration, including:
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA — Genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or
perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
§ 87-3. License required.
No person shall engage in, carry out or provide or perform the business
of massage except in a massage establishment duly licensed under the
provisions of this chapter. Existing massage establishments shall submit
applications for a massage license hereunder within 60 days of enactment
of this chapter.
§ 87-4. Exemptions.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast;
A.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; or
C. Homosexual and other deviate sexual relations.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following
individuals while engaged in the personal performance of the duties of
their respective professions:
(1) Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical
therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective
professions in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) Nurses who are registered under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(3) Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, except that this exemption
§ 87-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-4
1:85
§ 87-5. Application to establish or maintain massage establishment.
shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp and hair
of the customer or client for cosmetic or beautifying purposes.
(4) Athletic trainers.
B. In any prosecution for violation of this chapter, the foregoing
exemptions shall constitute affirmative defenses and it shall be
incumbent upon the defendant to show that he or she and any
establishment involved are not subject to the provisions of this chapter.
Nothing herein shall be deemed to shift the burden of proof of the
violation to the defendant.
A. Every applicant for a license to establish, maintain, operate or conduct
a massage establishment shall file an application, under oath, with the
Township and pay a nonrefundable annual license fee which shall be
determined by the Board of Supervisors from time to time by resolution.
The application shall at a minimum provide the Township with the
following information:
(1) A detailed description of the services to be provided.
(2) The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the
massage establishment is to be conducted.
(3) The name and residence address of each applicant.
(a) If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company,
the name and residence address of each of the officers,
directors and members/shareholders, together with the
address of the corporation if different from the address of the
massage establishment.
(b) If the applicant is a partnership (limited or general), the name
and residence address of each of the partners and the address
of the partnership itself if different from the address of the
massage establishment.
(4) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the address of the
proposed massage establishment.
(5) Proof that the applicant, if an individual, is at least 18 years of age.
(6) The height, weight, hair and eye color and gender of any individual
applicant.
(7) Copy of written identification, such as a driver's license or social
security card.
(8) One front-face (portrait), two-inch-by-two-inch photograph of the
applicant, including a photograph of all officers, directors,
§ 87-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 87-5
1:86
§ 87-6. Issuance of license.
The Township shall issue a license for a massage establishment after
approval by the Board of Supervisors, but only after all requirements for a
massage establishment or massagist permit have been met.
partners, members, and managing agents of any business entity
applicant.
(9) Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application.
(10) The massage or similar business license history of the applicant;
whether such person, in previously operating in this or another
township or state, has had a business license revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or
occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.
(11) All criminal convictions for sexual offenses, including the date of
conviction, nature of the crimes and place convicted.
(12) The name and address and one front-face (portrait), two-inch-bytwo-
inch photograph of each massagist who is or will be employed
in the proposed massage establishment.
(13) The diploma, certificate or other documentation evidencing that
each massagist has successfully completed the curricula of an
accredited school.
(14) The name and address of any massage establishment or other
business owned or operated by any person whose name is required
hereunder wherein the business or profession of massage is carried
on.
(15) A description of any other business proposed to be operated on the
same premises or adjoining premises owned or controlled by the
applicant.
(16) Authorization for the Township, its agents, and employees to seek
information and conduct investigations into the truth of the
statements and qualifications of the applicant contained in the
application.
(17) Such other identification and information as may be reasonably
required by the Township.
B. The application shall not be accepted by the Township until all required
information has been provided to the Township and all required fees
have been paid. Any change in any of the information provided
hereunder must be submitted to the Township within 10 days of said
change.
§ 87-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-7
1:87
§ 87-7. Time of approval or denial of application.
The Township shall act to approve or deny an application for a license
hereunder within a reasonable period of time and in no event shall the
Township act to approve or deny the license later than 90 days from the date
said application is accepted by the Township. Every license issued under
this chapter shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner
suspended or revoked.
§ 87-8. Posting of license.
Every license granted hereunder shall be conspicuously posted at or near
the interior entrance to the massage establishment.
§ 87-9. Registration of employees.
The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage
establishment shall maintain a written register of all persons employed at
any time at the massage establishment, including, but not limited to, all
massagists. Such register shall be available for inspection at the massage
establishment during regular business hours.
§ 87-10. Revocation or suspension of license.
Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Board of Supervisors after notice and a hearing, for good
cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this chapter are violated
or where any employee of the licensee, including any massagist, is engaged
in any conduct which violates any state or local laws or ordinances.
§ 87-11. Clothing and name tag requirements.
All employees, including massagists, shall wear clean, nontransparent outer
garments, covering all sexual or genital areas. Name tags for employees
and all massagists shall be worn and visible at all times.
§ 87-12. Persons under age 18 prohibited.
No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted in or on the premises of a
massage establishment, unless on lawful business.
§ 87-13. Hours of operation.
No massage establishment shall operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
§ 87-14. Inspection.
The Township or its authorized representatives may from time to time make
inspection of each massage establishment for the purpose of determining
compliance with this chapter.
§ 87-7 CHADDS FORD CODE § 87-15
1:88
§ 87-15. Unlawful acts.
§ 87-16. Sale, transfer or change of location.
Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license
therefor shall be null and void, except as approved as provided in § 87-5. No
license granted under this chapter shall be transferable.
§ 87-17. Notice required.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person not a massagist to perform, provide
or engage in a massage with any person in a massage establishment.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to
engage in prostitution.
C. It shall be unlawful for any massagist or other person in a massage
establishment to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any
part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual
or genital area of any other person.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to
expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any
other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person in a massage
establishment to expose the sexual or genital area, or any portion
thereof, of any other person.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other
person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully
opaque covering the sexual or genital area of his or her body.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a
massage establishment knowingly to cause, allow, or permit, in or about
such massage establishment, any agent, employee, or any other person
under his control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited by this
section.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly allow any massage
establishment to be used in violation of this chapter.
A. The holder of a license to operate a massage establishment shall post at
every entrance available to massage patrons the following notice:
NOTICE
IT SHALL BE UNLAWFUL FOR ANY PERSON TO PATRONIZE THIS
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT IF THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT
IS KNOWN BY SUCH PATRON TO BE IN VIOLATION OF CHAPTER 87
OF THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF CHADDS FORD, DELAWARE
COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA; A COPY OF SAID CHAPTER IS POSTED
HEREIN AND WILL BE MADE AVAILABLE TO ANY PATRON UPON
REQUEST.
§ 87-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-17
1:89
§ 87-18. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of this chapter, the violator, upon conviction
by the Magisterial District Judge, shall be guilty of a summary offense and
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 89
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 45. Firearms — See Ch. 73.
§ 89-1. Purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township, while respecting the
fair use of property, finds that excessive levels of sound are detrimental to
the physical, mental and social well-being of the residents and therefore
declares it to be necessary to provide for the control of excessive sound
within Chadds Ford Township.
§ 89-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Noise Disturbance Control Ordinance
of Chadds Ford Township."
§ 89-3. Definitions.
All terminology not specifically defined in this section shall be in conformity
with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute
[ANSI S1.1-1994 (R1999) and its revisions] or its successor body. In
addition, as used in this chapter, the following definitions should apply:
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL — The lowest sound level repeating itself during a
ten-minute period, as measured with a Type I or Type II sound-level meter
(ANSI S1.4-2014 and subsequent revisions). The minimum sound level shall
be determined with the noise source silent and in the same location as the
measurement of the sound level of the source when emitting the sound
under investigation.
B. This notice shall be capitalized and in not less than 72 point type and
shall be posted by the holder of a license to operate a massage
establishment in a conspicuous place at or near every entrance to said
establishment. Copies of this chapter shall be kept on the premises and
shall be made available to any massage patron upon request.
§ 87-17 CHADDS FORD CODE § 89-3
1:90
A-WEIGHTED SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — The sound-pressure level as
measured in decibels on a sound-level meter using the A-weighted network.
The level so read shall be designated dB(A) or dBA.
C-WEIGHTED SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — The sound-pressure level as
measured in decibels on a sound-level meter using the C-weighted network.
The level so read shall be designated dB(C) or dBC.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities or
work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to
danger.
IMPULSIVE NOISE — Any sound of short duration, with an abrupt onset
and rapid decay and an occurrence of not more than one time in any fifteensecond
interval.
LAeq — The average energy equivalent level of the A-weighted sound over
the measurement period.
LAmax — The maximum value the A-weighted sound-pressure level reaches
during the measurement period.
LCEq — The average energy equivalent level of the C-weighted sound over
the measurement period.
LCmax — The maximum value the C-weighted sound pressure level reaches
during the measurement period.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is propelled or drawn by mechanical
equipment, including, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, trucktrailers,
semitrailers, campers, motorcycles, mini-bikes, go-carts,
snowmobiles, amphibious craft on land, dune buggies or racing vehicles.
NOISE — Any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause
an adverse psychological effect on human beings.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound and/or vibration of excessive levels as
set forth in § 89-5 of this chapter, i.e., Noise-level limits.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and
includes officers, employees, departments, agencies or instrumentalities of
a state or of any political subdivision of a state. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, "person" includes individual
members, partners, officers and managers, or any of them, of partnerships
and associations, and as to corporations, the officers and managers thereof,
or any of them.
PROPERTY BOUNDARY LINE — Any imaginary line drawn through the
points of contact of adjoining lands, apartments, condominiums,
townhouses and duplexes owned, rented or leased by different persons; a
demarcation or a line of separation of properties; and also, for any two or
more buildings sharing common grounds, the line drawn midway between
any two said buildings. All areas devoted to public rights-of-way shall be
deemed to be across the property line. For the purposes of this chapter,
§ 89-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-3
1:91
the property line includes all points on a plane formed by projecting the
property line in a manner deemed appropriate by the enforcing officer.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon which are owned
or controlled by a governmental entity.
PURE TONE — Any noise that can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or as
a set of single pitches. For the purposes of measurement, a pure tone exists
when the one-third octave band sound-pressure level of the tone exceeds
the arithmetic average of the sound-pressure levels of the two contiguous
one-third octave bands by 5 dB for frequencies of 500 hertz and above, by 8
dB for frequencies between 160 and 400 hertz and by 15 dB for frequencies
less than or equal to 125 hertz.
§ 89-4. General prohibition against noise disturbances.
No person shall cause, or allow to be caused, any noise disturbance as
defined in § 89-5, Noise-level limits, of this chapter, unless a permit was
granted or the acts fall under § 89-6 of this chapter.
§ 89-5. Noise-level limits.
A. No person shall operate or permit operation of any device or otherwise
cause or commit to be caused noise in such a manner as to create an
equivalent noise level, LAeq or a maximum noise level, LAmax, which
exceeds either of the limits set forth for the receiving land use in the
table below when measured at the property boundary line. When a
noise source can be identified and the noise it creates can be measured
in more than one land use category, the limits of the most-restrictive
use shall apply at the boundaries between different zoning
designations. Any sound source that produces a sound in excess of
those levels shall constitute a noise disturbance.
Table 1 Sound-Level Limits by Land Use Category In Decibels
(dBA)
Receiving
Land Use
Category Time
Equivalent
Noise Level,
LAeq
Maximum
Noise Level,
LAmax
Residential,
public space,
open space,
agricultural or
institutional
Mon - Fri, 7:00 a.m. -
10:00 p.m.; Saturday
and Sunday, 9:00
a.m. - 5:00 p.m.
52 57
All other times
including *legal
holidays
45 52
§ 89-3 CHADDS FORD CODE § 89-5
1:92
Table 1 Sound-Level Limits by Land Use Category In Decibels
(dBA)
Receiving
Land Use
Category Time
Equivalent
Noise Level,
LAeq
Maximum
Noise Level,
LAmax
Commercial or
business
7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 62 67
10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.
plus Sundays and
*legal holidays
55 62
Industrial At all times 70 75
NOTES:
* Legal holidays include New Year's Day, Christmas Day, Thanksgiving
Day, Memorial Day, Labor Day and Independence Day.
B. When (LCeq-LAeq) is greater than or equal to 20 dBA, indicating
significant low-frequency content in the noise being measured, the
limits in Table 1 shall be reduced by 3 dBA.
C. Ambient sound. In the event that the background ambient sound levels
in an area of suspected noise disturbance exceed the levels set forth in
Table 1, the sound of the intrusive sound source shall be measured with
the ambient background sound levels being substituted as the Table 1
sound-level limits.
D. Where measured. For the purposes of this section, sound shall be
measured at or beyond the property line of the property on which the
noise source is located.
E. Pure tone and impulsive sound. For any source of sound which emits a
pure tone or impulsive sound, the limits set forth in Table 1 shall be
reduced by 5 dB(A).
F. Measuring instruments. All sound measurements shall be made on a
sound-level meter that meets ANSI Type II standards or better
according to ANSI S1.4-2014 and any subsequent revisions. An
integrating sound-level meter is required to determine LAeq.
G. All measurements made with an integrating sound-level meter shall be
made with the meter set to the "fast" response time.
H. For continuous noise sources, the averaging period for LAeq is to be 10
minutes. For intermittent noise sources of less than 10 minutes'
duration, the averaging time for LAeq is to be set to the duration of the
noise source being measured.
I. In the event of a noise source in a public space or a place of public
accommodation (as defined by the ADA Act, Title III) and within all
property lines, a noise disturbance occurs when the maximum noise
§ 89-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-5
1:93
§ 89-6. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the following:
§ 89-7. Permits for specific and temporary waivers.
The Township may grant permits for specific and temporary waivers from
this chapter, upon written request by the applicant and review by the Board
of Supervisors.
§ 89-8. Complaint procedure and enforcement.
level (LAmax) exceeds the ambient noise level by 5 dBA or more when
measured at 50 feet from the source.
J. See § 89-8C for additional measurement requirements.
A. Operation of properly licensed and properly maintained motor vehicles,
which are legally permitted to operate upon the public highways
pursuant to the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. Noise caused in the performance of emergency work for the immediate
safety, health or welfare of the community or individuals of the
community, or to restore property to a safe condition following a public
calamity. The use of stationary emergency signaling devices shall be for
emergency use only.
C. Sounds resulting from the repair or replacement of any municipal utility
installation.
D. Sounds made by warning devices, home alarms, motor vehicle alarms
and security alarms operating continuously for 10 minutes or less,
except that in the event of an actual emergency, the time limitation shall
not apply.
E. Sounds emanating from ordinary agricultural operations.
F. Sounds emanating from construction work and/or the repair of any
structure, but only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, and on Saturday between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
G. Sounds emanating from the use of domestic power tools: any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool,
lawn mower, blower, powered trimmer or similar device used outdoors
in residential areas between the hours of: 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays; and 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday.
H. Sounds emanating from the operation of snow removal in order to
remove snow at any time.
§ 89-5 CHADDS FORD CODE § 89-8
1:94
§ 89-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not
more than $1,000, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. If the person
A. Any Township Code Enforcement Officer may issue a notice requiring
the immediate abatement of any noise disturbance in violation of this
chapter. The owner or operator of the subject property or equipment
shall be notified of the violation upon hand delivery or certified mail
delivery of the notice, which shall specify the nature, date and time of
the Code violation and shall set forth the date and time by which the
violation must be abated, which date and time shall not be more than 24
hours from the time of notification. If a person or entity does not comply
with the abatement notice upon its issuance within the time specified in
the notice, a summary citation may be issued for such violation.
B. In order to implement the purpose of this chapter, a Township Code
Enforcement Officer may:
(1) Conduct, or cause to be conducted, measurements, studies,
research and monitoring related to noise;
(2) For reasonable cause, and upon presentation of proper credentials,
enter upon any property and inspect any noise source for the
purpose of ascertaining compliance or noncompliance with this
chapter.
C. The measurement of sound or noise under this section shall be made
with an integrating sound-level meter meeting the standards
prescribed by the American National Standards Institute for a Type I or
Type II meter. The instrument shall be maintained in calibration and
good working order. A check for calibration of the system shall be made
at the time of any noise measurement. Measurements shall be recorded
so as to provide a proper representation of the noise source. The
microphone, during measurement, shall be positioned so as not to
create any amplification or attenuation of the measured noise. A
windscreen for the microphone should be used for all outdoor
measurements. Traffic, aircraft and other transportation noise sources
and other background noises shall not be considered in taking
measurements, except where such background noise interferes with
the primary noise being measured. The noise measurements are to be
made using an integrating sound-level meter using the fast response
setting at the property boundary line of the property on which such
noise is generated or received as appropriate. The microphone is to be
located at least three feet above the ground and at least five feet from
any structure that reflects sound. In case of an elevated or directional
sound or noise source, compliance is to be maintained at any elevation
at the boundary.
§ 89-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-9
1:95
responsible for the violation neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules
of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance with this chapter.
§ 89-10. Repealer.
Any and all prior ordinances, resolutions and/or portions of prior ordinances
or resolutions in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict, including specifically Chapter 89 of the Chadds Ford
Township Code, Ordinance 81 and Ordinance 81A in their entirety.
Chapter 91
TRAILS, PARKS AND OPEN SPACE REGULATIONS
§ 91-1. Purpose.
This chapter establishes the rules and regulations for the use of Chadds
Ford Township-owned trails, parks and open space in order to properly
provide for the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 91-2. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations for all Chadds Ford Township-owned
parks, trails, open space lands and Township-eased land must be complied
with by all persons within those areas:
A. Parks, trails and open space lands are open daily from sunrise to sunset
and closed to all uses from sunset to sunrise.
B. Barbecues, cookouts, grilling and open fires are prohibited.
C. Discharge of firearms is prohibited. Slingshots, airsoft and paintball
guns, BB and pellet guns, air rifles, archery equipment, rockets,
fireworks, explosives or other dangerous materials are prohibited
unless a special permit has been issued by Chadds Ford Township.
D. Hunting is prohibited on and across Township-owned property unless it
is part of a Township-approved wildlife management program. Driving
whitetail deer, as defined by the Pennsylvania Game Commission,
within or from park property is considered disturbing wildlife and is
prohibited. Additionally, baiting/feeding wildlife or placing wildlife
attractants within park property is considered disturbing wildlife and is
prohibited. Violators will be prosecuted.
E. Pets must be leashed at all times by a responsible person. Pet owners
are required to clean up after their pets and deposit any used pet waste
bags in a trash receptacle.
§ 89-9 CHADDS FORD CODE § 91-2
1:96
§ 91-3. Harvey Run Trail.
The Harvey Run Trail has been designed as a naturally mowed field grass
surface for pedestrian use only for hiking and walking the trail. The
following rules and regulations are in addition to those listed in § 91-2 and
must be complied with by all persons using the Harvey Run Trail:
§ 91-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity which violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, after a hearing before a District Justice,
be subjected to a fine not exceeding $500, plus all court costs, including
F. Golfing is prohibited.
G. The use of a moped, minibike, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile or any
motorized vehicle is prohibited, except for official business,
emergencies, or other power-driven mobility devices for use by persons
who have mobility impairments.
H. Radio-controlled vehicles, including but not limited to cars, trucks,
airplanes, drones and helicopters, are prohibited.
I. Smoking is prohibited.
J. Alcoholic beverages and/or drugs are prohibited.
K. Disorderly conduct, including the use of indecent language, excessive
noise or sound-amplification equipment, is prohibited. Any noise shall
be deemed excessive and in violation of this regulation if it reasonably
disturbs the peace of any individual or impedes the peaceable use of the
park or any adjacent residence or business.
L. Littering is prohibited, and all refuse shall be placed in trash
receptacles (if provided) or removed by the person(s) generating the
refuse. Recycling is required within all parks. Recycling bins should be
used when provided, or, alternatively, recycling should be removed and
disposed of off the premises.
M. Vandalism to park property and facilities, including defacing or
damaging park property, unauthorized trail construction, and
destroying/removing vegetation, is prohibited. Disturbing wildlife,
unless part of an organized wildlife management program authorized
by Chadds Ford Township, is prohibited.
N. Parking is restricted to the designated parking areas provided.
Overnight parking and camping are prohibited.
A. No bicycles, skateboards, rollerblades or scooters.
B. No equestrian use.
C. No motorized toys or models.
§ 91-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-4
1:97
reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement
of this chapter. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance with this chapter.
Chapter 95
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 5, Art. I.
Construction codes — See Ch. 59.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
110.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 91-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 91-4
1:98
ARTICLE I
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 9-5-1990 by Ord. No. 82]
§ 95-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of holding tanks designed to receive and retain sewage
whether from residential or commercial uses and it is hereby declared
that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit
and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of
this Township. It is specifically intended that such holding tanks be of a
temporary nature and be permitted only when specifically approved by the
Chadds Ford Sewer Authority as part of a plan providing a more permanent
solution of disposal of sewage for a particular property.
§ 95-2. (Reserved)29
§ 95-3. Approval of use.
The use of an interim or repair sewage holding tank may be permitted by
the Authority providing the following minimum criteria are met:
§ 95-4. Rights and privileges granted.
The Authority is authorized and empowered to establish within the
Township the controls and methods for holding tank sewage disposal and its
collection and transportation and in furtherance thereof:
A. The use is consistent with good land use and planning and with the
spirit, purpose and intent of Chapter 135, Zoning.
B. The property is suitable for a holding tank and the use, if approved, will
be susceptible to regulation or restriction by appropriate conditions
and safeguards.
C. The proposed use of a holding tank will serve the best interests of the
Township, the convenience of the community (where applicable), and
the public health, safety and general welfare.
D. The use of an interim holding tank is part of the approved Township Act
537 Plan providing not only for the interim holding tank but also for the
permanent sewage disposal system.
E. The use of a repair holding tank is employed only where there is no
other suitable or acceptable method of sewage disposal and the use is
approved annually by the Authority.
29.Editor's Note: Former § 95-2, Definitions, was repealed 9-7-2016 by Ord. No. 145. See now
Art. VI, Definitions.
§ 95-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-4
1:99
§ 95-5. Permit procedure.
Any person desiring to own, construct, operate or maintain a new holding
tank on lands within the Township shall file an application therefor on a
form supplied by or satisfactory to the Authority, together with all plans
and other materials necessary to demonstrate compliance with all of the
requirements of this article and the design standards as defined herein.
Upon approval by the Authority, the application shall be forwarded to the
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO) (and/or DEP, if appropriate)
who shall, if he finds the application, plans and approvals to be in
accordance with this article, process the application in accordance with the
Township regulations (and/or DEP, if appropriate) and, upon approval, shall
issue appropriate permits.
§ 95-6. Transfer of property ownership.
A. It may adopt such rules and regulations concerning the operation of the
holding tank and sewage disposal which it may deem necessary to
effect the purposes herein.
B. As a condition to final subdivision and/or land development approval,
the Authority shall require that the property owner deliver to the
Township financial security, in an amount and form satisfactory to the
Township, to secure completion of the installation of the permanent
sewage disposal system, and that the delivery of this financial security
shall take place prior to the commencement of any work at the site. The
financial security shall be administered similar to the procedure as set
forth in the Municipalities Planning Code30 to the guarantee completion
of the required improvements.
C. All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the
Township, all applicable laws, and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. The use of an interim holding tank is limited to the initial property
owner to whom permissive use is granted, and the ownership of any
property served by the holding tank may not be transferred without
Authority approval where the permanent system is not otherwise
available.
B. Where a repair holding tank is in use, a property owner must notify the
Authority of any proposed change in ownership or use of the property
and must obtain approval for the continued operation of the repair
holding tank following the change.
30.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 95-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 95-7
1:100
§ 95-7. Exclusivity of rights and privileges.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a holding tank shall be done solely by or under the direction and
control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at
such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Authority shall
receive, review and retain all pumping receipts from and shall complete and
retain annual inspection reports for each permitted holding tank.
§ 95-8. Rates and charges.
The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments, and other charges at reasonable and uniform rates, as
authorized by applicable laws.
§ 95-9. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a holding tank shall:
A. Provide for the use of a holding tank only as an interim or repair
receptacle for the disposal of sewage as part of an overall, more
permanent sewage disposal plan.
B. Maintain the holding tank in conformance with this or any ordinance of
this Township, the provisions of any applicable law, and the rules and
regulations adopted by the Authority and any administrative agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. If the holding tank is installed for use other than a single-family
dwelling, aerate and design the tank to maintain a minimum dissolved
oxygen content of two milligrams per liter.
D. Permit only the Authority, its agent or such carrier as it may approve to
collect, transport and dispose of the contents therein.
E. Submit to the Authority yearly an executed contract for the holding
tank maintenance with an approved sewage disposal contractor.
F. At the time the permanent sanitary system is operational, remove and
properly dispose of the tank or, with the permission of the Authority,
incorporate the tank in the new system.
G. Submit to the Authority for its review and retention all pumping
receipts from permitted holding tanks.
H. Permit the Authority and any authorized agent thereof to inspect
holding tanks on an annual basis.
§ 95-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-10
1:101
§ 95-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No.
122]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment
shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by
the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 95-11. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of
§ 95-9 above shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the Township
or the Authority by either seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief from
a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 95-12. Retroactivity.
The provisions of this article shall be retroactive and applied to all existing
holding tanks within the Township.
§ 95-10 CHADDS FORD CODE § 95-12
1:102
ARTICLE II
Community Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 9-5-1990 by Ord. No. 83]
§ 95-13. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Community Sewage Disposal
System Management Program of the Township of Chadds Ford."
§ 95-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the management, operation,
maintenance, inspection and rehabilitation of community sewage disposal
systems, both on-lot and stream discharge; establish penalties for
compliance failure; and structure procedures necessary for the proper
administration of such a program.
§ 95-15. Scope.
The provisions within this article apply to any person, partnership,
corporation or other entity who or which is the owner(s) or agent of the
owner(s) of a community sewage disposal system or otherwise engaged
in the design, installation, operation and maintenance of such community
sewage disposal systems as are permitted by the Township and the
Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 95-16. (Reserved)31
§ 95-17. Permit requirements.
The owner(s) of the community sewage disposal system shall be responsible
for obtaining all required permits from the Township, Authority, Department
of Environmental Protection and any other agencies requiring permits for
the installation and operation of such systems.
§ 95-18. Design and construction.
All community sewage disposal systems shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the standards set forth by the Township or Authority.
§ 95-19. Controls for privately owned system.
All privately owned community sewage disposal systems subject to this
article shall not be installed, constructed or operated without the owners
providing to the Authority the following:
A. The identity of all owners and users of the community sewage disposal
system.
31.Editor's Note: Former § 95-16, Definitions, was repealed 9-7-2016 by Ord. No. 145. See
now Art. VI, Definitions.
§ 95-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-19
1:103
§ 95-20. Security for system operation.
Any maintenance escrow fund, forfeiture bond or equity provided by the
owner(s) of a community sewage disposal system shall be maintained as
security subject to the following conditions:
B. A maintenance plan providing periodic maintenance practices,
reflecting compliance with such regulations as the Authority may adopt
and identifying the name and address of any contractor engaged to
operate and/or maintain the community sewage disposal system.
C. A plan for the assessment of liability for operating, maintenance and
repair expenses among the owner(s) and/or users of the system.
D. Agreements that allocate among system owner(s) and/or users the
liability for expenses incurred by the Township, Authority or their
authorized agents if the system has been declared in violation of
municipal, state or federal statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations.
E. An established fee schedule for all system users providing for an
assigned percentage of the users' monthly cost to be deposited in a
maintenance escrow account in accordance with the approved
maintenance plan.
F. Absent other security acceptable to the Authority, provision for a
forfeiture bond or other equity equal to 50% of the cost of the
community sewage disposal system, to be held as security until the
maintenance escrow is equal to 50% of the original cost of the
community sewage disposal system.
G. Evidence of liability insurance as may be required by the Authority to
protect against third party damage from the community sewage
disposal system.
A. The security may be claimed by the Authority or Township where:
(1) Ordered to do so by Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection in accordance with the provisions of the Clean Streams
Law (35 P.S. §§ 60091.1 to 60091.100132) or the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act of January 24, 1986 (P.L. 1535 as amended,
35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.);
(2) It is necessary for the Township or Authority to protect the general
welfare and public health of its citizens; or
(3) The owner(s) of the system has been cited or convicted of a
violation(s) of Township, state or federal laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations relating to the operation of the community sewage
disposal system.
32.Editor's Note: See now 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 95-19 CHADDS FORD CODE § 95-20
1:104
§ 95-21. Inspection.
All community sewage disposal systems must be recognized in the
Township's official plan for sewage disposal as part of its sewage
management program and shall be subject to regular inspection both during
construction and operation by the Authority or its authorized agent.
Inspection of a community sewage disposal system by the Authority may
include:
§ 95-22. Maintenance and operation.
§ 95-23. Charges and fees.
There shall be imposed on the owner(s) of a privately owned community
sewage disposal system such fees or other charges as the Authority may
from time to time direct by its regulations.
B. A security required by this article shall be used only for the direct or
indirect expenses incurred by the Township or Authority, or their
authorized agents, for the operation, maintenance, rehabilitation or
repair of the collection and treatment components of the system and
associated fines, penalties or lawsuits in equity.
A. The periodic evaluation and examination of any component of the
sewage disposal system to determine its compliance with the Township,
Authority, county or state standards.
B. The regular sampling of any sewage, treated effluent soils, surface and/
or groundwaters in the disposal and/or treatment areas.
A. The owner(s) of a private community sewage disposal system shall
either contract with a certified sewage treatment plant operator for the
operation and maintenance of its system or make other provisions
acceptable to the Authority.
B. Copies of operation and maintenance contracts pertaining to a private
community sewage disposal system shall be provided to the Authority.
C. Reports pertaining to plant operations and testing shall be provided to
the Authority on at least a quarterly basis throughout the year.
A. Such charges may include permit fees, construction inspection fees and
annual administration and inspection fees.
B. The right to establish charges and fees by a sewage management fee
resolution, to increase, decrease or reallocate said charges and fees
from time to time, to best implement the sewage management program
is reserved to the Authority.
§ 95-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-24
1:105
§ 95-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No.
122]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article. No judgment
shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by
the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 95-25. Retroactivity.
The provisions of this article shall be retroactive and applied to all existing
community sewage disposal systems and their operative components.
§ 95-24 CHADDS FORD CODE § 95-25
1:106
ARTICLE III
Sewage Facilities
[Adopted 5-1-1991 by Ord. No. 84]
§ 95-26. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Township Sewage Facilities
Enabling Ordinance."
§ 95-27. (Reserved)33
§ 95-28. Individual and community onlot sewage systems.
§ 95-29. Individual and community sewerage systems and
appurtenances.
A. This § 95-28 applies to all individual and community onlot sewage
systems located in the Township of Chadds Ford.
B. Any and all individual and community onlot sewage systems located in
the Township of Chadds Ford, now existing or hereafter established,
shall be designed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance
with and pursuant to rules and regulations adopted, from time to time,
by the Chadds Ford Township Sewer Authority and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, or its successors. [Amended
3-7-2001 by Ord. No. 84A]
C. A certified copy of all such rules and regulations adopted by the Chadds
Ford Township Sewer Authority shall be filed with the Township for
informational purposes within 30 days after adoption.
A. This § 95-29 applies to all individual and community sewerage facilities
for collecting, pumping, transporting, treating and disposing of sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes, situate in or adjacent to the Township of
Chadds Ford, whether or not owned, maintained, operated or controlled
by the Township or the Chadds Ford Township Sewer Authority.
B. Any and all individual and community sewerage systems and
appurtenances in the Township of Chadds Ford shall be designed,
installed, operated and maintained in accordance with and pursuant to
rules and regulations adopted, from time to time, by the Chadds Ford
Township Sewer Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, or its successors. [Amended 3-7-2001 by
Ord. No. 84A]
C. A certified copy of all such rules and regulations adopted by the Chadds
Ford Township Sewer Authority shall be filed with the Township, for
informational purposes, within 30 days after adoption.
33.Editor's Note: Former § 95-27, Definitions, as amended, was repealed 9-7-2016 by Ord. No.
145. See now Art. VI, Definitions.
§ 95-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-30
1:107
§ 95-30. Design and installation of capped sewers.
§ 95-31. Use of public sewerage required.
A. When required by the Township, all owners of land intended to be
improved and developed with on-site sewage disposal, as part of final
approval of the improvement or development, must agree to design and
install a capped sewer system for hooking to and becoming part of a
community sewerage system within Chadds Ford Township. A capped
sewer system shall be installed when the Township concludes, after
consultation with the Authority, that the area to be subdivided or
developed is likely to be served within a reasonable time by a collection
system.
B. The sewer lines within a capped sewage system shall be suitably
capped at the limits of the subdivision, and the laterals shall be capped
at the street right-of-way line. When capped sewers are provided, onsite
disposal facilities shall also be provided.
C. Any and all capped sewer systems located in Township of Chadds Ford
shall be designed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance
with the standards, specifications, rules and regulations adopted, from
time to time, by the Chadds Ford Township Sewer Authority and
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or its
successors. [Amended 3-7-2001 by Ord. No. 84A]
D. Routing and limits of the installed capped sewer systems shall be
approved by the Authority Engineer. The developer will submit to the
Authority for approval a sketch of each lateral showing the location and
depth of the end of the lateral.
E. A certified copy of all specifications and standards for capped sewers
adopted by the Chadds Ford Township Sewer Authority shall be filed
with the Township for informational purposes within 30 days after
adoption.
A. Connection to system.
(1) The owner of any improved property which is or hereafter becomes
adjoining or adjacent to a public sewer system, or whose principal
building is or hereafter becomes located within 150 feet of a public
sewer system, and the owner of any improved property which is or
hereafter becomes accessible to and whose principal building is
within 150 feet from a portion of the public sewer system which is
extended or altered at the expense of a developer or other private
person or corporation under the supervision of the Township or the
Authority, shall connect such improved property to such public
sewer system in such manner as the Authority may require within
60 days after notice to such owner from the Township to make such
connection. Upon such connection, the owner of the improved
property shall use the public sewer system for the purpose of
§ 95-30 CHADDS FORD CODE § 95-31
1:108
discharging all sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from such
improved property, subject to such limitations and restrictions
which are established herein or which otherwise shall be
established by the Township or the Authority from time to time.
[Amended 3-7-2001 by Ord. No. 84A]
(2) No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used and maintained at any time upon any improved
property which has been connected to a public sewer system or
which shall be required under this § 95-31 to be connected to a
public sewer system. Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole,
septic tank or similar receptacle in existence shall be abandoned
and, at the discretion of the Authority, shall be cleansed and filled
under the direction and supervision of the Authority's engineer.
Any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle not so abandoned and, if required by the Authority,
cleansed and filled, shall constitute a nuisance and such nuisance
may be abated as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of
such improved property.
(3) No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
at any time shall be connected with a public sewer system.
(4) The notice by the Township to make a connection to the public
sewer system shall consist of a written or printed document
requiring such connection in accordance with the provisions of this
§ 95-31 and specifying that such connection shall be made within
60 days from the date such notice is given. Such notice may be
given at any time after a public sewer system is in place which can
receive and convey sanitary sewage and industrial wastes for
treatment and disposal from the particular improved property.
Such notice shall be served upon the owner either by personal
service or by registered mail or by such method as at the time may
be provided by law. [Amended 3-7-2001 by Ord. No. 84A]
(5) If the owner of any improved property located in the Township
which the Township requires be connected to the public sewer
system pursuant to Subsection A(1) hereof shall fail to connect
such improved property, as required, within 60 days after being
served with notice from the Township in accordance with this
§ 95-31, then the Township or the Authority, in addition to all other
available legal remedies, may make such connection or cause the
same to be made and may collect from such owner the costs and
expenses thereof. In such case, the Township or the Authority shall
forthwith, upon completion of the work, send an itemized bill of the
cost of the construction of such connection to the owner of the
improved property to which connection has been so made, and
such bills shall be payable immediately. In case of neglect or refusal
by the owner of such improved property to pay said bill, the
Township shall file a municipal lien for said construction within six
months of the date of the completion of the construction of said
§ 95-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-31
1:109
§ 95-32. Permit procedures; fees.
§ 95-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No.
122]
For any and every violation of the provisions of this article, the owner,
general agent or contractor of a building or premises where such violation
has been committed or shall exist; the lessee or tenant of an entire building
or entire premises where such violation has been committed or shall exist;
the owner, general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a
building or premises in which part such violation has been committed or
shall exist; and the general agent, architect, contractor or any other person
who knowingly commits, takes part or assists in any such violation, or who
maintains any building or premises in which any such violation shall exist,
shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
connection, with interest to accrue on the amount of the unpaid bill
at the rate of 10% per annum from the date of the completion of
the work, the same to be subject in all respects to the general law
provided for the filing and recovery of municipal liens. [Amended
3-7-2001 by Ord. No. 84A]
B. Any and all connections of improved property to the public sewer
system pursuant to the requirements of this § 95-31 shall be in
accordance with and pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted,
from time to time, by the Chadds Ford Township Sewer Authority.
C. A certified copy of all such rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
this § 95-31 by the Chadds Ford Township Sewer Authority shall be filed
with the Township, for informational purposes, within 30 days after
adoption.
A. All permits relating to sewage disposal or sewage disposal systems
required by Township ordinances or the regulations of the Chadds Ford
Township Sewer Authority shall only be issued upon application made
in writing to the Township or the Authority, as applicable, in such form
and manner as may be prescribed by the Authority for a permit and
upon payment of a permit fee in an amount established by the Authority
from time to time.
B. All use and maintenance fees, inspection costs and connection charges
relating to sewage disposal systems shall be set and collected in
accordance with and pursuant to rules and regulations adopted, from
time to time, by the Chadds Ford Township Sewer Authority and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, or its
successors. [Amended 3-7-2001 by Ord. No. 84A]
C. A certified copy of all such rules and regulations covering fees, costs
and charges and adopted by the Chadds Ford Township Sewer
Authority shall be filed with the Township for informational purposes
within 30 days after adoption.
§ 95-31 CHADDS FORD CODE § 95-33
1:110
commenced by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a
fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees, incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this article.
No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Whenever such person
or persons shall have been officially notified by the Zoning Officer or
Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO), or by service of a summons in a
prosecution, or in any other official manner, that he is committing a
violation of the article, each day's continuance of such violation after such
notification shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine or
penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like fines or penalties
are now collected by law. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of
the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 95-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-33
1:111

ARTICLE IV
Prohibited Discharges; Grease Traps
[Adopted 10-2-1996 by Ord. No. 93]
§ 95-34. Prohibited discharges.
No individual, partnership, company, association, society, corporation, or
other group or entity (hereinafter "person") shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described wastes, waters or substances into
any "community sewage disposal system," as said term is defined in Article
II of this chapter, which definition is incorporated herein by reference:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
B. Any water or waste containing more than 100 parts per million (ppm)
by weight of fats, oils or greases.
C. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity
are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to
the sanitary sewer system or the treatment plant or to the operation of
same. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard
meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the
system) be more than 5%, nor any single reading over 10%, of the lower
explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are
not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene,
ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other
substances which the Township, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
D. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, shall be capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into any sewer or
sewage treatment plant for maintenance and repair.
E. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
bones, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure, butchers offal,
whole blood, bentonite, lye, building materials, rubber, hair, leather,
porcelain, china, ceramic wastes, asphalt, paint, waxes or any other
solid or viscous substance which shall be capable of causing obstruction
to the flow of any sewer or other interference with the proper operation
of the community sewage disposal system or sewage treatment plant.
F. Any water or waste having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or
having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures or equipment of the community sewage disposal system or
sewage treatment plant or to personnel engaged in operation and
maintenance thereof.
§ 95-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-34
1:113
G. Any water or waste containing any toxic or poisonous substance in
quantity sufficient to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to
interfere with the biochemical processes of the sewage treatment plant
or that will pass through the sewage treatment plant in such condition
so that it will exceed state, federal or other existing valid requirements
for the receiving stream.
H. Any water or waste containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense shall be required to handle
such water or waste at the sewage treatment plant.
I. Any toxic radioactive isotopes, except by special permission of this
Township.
J. Any drainage from building construction.
K. Any garbage that has not been ground to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely in suspension under flow conditions
normally prevailing in the sanitary sewers, with no particles under any
circumstances greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
L. Any waste, water or substance containing color from any source that
when diluted with distilled water 1:10 will have a luminescence of 10%
or better and a purity of 90% or less, at its dominant wavelength
established by the tristimulus method.
M. Any waste, water or substance having a chlorine demand in excess of 12
milligrams per liter (mg/l).
N. Any waste, water or substance prohibited by any permit issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or any other federal agency.
O. Any waste, water or substance containing wastes which are not
amenable to biological treatment or reduction in existing treatment
facilities, specifically nonbiodegradable complex carbon compounds.
P. Any waters which are used for the purpose of diluting wastes which
would otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limitations.
Q. Ammonia nitrogen in such an amount that would cause the Township
Sewer Authority, or owner or operator of the community sewage
disposal system, to be in noncompliance with regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
R. Wastes containing more than 10 milligrams per liter of hydrogen
sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide, or any of the halogens.
S. Roof drainage, cellar, surface water, waste from hydrants or
groundwater from underground drainage fields. (The sewer system is
intended to convey sanitary sewage and permitted wastes only.)
§ 95-34 CHADDS FORD CODE § 95-34
1:114
T. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any stormwater into the
municipal authority's sanitary sewer system, or sanction the inflow of
stormwater from any property owned by such a person into the sanitary
sewer system. Any discharge or inflow of stormwater into the sanitary
sewer system shall be deemed to have been allowed by the owner of the
property upon which or within which such stormwater enters the
sanitary sewer system. [Amended 9-7-2016 by Ord. No. 145]
(1) No person who owns any property serviced by the sanitary sewer
system shall connect any sump pump, roof drain, foundation drain,
HVAC condensate line or other surface or subsurface water drain,
or sanction any such drains to remain connected, to the sanitary
sewer system.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to perform all
maintenance and to keep the sewer lateral(s) in good condition, by
which:
(a) The sewer lateral and vent cleanouts shall be kept free from
roots, grease deposits, and other solids which may impede the
flow or obstruct the transmission of waste.
(b) All joints shall be tight and all pipes shall be sound to prevent
filtration by waste or infiltration by stormwater.
(c) The sewer lateral shall be free of any structural defects,
cracks, breaks, or missing portions and the grade shall be
uniform without sags or offsets.
(d) The sewer lateral shall have a two-way cleanout located at the
property line or at the sewer main easement. All cleanouts
shall be securely capped with a proper cap at all times.
(3) All sewer lateral work on private property must be performed by a
licensed professional, and any applicable Township permits must
be obtained and approved by a Township official.
(4) Chadds Ford Township and/or its agents, employees, designees, or
assigns may, upon 30 days' notice, undertake such inspection or
test as it may deem appropriate to determine the condition of any
sewer lateral. Any such inspection or test may only take place
during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday. The owner of the affected property shall make all areas to
be inspected or tested available to the Township or its designee,
upon request.
(5) If, in the sole opinion of the inspector, any illegal stormwater inflow
connections are found, or the sewer lateral is determined to be in
unsatisfactory condition, the sewer lateral shall be repaired or
replaced by the owner of the property at such owner's expense
within 30 days or at the expiration of any such extension as
§ 95-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-34
1:115
§ 95-35. Gas stations and restaurants discharging into community
systems.
§ 95-36. Other establishments discharging into community systems.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors and oil reclaimers shall be provided in
any other buildings or establishments discharging waste, water or other
substances into community sewage disposal systems when deemed
necessary by the Township Code Official for the proper handling of liquid
wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients. Hair traps shall be provided
for all barbershops and beauty parlors.
outlined above of the date the Township notifies such owner of the
condition.
(6) The Township shall reinspect the property upon notice from the
property owner that the deficiency has been repaired, or 90 days
after the notice of deficiency was first sent by the Township,
whichever occurs first.
(7) If a violation exists, the property owner will be responsible for
reimbursing the Township for all inspection fees.
(8) Plumbing codes and other applicable regulations, adopted or
amended by Chadds Ford Township, the Chadds Ford Township
Sewer Authority and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection shall govern the construction of private
lateral maintenance, connection, repair and inspection.
A. Gas stations, garages and other motor vehicle service or repair facilities
discharging waste, water or other substances into community sewage
disposal systems are required to provide oil interceptors and reclaimers
approved by the Township, in the proper location where the hazardous
or volatile liquids are to be intercepted.
B. Restaurants discharging water, waste or other substances into
community sewage disposal systems are required by the Township to
provide grease interceptors of the type approved by the Township
(Series J of the Josam Manufacturing Company or approved equal of a
size as required by the most current edition of the BOCA Plumbing
Code34).
C. After treatment or passage through the above traps and/or inceptors,
the effluent discharged to a community sewage disposal system may not
contain any of the substances listed in the prohibited discharges
enumerated in § 95-34 above.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 59, Construction Codes.
§ 95-34 CHADDS FORD CODE § 95-37
1:116
§ 95-37. Reporting requirements; inspections.
Owners and operators ("users") of gas stations, restaurants and other
establishments required by this article to have grease and/or oil
interceptors and/or traps shall submit to the Township Code Enforcement
Officer certified quarterly reports (March 31, June 30, September 30, and
December 31) each year in a form prescribed by the Township Code
Enforcement Officer certifying that the grease and/or oil interceptors and
traps have been cleaned. The report provided shall include the name of
the person or contractor responsible for the work, the date of cleaning
and the location where the material is being disposed of. All interceptors
and traps must be approved by the Township Code Enforcement Officer
and shall be located such that they are readily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. The Township Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect all such
facilities quarterly and review the owner/operator's quarterly reports and
if any inspection or quarterly report indicates that prohibited discharges
have occurred (§ 95-34 above), the Township Code Enforcement Officer
may, in addition to any other remedies, conduct additional inspections and/
or require additional reports or tests as needed to correct the deficiencies.
Costs of all reports and any necessary additional inspections or tests shall
be borne by the user.
§ 95-38. Fees.
The Township may establish fees to be charged to the users of facilities
requiring oil interceptors and/or grease traps to cover the administrative
and inspection expenses incurred in the administration and/or enforcement
of the provisions of this article.
§ 95-39. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of any provisions of this article shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a fine/judgment of not more than $600 per violation plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Township
as a result thereof. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. All fines, judgments, costs and reasonable attorney's fees
imposed shall be enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time
provided by applicable law and shall be payable to the Township.
§ 95-40. Remedies nonexclusive.
The remedies provided herein are not intended to be exclusive. The
Township reserves the right to take any and all action permitted by law
against a person violating this article.
§ 95-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-40
1:117

ARTICLE V
Grinder Pumps
[Adopted 12-7-2005 by Ord. No. 111]
§ 95-41. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the installation, use
and maintenance of grinder pumps and any associated force mains or lowpressure
laterals. It is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is
necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the health, safety
and welfare of the inhabitants of this municipality.
§ 95-42. (Reserved)35
§ 95-43. Planning requirements.
The connection of any property to any sewage system through the use of
grinder pumps, their associated force mains, or low-pressure laterals shall
occur only after an official plan revision to the municipality's Act 537 Plan,
approved by both the municipality and Department, designates that the
proposed properties be served by such a connection.
§ 95-44. Powers of Authority.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules
and regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from time
to time to effect the purposes herein. The Authority is hereby authorized
and empowered to take such other actions as are necessary, including,
but not limited to, entering into agreements with property owners that
assure proper operation and maintenance of sewage facilities within the
municipality's borders, including, but not limited to, grinder pumps and any
associated force mains or low-pressure laterals.
§ 95-45. Duties and responsibilities of Authority.
A. The Authority may exercise its powers and legal authority set forth
herein, and under all applicable statutes, ordinances, and other laws to
effect the purposes of this article.
B. The Authority may enter into an agreement with each property owner
proposing to install or who has installed a grinder pump or lowpressure
sewage system to assure the short- and long-term operation
and maintenance, use, service, repair or replacement of such systems.
C. All grinder pumps and low-pressure sewer systems (and the connection
to sewage collection and conveyance systems, installation, use,
operation, maintenance, service, repair and replacement thereof) shall
35.Editor's Note: Former § 95-42, Definitions, as amended, was repealed 9-7-2016 by Ord. No.
145. See now Art. VI, Definitions.
§ 95-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-45
1:119
§ 95-46. Duties and responsibilities of others.
Each property owner served by a grinder pump shall bear full responsibility
for providing, installing, using, operating, maintaining, servicing, repairing
and replacing his/her grinder pump and/or its low-pressure force main or
lateral, unless otherwise set forth herein.
§ 95-47. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided to the Authority by this article or
otherwise available under the law, any violation of §§ 95-44 and 95-45 above
shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the Authority by either
seeking mitigation of the nuisance or appropriate equitable or legal relief
from a court of competent jurisdiction.
comply with the rules and regulations of the Authority in effect from
time to time.
D. The Authority shall be authorized to maintain control over the type of
grinder pumps used and assure that full service is available locally on
short notice.
E. The Authority or municipality shall bear no responsibility for any
purchase, installation, use, operation, maintenance, service, repair, or
replacement of any grinder pump and/or its low-pressure force main or
lateral, except as otherwise set forth herein.
A. The owner of each property served by a grinder pump shall have full
responsibility for using the pump consistent with the manufacturer's
instructions and shall avoid introducing into the sewerage system
materials that may damage the impellers on the pump, including, but
not limited to, items designated as biodegradable in septic tanks.
B. The owner of each property served by a grinder pump shall cease
operations, such as the use of any sink, shower, washing matching,
dishwasher, garbage disposal, toilet or any appliance that discharges
water into the sewer system, during any period when the grinder pump
and/or low-pressure system serving a property is inoperable for more
than 48 hours.
C. Where the use and/ownership of a low-pressure force main or lateral is
shared by property owners of separate properties, they shall submit to
the Authority a Declaration of Easements, Covenants and Restrictions
in recordable form setting forth the agreement of each benefited
property owner with respect to the installation, use, operation,
maintenance, service, repair and replacement of a low-pressure sewer
system, which agreement shall bind all future property owners.
Following the approval of the low-pressure system by all applicable
agencies, the Authority will not issue a permit for its installation until
evidence is presented that the agreement has been recorded in the
Office for the Recording of Deeds, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 95-45 CHADDS FORD CODE § 95-48
1:120
§ 95-48. Rules and regulations.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority to effectuate this
article shall be in conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances
of the municipality, and all applicable laws, and applicable rules and
regulations of administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 95-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-48
1:121

ARTICLE VI
Definitions
[Adopted 9-7-2016 by Ord. No. 145]
§ 95-49. Terms defined.
A. Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ACT 537 PLAN — A municipality's official plan as defined in the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535
(1965), No. 537, as amended, 35 P.S. §§ 750.1 to 750.20a ("Sewage
facilities Act" or "Act 537").
AUTHORITY — The Sewer Authority of Chadds Ford Township,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, or such individuals or agents whom it
may designate.
COMMUNITY ONLOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — A community sewage
system which uses a system of piping, tanks or other facilities for
collecting, treating and disposing of sewage into a subsurface soil
absorption area or retaining tank.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system, whether
publicly or privately owned, providing for the collection, treatment and/
or disposal of sewage:
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage facility, whether publicly
or privately owned, for the collection of sewage from two or more lots,
or two or more equivalent dwelling units, and the treatment or disposal,
or both, of the sewage on one or more of the lots or at another site.
COMMUNITY SEWERAGE SYSTEM — A community sewage system
which uses a method of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment and
disposal other than renovation in a subsurface absorption area, or
retention in a retaining tank.
DEPARTMENT or DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Refers to those provisions for holding tanks
(retaining tanks) as established by DEP at 25 Pa. Code § 73.61 et. seq.
as well as all relevant installation standards and relevant locational
standards established by such regulations. Said design standards are
incorporated herein by reference as fully as though set forth at length.
As used herein, the term "design standards" shall be deemed to include
"installation standards" and "locational standards."
(1) From two or more lots or commercial buildings;
From a single commercial building with more than one business
occupant; or
(2)
(3) With a volume of more than 2,500 gallons of sewage daily.
§ 95-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-49
1:123
GRINDER PUMP — Any electric, motor-driven, submersible, centrifugal
pump capable of macerating all material found in normal domestic
sanitary sewage, including reasonable amounts of objects, such as
plastics, sanitary napkins, disposable diapers, rubber and the like, to
a fine slurry, and pumping this material through a small diameter
discharge.
HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal
of the sewage at another site. Holding tanks include but are not limited
to the following:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the municipality upon
which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from
which structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall or may
be discharged.
INDIVIDUAL ONLOT SEWAGE SYSTEM — An individual sewage
system which uses a system of piping, tanks or other facilities for
collecting, treating and disposing of sewage into a subsurface
absorption area or a retaining tank.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage facility, whether publicly
or privately owned, located on a single lot and serving one equivalent
dwelling unit and collecting, treating and disposing of sewage in whole
or in part into the soil or into waters of this commonwealth or by means
of conveyance of retaining tank wastes to another site for final disposal.
INDIVIDUAL SEWERAGE SYSTEM — An individual system which uses
a method of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal
other than a renovation in subsurface absorption area, or retention in a
retaining tank.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
CHEMICAL TOILET — A toilet using chemicals that discharge to a
holding tank.
(1)
RETENTION TANK — A holding tank where sewage is conveyed to
it by a water carrying system.
(2)
VAULT PIT PRIVY — A holding tank designed to receive sewage
where water under pressure is not available.
(3)
INTERIM HOLDING TANK — A tank employed with the Authority's
approval to hold sewage only until such time as a Pennsylvania DEP
operating permit can be obtained for a permanent sewage disposal
system.
(4)
REPAIR HOLDING TANK — A tank used to hold sewage when no
other approved method of disposing of sewage is available on the
site of an existing, but ineffective, system.
(5)
§ 95-49 CHADDS FORD CODE § 95-49
1:124
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct
from domestic strength sanitary sewage. Industrial sewage to be
treated by owner to domestic waste strength and composition.
INFILTRATION — Groundwater that enters sanitary sewer systems
through cracks and/or leaks in the sanitary sewer pipes. Cracks or leaks
in sanitary sewer pipes may be caused by age related deterioration,
loose joints, poor design, installation or maintenance errors, damage or
root infiltration. Groundwater can enter these cracks or leaks wherever
sanitary sewer systems lie beneath water tables or the soil above the
sewer systems becomes saturated.
INFLOW — Stormwater that enters into sanitary sewer systems at
points of direct connection to the systems. Various other sources
contribute to inflow, including footing/foundation drains, roof drains
or leaders, downspouts, drains from window wells, outdoor basement
stairwells, drains from driveways, groundwater/basement sump pumps,
HVAC condensate lines and even streams and underground springs.
These sources are typically improperly or illegally connected to sanitary
sewer systems, via either direct connections or discharge into sinks
or tubs that are directly connected to the sewer system. An improper
connection lets water from sources other than sanitary fixtures and
drains to enter the sanitary sewer system.
MUNICIPALITY — Chadds Ford Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
OFFICIAL PLAN REVISION — A change in the municipality's Act 537
Plan to provide for additional or newly identified future or existing
sewage facilities needs, as defined fully in Section 1 of the Sewage
facilities Act, 35 P.S. § 750.1.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of any property.
PERSON — Any individual, legal entity, partnership, business,
corporation or company.
PROPERTY — Any real property located within the boundaries of
Chadds Ford Township.
PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM — A community sewerage system owned or
operated by the Township or the Authority.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The liquid-carrying household and toilet wastes
from residences, business buildings, institutions, and commercial and
industrial establishments.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — Pumps, piping, lines, sewers, laterals
and connections thereto, which transport wastewater to the Chadds
Ford Township Sewer Authority's destination for wastewater treatment.
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products
or excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings
§ 95-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-49
1:125
or animals and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful
or inimical to the public health, or to animal or aquatic life or to
the use of water for domestic water supply or for recreation or any
substance which constitutes pollution under the Clean Streams Law, 35
P.S. §§ 691.1 to 691.1001, as amended.
SEWER LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from
a sewer to the curbline or, if there shall be no curbline, then to the
property line; or, if no such lateral shall be provided, then "lateral"
shall mean that portion of or place in a sewer which is provided for
connection of any building sewer.
STORMWATER — All stormwater, rainwater, surface water, roof runoff
or surface drainage.
STREAM DISCHARGE SYSTEM — Any sewage disposal system
discharging into a stream after treatment.
TOWNSHIP — The municipal government known as "Chadds Ford
Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania."
B. Other definitions. All other words and terms, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings set forth in Title 25, Chapter 73, Standards for
Sewage Disposal Facilities, of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP), unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
§ 95-49 CHADDS FORD CODE § 95-49
1:126
Chapter 100
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 100-1. Definitions.
A. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this chapter:
COLLECTOR — Any person collecting or transporting municipal solid
waste for owners or occupants of property in the municipality, including
the municipality itself if it undertakes the collection of municipal solid
waste directly, and any business or institution within the municipality
which generates municipal solid waste and uses its own employees and
equipment for the collection and transport of the waste.
CONTRACTOR — One or more contractors with whom the county or
the Delaware County Solid Waste Authority (hereinafter referred to as
"Authority") contracts for construction and operation of the proposed
resource recovery plant or plants, or other solid waste facilities.
MUNICIPALITY — Chadds Ford Township.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste, and other material including solid or
semisolid material generated in residential, municipal, commercial, or
institutional establishments and from community activities, and other
solid waste which is within the definition of "municipal solid waste" as
set forth in the Act and which the county, Authority, or contractor by its
ordinance or regulations is willing to accept at the plant, but excluding:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or
governmental entity, with the exception of the county, Authority, or
designated contractor.
PLANT — The energy and/or material recovery facility or facilities,
transfer station or solid waste plants owned by the county or Authority
or the contractor, including all associated property and equipment.
(1) Any liquid waste or sludge;
All wastes which are defined by existing or future federal or state
law or regulations as hazardous waste or industrial residual waste;
(2)
Any waste which may be marketable and which is intentionally
segregated for purposes of recycling; and
(3)
Materials specifically excluded under applicable county
ordinances.
(4)
§ 95-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-1
1:127
§ 100-2. Accumulation and unlawful disposal prohibited.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person
to accumulate upon any property in this municipality any municipal solid
waste or to dispose of it except in accordance with this chapter, and other
applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
§ 100-3. County/Authority operations and charges.
The municipality has been advised by the county that the solid waste plan
proposes to provide for a plant or plants which will be operated efficiently
and economically by the contractor and/or by the county and in accordance
with all applicable laws and regulations, and also that the contractor and/or
the county will impose reasonable charges, which will be uniform among all
classes of users of the plant or plants.
§ 100-4. Operations by licensed collectors.
Except as it pertains to municipal solid waste collected directly by this
municipality, all collectors of municipal solid waste generated within the
municipality shall be licensed by the municipality and shall be responsible
for collecting municipal solid waste from properties in the municipality
pursuant to a contract between them and the municipality and/or contracts
between them and the owners or occupants of properties.
§ 100-5. Disposal at designated site.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any site owned and operated by the county,
the Authority, or its designated contractor for the purpose of transfer,
processing, or disposal of municipal solid waste, including landfills,
resource recovery plants, and transfer stations.
B. Certain terms used herein are also defined in the recitals hereto.36
A. All collectors shall deliver and dispose of all municipal solid waste
collected within the municipality at the solid waste facility designated
by the county subject to such reasonable regulations for the operation
thereof as may be established by the county and/or contractor.
B. Delivery and disposal at any other place shall be a violation of this
chapter and cause for revocation of the collector's license, except in
special circumstances approved in advance by the municipality and the
county and/or contractor.
C. All collectors shall comply in their operation with all applicable laws,
ordinances, and regulations pertaining to the collection and
transportation of municipal solid waste.
36.Editor's Note: The prefatory clauses of this Ord. No. 77 are on file in the Township offices.
§ 100-1 CHADDS FORD CODE § 100-6
1:128
§ 100-6. Private dumps, transfer stations and landfills prohibited.
No person shall use or permit to be used any property owned or occupied
by him within the municipality as a public or private dump, transfer station,
or landfill for municipal solid waste, whether generated within the
municipality or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the
municipality.
§ 100-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No.
122]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment
shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by
the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant
to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists,
and each truckload of illegally delivered trash, shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Township are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce
compliance herewith.
§ 100-8. Abatement of nuisance.
In addition to the remedies provided in § 100-7 herein, any continued
violation of this chapter or other applicable law which shall constitute a
nuisance in fact, or which in the opinion of the governing body of this
municipality shall constitute a nuisance, may be abated by proceeding
against the violator in a court of equity for relief.
§ 100-9. Rules and regulations.
The collection of municipal solid waste in the municipality and the disposal
thereof shall be subject to such further reasonable rules and regulations
as may from time to time be promulgated by the governing body of the
municipality, including but without limitation regulations as to the form
of license application, the amount of fee to be charged for said licenses,
and the terms of the licenses and license issuance procedures; provided,
however, that no such rules and regulations shall be contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, the county solid waste plan, or applicable law.
§ 100-10. Amendments to chapter; contract provisions.
The municipality reserves the right to amend this chapter or repeal it at
any time; provided, however, that the requirement for use of the designated
solid waste facility for disposal of municipal solid waste from the
municipality shall not be amended or repealed without the prior express
written approval of the county during the term of the contract between
§ 100-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-10
1:129
the county (or Authority) and contractor providing for the construction
and operation of the plant, which contract shall have a term of 25 years.
For the purposes of securing the contractor's financing, such requirement
shall be deemed to be a contract between the county, the contractor, and
the municipality, which the municipality (subject to the terms of the joint
cooperation agreement set forth below) agrees to enforce so that the
municipal solid waste from the municipality will be available to provide a
source of energy for the plant. If the municipality is not now a collector but
in the future it becomes a collector it agrees to deliver all municipal solid
waste so collected to the plant.
§ 100-11. Joint cooperation agreement.
§ 100-12. Adoption of solid waste management plan.
A. The municipality agrees to deliver or cause to be delivered during the
term of this agreement all municipal solid waste, as defined herein,
generated within the municipality for disposal at a facility designated
by the county.
B. The county agrees to accept for disposal all such municipal solid waste
described in Subsection A above upon completion and commencement
of operation of the plant in accordance with a contract, containing
terms satisfactory to the county, with the contractor providing for
construction and operation of the plant.
C. The term of this agreement shall be for a period of 25 years,
commencing on January 1, 2017, and ending on December 31, 2041.
[Amended 7-6-2016 by Ord. No. 143]
D. The county shall hold harmless and defend the municipality from any
suit, claim or action challenging the legality of this chapter against the
municipality. In the event that any such suit, claim or action is brought
against the municipality, the municipality shall authorize the county,
through its designated legal counsel, to defend against the same, and
the municipality shall cooperate with the county in said defense and
shall give the County Solicitor notice of any such suit, claim or action
within five days of the municipality's receiving notice thereof.
A. The Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) has recommended
that the requirements of the Solid Waste Management Act37 can best be
accomplished on a county-wide basis.
B. The municipality, by formal resolution dated March 3, 1988, authorized
the county to prepare the solid waste management plan on the
municipality's behalf.
C. The county, through the staff of its Public Works Department, its
Planning Commission, and Charles M. Harris and Associates, Inc.,
37.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 100-10 CHADDS FORD CODE § 100-12
1:130
Chapter 102
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 89. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 125.
§ 102-1. Purpose.
This chapter establishes the permit requirements and regulations for
special events to be held in Chadds Ford Township in order to properly
provide for public health, safety and welfare.
§ 102-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person or any sponsoring organization seeking a special
event permit from the Township in order to conduct or sponsor an event
governed by this chapter. This term shall include, in the case of an
organization applying for a special event permit, an individual designated
by such organization as the responsible contact person.
APPROVED USE — A use:
FACILITY — Any auxiliary lighting, portable toilet, first aid station, cooking
structure, food or beverage location, inflatable, generator, tent, canopy or
removable structure.
Consulting Engineers, prepared a ten-year plan for solid waste
management.
D. The appropriate municipal officials of this municipality have reviewed
the findings and recommendations of the plan as it affects this
municipality, have found the plan acceptable, and have recommended
that the plan be adopted.
E. The municipality, accordingly, hereby accepts and adopts the Solid
Waste Management Study prepared by the county as the ten-year plan
for solid waste management required by the Act.
F. The county is hereby authorized to submit the plan to DEP for the final
approval on behalf of the municipality.
A. Permitted by right in the zoning district in which a property sits;
B. Approved by variance, special exception or conditional use; or
That constitutes a nonconforming use pursuant to § 135-166 of the
Chadds Ford Township Code.
C.
§ 100-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-2
1:131
SPECIAL EVENT —
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Township Manager of Chadds Ford Township
or his/her designee.
§ 102-3. Permit required.
No special event may be conducted without first having obtained a special
event permit from Chadds Ford Township.
§ 102-4. Permit exemptions.
A special event permit is not required for the following:
Any outdoor event not more than three days in duration:
(1) Where 225 or more individuals are gathered;
(2) That utilizes facilities; or
(3) Which may interfere with normal traffic flow.
A.
Any event more than three days in duration shall require a separate
permit for each additional day. "Special event" shall not include private
events held at a property being used for a residential purpose unless
they are commercial in nature or involve more than 225 people.
B.
A. State or federally sponsored parades or events.
B. Funeral processions and memorial services.
C. Any special event sponsored by the Township, whether or not occurring
exclusively on Township property.
D. First Amendment activity on public property that does not obstruct
Township streets or sidewalks nor compromise the ability of the
Township or first responders to respond to an emergency.
E. An event that constitutes an approved use for the property at which it is
hosted, and:
(1) Provides sufficient approved on-lot parking for the number of
participants anticipated at such event;
(2) Meets all applicable laws and regulations;
(3) Will not utilize any facilities except tents, canopies or removable
structures located more than:
(a) Two hundred fifty feet away from residential structures; and
(b) One hundred feet from residential property lines; and
(4) Will not interfere with normal traffic flow.
§ 102-2 CHADDS FORD CODE § 102-5
1:132
§ 102-5. Permit fee.
The permit fee shall be established by resolution in an amount determined
by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 102-6. Application for permit.
Any person or organization intending to conduct or sponsor a special event
shall apply to the Township with a special event permit at least 60 days
prior to the date of the proposed event. The following information shall be
included in the application and subject to review by the Township Manager,
Board of Supervisors, Fire Marshal, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, and/
or any Township official the Township Manager deems necessary:
A. Description of special event, including:
(1) The nature and purpose of the special event;
(2) Any facilities; and
(3) Any outdoor music, amplified sounds, and/or similar activity.
B. Name, address and cell phone number for the point person of contact
for the special event of the sponsoring organization or individual.
C. Proposed date(s), location and hours of operation.
D. Schedule of proposed special event.
E. The estimated number of participants or spectators.
F. A site plan, including, but not limited to, the location of the special
event, including its boundaries, the locations of any facilities, sound
amplification equipment, emergency exits, vehicular entrances and
exits, locations of traffic cones or barricades, all parking locations and
shuttle bus routes, and parade or race routes (including organizing and
disbanding areas).
G. Signage plan, including, but not limited to, the location, type, and
removal date of each sign to be placed in Chadds Ford Township.
H. A narrative outlining security, traffic, crowd control measures,
emergency vehicle access, emergency evacuation or shelter in place
plan and such other necessary preparations as the event might require.
I. PLCB written approval, if required.
J. A letter from the property owner authorizing such activity, if the owner
is not the sponsor of the special event.
K. Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture temporary food facility license,
if applicable. (Note: if the event is three or fewer days, it is exempt from
licensure.)
§ 102-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-6
1:133
§ 102-7. Indemnification agreement.
Prior to the issuance of a special event, the permit applicant and an
authorized officer of the sponsoring organization, if any, must sign an
agreement to reimburse Chadds Ford Township for any costs incurred by
it in repairing damage to Township property occurring in connection with
the permitted event proximately caused by the actions of the permittee, its
officers, employees or agents or any person who was under the permittee's
control insofar as permitted by law. The agreement shall also provide that
the permittee shall defend the Township against and indemnify and hold
the Township harmless from any liability to any persons resulting from
any damage or injury occurring in connection with the permitted event
proximately caused by the actions of the permittee, its officers, employees
or agents or any person who was under the permittee's control insofar
as permitted by law. Persons who merely join in a parade event are not
considered by that reason alone to be under the control of the permittee.
§ 102-8. Insurance requirements.
L. A certificate of insurance, along with all required endorsements,
naming the Township as additional insured.
M. Any supplemental information deemed necessary to determine whether
a special event permit shall be issued.
N. The applicable permit fee.
O. A signed reimbursement agreement by the applicant for any
professional time spent on reviews, inspections or work necessary prior,
during and after the event.
P. Any other permits as required by the Township.
A. The applicant for a special event permit must possess or obtain public
liability insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law
for damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising
from or connected to the event. Such insurance shall name Chadds Ford
Township, its officers, employees and agents as additional insureds.
Coverage shall be a comprehensive general liability insurance policy.
The following minimum limits shall be required:
(1) Five hundred thousand dollars for each person for bodily injury;
$1,000,000 for each occurrence of bodily injury; and $250,000 for
each occurrence of property damage; or
(2) One million dollars for each occurrence of combined single limit
bodily injury and property damage.
(3) If food or nonalcoholic beverages are sold or served at the event,
the policy must also include an endorsement for products liability
in an amount not less than $500,000. If alcoholic beverages are
sold or served at the event, the policy must also include an
§ 102-6 CHADDS FORD CODE § 102-8
1:134
§ 102-9. Timeline for decision.
The Township shall act upon a completed application for a special event
within 45 days after receipt of a completed application thereof. All
applications will be discussed at an advertised Board of Supervisors
Meeting. The applicant shall produce evidence satisfactory to the Township
of notification to all abutting property owners and those residents within
500 feet of the property holding the special event prior to the date of
the application's discussion at the Board of Supervisors meeting. If the
application is approved, the Township Manager shall issue a special event
permit in writing, upon agreement by the applicant, to the terms and
conditions of the permit. If the application is disapproved, a notice shall be
mailed to the applicant and shall include the reasons for denial of the permit
and the procedure for appeal.
§ 102-10. Standards for approval or denial of permit.
After review of the application, the Board of Supervisors may:
endorsement for liquor liability in an amount not less than
$500,000.
B. A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance, along with all
necessary endorsements, must be filed with the Township no less than
10 days before the date of the special event.
A. Approve a special events application in writing with possible conditions
as it deems necessary; or
B. Deny a special event permit for reasons including but not limited to:
(1) The special event would interrupt the safe and orderly movement of
vehicular traffic on streets or commercial parking lots so as to
create a real and present danger to the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of Chadds Ford Township or the traveling public.
(2) The special event will pose a real and present danger to the general
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Chadds Ford Township
by preventing firefighting equipment, ambulance service, rescue
vehicles or other public safety vehicles from reaching any person or
property in Chadds Ford Township.
(3) The special event will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses
or residents or will require the diversion of public employees such
that their absence from their usual assignments would pose a
danger to the residents of Chadds Ford Township.
(4) The application contains incomplete or inaccurate information.
(5) The applicant has failed to comply with the terms of this chapter,
including failure to remit all fees.
§ 102-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-11
1:135
§ 102-11. Notice to officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of the special event permit, the Township
Manager shall, if applicable, send a copy of the permit to the following:
§ 102-12. Sanitation and cleanup.
The applicant shall have the sole responsibility of clearing the special event
location of any rubbish and debris and returning it to its pre-event condition
within 48 hours of the conclusion of the event. If the applicant fails to
do so, the Township shall have grounds to deny future permit applications
or require applicant or sponsoring organization to pay all costs from any
previous event that are outstanding and post a deposit to cover estimated
costs going forward.
§ 102-13. Revocation.
Reasons for revocation of a special event permit, include, but are not limited
to:
§ 102-14. Appeals procedure.
Any applicant whose special event permit application has been denied or
revoked may appeal the decision to the Delaware County Court of Common
Pleas.
§ 102-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity which violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, after a hearing before a District Justice, be
subjected to a fine not exceeding $500 per day for each day of violation,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
A. Board of Supervisors.
B. Fire Marshal.
C. Township Secretary.
D. Pennsylvania State Police.
E. Building Inspector.
F. Zoning Officer.
A. Application contains incomplete or inaccurate information.
B. Applicant fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit.
C. Applicant fails to arrange for or pay all fees.
D. Disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency exists.
E. Noncompliance with existing Chadds Ford Township codes.
§ 102-11 CHADDS FORD CODE § 102-15
1:136
Township in the enforcement of this chapter. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or
agents of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,
including injunction, to enforce compliance with this chapter.
Chapter 105
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 95.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
110.
Water conservation — See Ch. 129.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 102-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 102-15
1:137

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 105-101. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Chadds Ford Township Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 105-102. Statement of findings.
The governing body of Chadds Ford Township finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces infiltration, and
threatens public health and safety.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development throughout a watershed can also harm surface
water resources by changing the natural hydrologic patterns,
accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion of stream
beds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation), destroying
aquatic habitat, and elevating aquatic pollutant concentrations and
loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals, and pathogens.
Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss of recharge.
C. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
minimization of impacts of development, redevelopment, and activities
causing accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is
fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the protection of
the people of this municipality and all of the people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing
infiltration for water supplies and base flow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Impacts from stormwater runoff can be minimized by using project
designs that maintain the natural hydrologic regime and sustain high
water quality, infiltration, stream base flow, and aquatic ecosystems.
The most cost-effective and environmentally advantageous way to
manage stormwater runoff is through nonstructural project design that
minimizes impervious surfaces and sprawl, avoids sensitive areas (i.e.,
stream buffers, floodplains, steep slopes), and considers topography
and soils to maintain the natural hydrologic regime.
F. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
§ 105-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-102
1:139
§ 105-103. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare within Chadds Ford Township by maintaining the natural hydrologic
regime and minimizing the impacts described in § 105-102 of this chapter
through provisions designed to:
G. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
H. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
municipality.
A. Promote alternative project designs and layouts that minimize the
impacts on surface water and groundwater.
B. Promote nonstructural best management practices (BMPs).
C. Minimize increases in runoff stormwater volume.
D. Minimize impervious surfaces.
E. Manage accelerated stormwater runoff and erosion and sedimentation
problems and stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause these problems.
F. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
G. Utilize and preserve existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, requiring a
minimum of structures and relying on natural processes.
I. Focus on infiltration of stormwater to maintain base flow, to prevent
degradation of surface water and groundwater quality, and to otherwise
protect water resources.
J. Protect base flows and quality of streams and watercourses, where
possible.
K. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at Title 25, Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 93.4(a) requiring
protection and maintenance of "existing uses" and maintenance of the
level of water quality to support those uses in all streams, and the
protection and maintenance of water quality in "special protection"
streams.
§ 105-102 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-103
1:140
§ 105-104. Statutory authority.
Chadds Ford Township is empowered or required to regulate land use
activities that affect runoff and surface water and groundwater quality and
quantity by the authority of:
§ 105-105. Applicability; regulated activities.
L. Address the quality and quantity of stormwater discharges from the
development site.
M. Provide standards to meet certain NPDES MS4 permit requirements.
N. Implement an illicit discharge detection and elimination program that
addresses nonstormwater discharges into the municipality's separate
storm sewer system (MS4).
O. Preserve the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
P. Prevent accelerated scour, erosion and sedimentation of stream
channels.
Q. Provide performance standards and design criteria based on
watershed-wide stormwater management planning.
R. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management facilities and BMPs that are implemented
within the municipality.
A. The Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as
amended, the Storm Water Management Act (hereinafter referred to as
"the Act").
B. The Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 66501 et seq., and § 66601
et seq.
C. The Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.38
A. All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater
runoff, including but not limited to land development, redevelopment,
and earth disturbance activity located within Chadds Ford Township,
are subject to regulation by this chapter.
B. This chapter contains the stormwater management performance
standards and design criteria that are necessary from a watershed-wide
perspective. Local stormwater management design criteria (e.g., inlet
spacing, inlet type, collection system design and details, outlet
structure design, etc.) shall continue to be regulated by the applicable
municipal ordinances and applicable state regulations.
38.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 105-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-106
1:141
§ 105-106. Exemptions.
A. An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing the
requirements of this chapter or from implementing such measures as
are necessary to protect public health, safety, and property. An
exemption shall not relieve the applicant from complying with the
special requirements for watersheds draining to identified high-quality
(HQ) or exceptional-value (EV) waters or any other current or future
state or municipal water quality protection requirements. If a drainage
problem is documented or known to exist downstream of, or is expected
from, the proposed activity, then Chadds Ford Township may withdraw
exemptions listed in Table 106.1 and require the applicant to comply
with all requirements of this chapter. Even though the applicant is
exempt, he is not relieved from complying with other municipal
ordinances or regulations.
B. General exemptions.
(1) Table 106.1 summarizes the exemptions from certain provisions of
this chapter. Exemptions are for the items noted in Table 106.1 only
and shall not relieve the applicant from other applicable sections of
this chapter.
(2) Any regulated activity that is exempt from some provisions of this
chapter is exempt only from those provisions. If development is to
take place in phases, the developer is responsible for implementing
the requirements of this chapter as the impervious cover/earth
disturbance threshold is met. The date of adoption of this chapter
shall be the starting point from which to consider tracts as "parent
tracts" in which future subdivisions and respective impervious area
and earth disturbance computations shall be cumulatively
considered. Exemption shall not relieve the applicant from
implementing such measures as are necessary to protect health,
safety, and property.
For example:
If a property owner proposes a one-hundred-fifty-square-foot shed
after adoption of this chapter, that property owner would be
exempted from water quality and quantity requirements of this
chapter as noted in Table 106.1 of this chapter. If, at a later date,
the property owner proposes to construct a four-hundred-ninetynine-
square-foot room in addition, the applicant would be required
to comply with the requirements for the Simplified Method for the
full 649 square feet of impervious cover created since adoption of
this chapter. If an additional seven-hundred-square-foot swimming
pool/patio is proposed later, the property owner would be required
to implement the full stormwater quantity and quality control
submission requirements of this chapter for the total 1,349 square
feet of additional impervious surface added to the original
property since adoption of this chapter.
§ 105-106 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-106
1:142
Table 106.1
Exemptions
Article or
Section
Type of
Project
Proposed Impervious
Surface Earth Disturbance
0-499
sq. ft.
500-999
sq. ft.
1,000+
sq. ft.
0-3,999
sq. ft.
disturbance
4,000
sq. ft. to
< 1 acre > 1 acre
Article IV,
SWM Site
Plan
Requirements
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not
exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Exempt Modified1 Not
exempt
§ 105-304,
Nonstructural
project
design
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not
exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Exempt Not
exempt
Not
exempt
§ 105-305,
Infiltration
volume
requirements
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not
exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Exempt Exempt Not
exempt
§ 105-306,
Water
quality
requirements
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not
exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Modified2 Modified2 Not
exempt
§ 105-307,
Stream
bank
erosion
requirements
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Not
exempt
Simplified
approach
Not
exempt
Exempt Exempt Not
exempt
§ 105-308,
Stormwater
peak rate
control
Development
Redevelopment
Exempt Exempt Not
exempt
Exempt Not
exempt
Not
exempt
Erosion and
sediment
pollution
control
requirements
Must comply with Title 25, Chapter 102, of the Pa. Code and
other applicable state and municipal codes, including the Clean
Streams Law
Not
exempt
Legend:
• "Proposed impervious surface" in Table 106.1 includes new, additional, or replacement
impervious surface/cover as part of development or redevelopment.
• Exempt - Exempt from required section provision only; SWM site plan submission may
still be required if other section provisions are applicable.
§ 105-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-106
1:143
Legend:
• Modified1 - A modified SWM site plan need only consist of items in §§ 105-402A(2) and
(4); 105-402B(7), (8), (11) and (22); and 105-402D(1) and (3) and related supportive
material needed to determine compliance with §§ 105-304 and 105-308. A modified
SWM site plan is required that includes all elements of § 105-304 as applicable.
• Modified2 - A modified SWM site plan need only consist of items and related material
needed to determine compliance with § 105-306D.
• Simplified approach - Must comply with provisions of Appendix B of this chapter.
• Redevelopment - See § 105-308 for alternate stormwater peak rate control criteria.
C. Exemptions for specific activities.
(1) Use of land for gardening or home consumption.
(2) Agriculture when operated in accordance with a conservation plan,
nutrient management plan, or erosion and sedimentation control
plan approved by the County Conservation District, including
activities such as growing crops, rotating crops, tilling soil, and
grazing animals. For agriculture with an approved conservation
plan, installation of new or expansion of existing farmsteads,
animal housing, waste storage, and production areas having
impervious surfaces that result in a net increase in impervious
surface of between 500 and 999 square feet shall apply the
simplified approach, and net increases in impervious surface of
greater than or equal to 1,000 square feet shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(3) Forest management operations which are following the
Department of Environmental Protection's (PADEP) management
practices contained in its publication "Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Guidelines for Forestry" are operating
under an approved erosion and sedimentation plan and must
comply with the stream buffer requirements in § 105-306D.
(4) Repaving without reconstruction.
(5) Emergency exemption: emergency maintenance work performed
for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare. A written
description of the scope and extent of any emergency work
performed shall be submitted to Chadds Ford Township within two
calendar days of the commencement of the activity. If the Township
finds that the work is not an emergency, then the work shall cease
immediately, until a stormwater site plan in accordance with this
ordinance is submitted and approved by the municipality.
(6) Maintenance exemption: any maintenance to an existing
stormwater management system made in accordance with plans
and specifications approved by the Township Engineer or
Township.
§ 105-106 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-107
1:144
§ 105-107. Compatibility with other ordinances or legal
requirements.
A. Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
B. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or stringent
requirements for stormwater management, the specific requirements
contained in this chapter shall be followed.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters that do not
conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting
provisions in other municipal ordinances or regulations shall be
construed to retain. The requirements of this chapter shall supersede
any conflicting requirements in other municipal ordinances or
regulations.
§ 105-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-107
1:145

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 105-201. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 105-202. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural processes alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising
livestock, including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing, nursery
and sod operations, excluding greenhouse structures, and installation of
conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is
not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and/or rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner or other person who has filed an application to
the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated activity defined in
§ 105-105 of this chapter.
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — Engineering or site drawings maintained by the
contractor as he constructs the project and upon which he documents the
actual locations of the building components and changes to the original
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, unit of
government, or any other similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied, or maintained."
§ 105-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-202
1:147
contract documents. These documents, or a copy of same, are turned over
to the Municipal Engineer at the completion of the project.
BANKFULL — The channel at the top-of-bank or point from where water
begins to overflow onto a floodplain.
BASE FLOW — The portion of stream discharge derived from groundwater;
the sustained discharge that does not result from direct runoff or from
water diversions, reservoir releases, piped discharges, or other human
activities.
BIORETENTION — A stormwater retention area that utilizes woody and
herbaceous plants and soils to remove pollutants before infiltration occurs.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
infiltration, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter. Stormwater
BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories or measures:
"structural" or "nonstructural." In this chapter, "nonstructural BMPs or
measures" refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that
attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff,
whereas "structural BMPs or measures" are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low-impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
BUFFER — See "riparian buffer."
CHANNEL — An open drainage feature through which stormwater flows.
Channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and man-made
drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes flowing partly
full.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, or headward cutting of
channels and waterways caused by stormwater runoff or bankfull flows.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CLEAN FILL — Uncontaminated, non-water-soluble, nondecomposable
inert solid material. The term includes soil, rock, stone, dredged material,
used asphalt (except milled asphalt), and brick, rock or concrete from
construction and demolition activities that is separate from other waste
and recognizable as such (25 Pa. Code §§ 271.101 and 287.101). The term
does not include materials placed in or on the waters of the Commonwealth
unless otherwise authorized.[Added 9-7-2016 by Ord. No. 146]
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Delaware County Conservation District.
§ 105-202 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-202
1:148
CONVEYANCE — A facility or structure used for the transportation or
transmission of something from one place to another.
CULVERT — A structure, with its appurtenant works, which carries water
under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — A man-made barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid. A dam may include a refuse bank, fill, or structure for
highway, railroad, or other purposes which impounds or may impound water
or another fluid or semifluid.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Delaware County Planning Commission,
Delaware County Conservation District, and/or agent of the governing body
involved with the administration, review, or enforcement of any provisions
of this chapter by contract or memorandum of understanding.
DESIGN PROFESSIONAL (QUALIFIED) — A Pennsylvania registered
professional engineer, registered landscape architect, registered
professional land surveyor trained to develop SWM site plans, or any person
licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment designed to collect and retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely soon
after a rainfall event and become dry until the next rainfall event.
DETENTION or TO DETAIN — The prevention of, or to prevent, the
discharge, directly or indirectly, of a given volume of stormwater runoff into
surface waters by temporary storage.
DEVELOPER — A person who seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the municipality.
DEVELOPMENT, LAND — Any human-induced change to improved or
unimproved real estate, whether public or private, including, but not limited
to, land development, construction, installation, or expansion of a building
or other structure, land division, street construction, drilling, and site
alteration such as embankments, dredging, grubbing, grading, paving,
parking or storage facilities, excavation, filling, stockpiling, or clearing. As
used in this chapter, development encompasses both new development and
redevelopment.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract or parcel of land where any
regulated activity set forth in § 105-105 is planned, conducted, or
maintained.
§ 105-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-202
1:149
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The outside bark diameter at
breast height, which is defined as 4.5 feet (1.37 m.) above the forest floor
on the uphill side of the tree.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge that is not
confined to a single point location or channel, including sheet flow or
shallow concentrated flow.
DISCHARGE —
DISCHARGE POINT — The point of discharge for a stormwater facility.
DISTURBED AREA — Unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
DITCH — A man-made waterway constructed for irrigation or stormwater
conveyance purposes.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed, located such that overland or
pipe flow from the project site would be directed towards it by gravity.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transport stormwater runoff that includes channels, swales,
pipes, conduits, culverts, and storm sewers.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the municipality after the
stormwater management site plan has been approved.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY — A conveyance area that is used to pass a peak
discharge greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
stormwater facility.
ENCROACHMENT — A structure or activity that changes, expands, or
diminishes the course, current, or cross section of a watercourse, floodway,
or body of water.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including water/
stream channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan that is designed
to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation. Said plan must be
(verb) To release water from a project, site, aquifer, drainage basin, or
other point of interest.
A.
(noun) The rate and volume of flow of water such as in a stream,
generally expressed in cubic feet per second (see "peak discharge").
B.
§ 105-202 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-202
1:150
submitted to and approved by the appropriate conservation district before
construction can begin.
EXCEPTIONAL-VALUE (EV) WATERS — Surface waters of high quality
which satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection,
Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to
antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to the
proposed alteration. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped land,
the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless the natural land cover
is proven to generate a lower curve number or Rational "c" value, such as
forested lands.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FINANCIAL HARDSHIP — A situation where the greatest possible profit
cannot be fully realized from development/redevelopment on a given parcel
of land due to added costs or burdens associated with the design,
construction, and/or maintenance of stormwater structures, facilities,
buffers and/or setbacks.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of land
areas from the overflow of streams, rivers, and other waters of this
commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or as delineated by the applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard
Boundary Map as being a special flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it
is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top-of-bank.
FLUVIAL GEOMORPHOLOGY — The study of landforms associated with
river channels and the processes that form them.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
associated activities necessary for the management of forest lands. These
include timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high
water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, swale, or diversion berm. The
space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
§ 105-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-202
1:151
GRADE —
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or man-made waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses used to convey surface
water.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells
and springs and is often between saturated soil and rock.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies from rain or overland flow.
HEC-HMS — The United States Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic
Engineering Center (HEC) — Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS). This
model was used to model the Darby-Cobbs and Crum Creek watersheds
during the Act 167 Plan development and was the basis for the standards
and criteria of this chapter.
HIGH-QUALITY (HQ) WATERS — Surface waters having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code
Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards,
§ 93.4b(a).
HOTSPOTS — Areas where land use or activities generate highly
contaminated runoff with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those
typically found in stormwater.
HYDROGRAPH — A graph representing the discharge of water versus time
for a selected point in the drainage system.
HYDROLOGIC REGIME — The hydrologic cycle or balance that sustains
quality and quantity of stormwater, base flow, storage, and groundwater
supplies under natural conditions.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), formerly the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS), into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A
soils, which are very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which
are not very permeable and produce much more runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of water
into the ground. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, streets,
sidewalks, pavements, driveway areas, or roofs. Any surface areas designed
to be gravel or crushed stone shall be regarded as impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
(noun) A slope, usually of a road, channel, or natural ground, specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
(verb) To finish the surface of a roadbed, the top of an embankment, or
the bottom of an excavation.
B.
§ 105-202 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-202
1:152
INFILL — Development that occurs on smaller parcels that remain
undeveloped but are within or in very close proximity to urban or densely
developed areas. Infill development usually relies on existing infrastructure
and does not require an extension of water, sewer, or other public utilities.
INFILTRATION — Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is
absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated
downward to recharge groundwater.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the underground water (e.g., French drains, seepage pits, or seepage
trenches).
INFLOW — The flow entering the stormwater management facility and/or
BMP.
INLET — The upstream end of any structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A stream that flows only part of the time.
Flow generally occurs for several weeks or months in response to seasonal
precipitation or groundwater discharge.
INVERT — The lowest surface, the floor or the bottom of a culvert, drain,
sewer, channel, basin, BMP, or orifice.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LIMITING ZONE — A soil horizon or condition in the soil profile or
underlying strata that includes one of the following:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features;
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.39
C.
A seasonal high-water table, whether perched or regional, determined
by direct observation of the water table or indicated by soil mottling.
A.
39.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503.
§ 105-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-202
1:153
LOT — A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as a
unit.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance used as a reach in watershed-specific hydrologic models.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow, and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MAXIMUM DESIGN STORM — The maximum (largest) design storm that is
controlled by the stormwater facility.
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for a
municipality, planning agency, or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPALITY — Chadds Ford Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
NATURAL CONDITION — Predevelopment condition.
NATURAL HYDROLOGIC REGIME — See "hydrologic regime."
NATURAL RECHARGE AREA — An undisturbed surface area or depression
where stormwater collects and a portion of which infiltrates and replenishes
the underground and groundwater.
NON-POINT-SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGES — Water flowing in stormwater
collection facilities, such as pipes or swales, which is not the result of a
rainfall event or snowmelt.
NONSTRUCTURAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Methods
of controlling stormwater runoff quantity and quality, such as innovative
site planning, impervious area and grading reduction, protection of natural
depression areas, temporary ponding on site, and other techniques.
NPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water Act,
which is delegated to PADEP in Pennsylvania.
NRCS — The Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A conveyance channel that is not enclosed.
A rock with open joints, fracture or solution channels, or masses of
loose rock fragments, including gravel, with insufficient fine soil to fill
the voids between the fragments.
B.
A rock formation, other stratum, or soil condition that is so slowly
permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of water.
C.
§ 105-202 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-202
1:154
OUTFALL — "Point source," as described in 40 CFR 122.2, at the point
where the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters
of the commonwealth.
OUTFLOW — The flow exiting the stormwater management facility and/or
BMP.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal to a stream, river, lake, tidewater, or
artificial drain.
PARENT TRACT — The parcel of land from which a land development or
subdivision originates, determined from the date of municipal adoption of
this chapter.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of parking areas as temporary
impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNSYLVANIA STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
MANUAL (Document Number 363-0300-002) (December 2006) — The Best
Management Practices Manual published by the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection. The manual is to supplement federal and
state regulations and the Department of Environmental Protection's
Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy that emphasizes effective
site planning as the preferred method of managing runoff while also
providing numerous examples of BMPs that can be employed in
Pennsylvania to further avoid and minimize flooding and water resource
problems.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Chadds Ford
Township.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
POST-CONSTRUCTION — The period after construction during which
disturbed areas are stabilized, stormwater controls are in place and
functioning, and all proposed improvements in the approved land
development plan are completed.
PRECONSTRUCTION — Prior to commencing construction activities.
PREDEVELOPMENT CONDITION — Undeveloped/natural condition.
PRETREATMENT — Techniques employed in stormwater BMPs to provide
storage or filtering to trap coarse materials and other pollutants before they
enter the system but not necessarily designed to meet the water quality
volume requirements of § 105-306.
§ 105-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-202
1:155
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — See "design professional (qualified)."
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow.
REACH — Any stream segment or other runoff conveyance used in the
watershed-specific hydrologic models.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of groundwater through the infiltration
of rainfall, other surface waters, or land application of water or treated
wastewater.
RECONSTRUCTION — Demolition and subsequent rebuilding of impervious
surface.
RECORD DRAWINGS — Original documents revised to suit the as-built
conditions and subsequently provided by the Engineer to the client. The
Engineer reviews the contractor's as-builts against his/her own records
for completeness, then either turns these over to the client or transfers
the information to a set of reproducibles, in both cases for the client's
permanent records.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any development that requires demolition or removal
of existing structures or impervious surfaces at a site and replacement
with new impervious surfaces. Maintenance activities such as top-layer
grinding and repaving are not considered to be redevelopment. Interior
remodeling projects and tenant improvements are also not considered to be
redevelopment.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff, including redevelopment.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 92
or Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of existing conditions' peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions' peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
REPAVING — Resurfacing of the impervious surface that does not involve
reconstruction of an existing paved (impervious) surface.
REPLACEMENT PAVING — Reconstruction of and full replacement of an
existing paved (impervious) surface.
RETENTION BASIN — A structure in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Retention basins are designed for
infiltration purposes and do not have an outlet.
RETENTION or TO RETAIN — The prevention of direct discharge of
stormwater runoff into receiving waters or water bodies by temporary or
permanent containment in a pond or depression; examples include systems
§ 105-202 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-202
1:156
which discharge by percolation to groundwater, and/or evaporation
processes and which generally have residence times of less than three days.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average of once every 25 years.
RIPARIAN — Pertaining to anything connected with or immediately adjacent
to the banks of a stream or other body of water.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — An area of land adjacent to a body of water and
managed to maintain the integrity of stream channels and shorelines to:
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches, and
other similar activities.
ROOF DRAINS — A drainage conduit or pipe that collects water runoff from
a roof and leads it away from the structure.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — The temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces using controlled-flow roof
drains in building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SALDO — The Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.40
SEDIMENT — Soil or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water or air.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, or retention or detention basin located
and designed in such a way as to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other
material transported by water during construction.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the soil.
Reduce the impact of upland sources of pollution by trapping, filtering,
and converting sediments, nutrients, and other chemicals; and
A.
B. Supply food, cover and thermal protection to fish and other wildlife.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 110, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 105-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-202
1:157
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHALLOW CONCENTRATED FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in
shallow, defined ruts prior to entering a defined channel or waterway.
SHEET FLOW — A flow process associated with broad, shallow water
movement on sloping ground surfaces that is not channelized or
concentrated.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/cover to
a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
SOURCE WATER PROTECTION AREA (SWPA) — The zone through which
contaminants, if present, are likely to migrate and reach a drinking water
well or surface water intake.
SPECIAL-PROTECTION SUBWATERSHEDS — Watersheds that have been
designated by PADEP as EV or HQ waters.
SPILLWAY — A conveyance that is used to pass the peak discharge of the
maximum design storm that is controlled by the stormwater facility.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Pennsylvania
Code Title 25 and the Clean Streams Law.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage), with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and
depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm "event"
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years (see "return
period").
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation, snow, or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DISTRICT — Those subareas of a
watershed in which some type of detention is required to meet the plan
requirements and the goals of Act 167.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff quality, rate, or quantity. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to, detention
and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration
structures.
§ 105-202 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-202
1:158
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The watershed plan for managing
stormwater runoff for a watershed, adopted by Delaware and Chester
Counties as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167),
as amended, and known as the "Storm Water Management Act." See also
"watershed stormwater management plan."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by
the applicant or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will
be managed at the particular site of interest according to this chapter, and
including all necessary design drawings, calculations, supporting text, and
documentation to demonstrate that the requirements of this chapter have
been met; hereafter referred to as "SWM site plan."
STREAM — A natural watercourse.
STREAM BUFFER — The land area adjacent to each side of a stream
essential to maintaining water quality (see also "riparian buffer").
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated
water of the commonwealth.
SUBAREA (SUBWATERSHED) — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria have been established in the
stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface waters, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial,
within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
SWM SITE PLAN — See "stormwater management site plan."
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time required for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most-distant point of the watershed to a point
of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TOP-OF-BANK — The highest point of elevation in a stream channel cross
section at which a rising water level just begins to flow out of the channel
and over the floodplain.
§ 105-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-202
1:159
UNDEVELOPED CONDITION — Natural condition (see also
"predevelopment condition").
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
VERNAL POND — Seasonal depressional wetlands that are covered by
shallow water for variable periods from winter to spring but may be
completely dry for most of the summer and fall.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — A region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERSHED STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A watershed plan
for managing stormwater runoff for a watershed, adopted by Delaware and
Chester Counties as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), as amended, and known as the "Storm Water Management Act" (e.g.,
Chester Creek, Ridley Creek, Crum Creek, Darby-Cobbs Creeks). See also
"stormwater management plan."
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the commonwealth.
WELLHEAD —
WELLHEAD PROTECTION AREA — The surface and subsurface area
surrounding a water supply well, well field, or spring supplying a public
water system through which contaminants are reasonably likely to move
toward and reach the water source.
WET BASIN — A pond for urban runoff management that is designed to
detain urban runoff and always contains water.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support; and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
WOODS — A natural ground cover with more than one viable tree of a DBH
of six inches or greater per 1,500 square feet which existed within three
years of application; a cover condition for which SCS curve numbers have
been assigned or to which equivalent Rational Method runoff coefficients
have been assigned.
A. A structure built over a well;
B. The source of water for a well.
§ 105-202 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-202
1:160
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management
§ 105-301. General requirements.
A. Applicants proposing regulated activities in the municipality which do
not fall under the exemption criteria shown in § 105-106 shall submit a
stormwater management site plan consistent with this chapter and the
applicable watershed stormwater management plan to the municipality
for review. The stormwater management criteria of this chapter shall
apply to the total proposed development even if development is to take
place in stages.
B. No regulated activity within the municipality shall commence until the
municipality issues approval of an SWM plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(1) For any site with proposed regulated earth disturbance equal to or
greater than one acre where, after a close evaluation of alternative
site designs, it proves to be impracticable to meet the mandatory
minimum volume and infiltration control standards of this chapter
on site, the municipality may approve measures other than those in
this chapter after consultation with and evaluation by PADEP that
the alternate site design meets state water quality requirements
and does not conflict with state law, including, but not limited to,
the Clean Streams Law.
(2) For any site with proposed regulated earth disturbance that is less
than one acre where, after a close evaluation of alternative site
designs, it proves to be impracticable to meet any one or more of
the mandatory minimum standards of this chapter on site, the
municipality may approve measures other than those in this
chapter.
(3) "Regulated earth disturbance" is defined to mean any activity
involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa.
Code, Chapter 92; 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102; or the Clean Streams
Law.
C. The applicant is required to design the site to minimize surface
discharge of stormwater and the creation of impervious surfaces in
order to maintain, as much as possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
D. The SWM site plan must be designed consistent with the sequencing
provisions of § 105-304 to ensure maintenance of the natural hydrologic
regime, to promote infiltration, and to protect groundwater and surface
water quality and quantity. The SWM site plan designer must proceed
sequentially in accordance with Article III of this chapter.
E. Stormwater drainage systems shall be designed in order to preserve
natural flow conditions to the maximum extent practicable.
§ 105-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-301
1:161
F. Existing drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall not be
increased in any manner without written permission/notification from/
to the affected property owner(s). Such discharge shall be subject to
any applicable discharge criteria specified in this chapter and still must
meet the requirements of Act 167.
G. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge, whether proposed to be
concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas, shall be subject
to any applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If diffused
drainage discharge is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other impacts will result from the
concentrated discharge.
H. Where a development site is traversed by a stream, drainage easements
of 10 feet shall be provided on either side of, and conform to the line of,
such streams.
I. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., is encouraged where soil
conditions permit in order to reduce the size or eliminate the need for
detention facilities or other structural BMPs.
J. All stormwater runoff from new development or redevelopment shall be
pretreated for water quality prior to discharge to surface water or
groundwater. Rooftop runoff may go directly to an infiltration BMP or
be evapotranspirated.
K. All regulated activities within the municipality shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes of this
chapter, through these two elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control during earth disturbance activities
(e.g., during construction); and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (i.e., after construction), including
operations and maintenance.
L. The BMPs shall be designed, implemented, and maintained to meet
state water quality, requirements and any other more-stringent
requirements as determined by the municipality.
M. Post-construction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by § 105-306.
N. Operations and maintenance of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be
addressed as required by Article VII.
§ 105-301 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-301
1:162
O. All BMPs used to meet the requirements of this chapter shall conform to
the state water quality requirements and any more-stringent
requirements as set forth by the municipality.
P. Techniques described in Appendix D (Low-Impact Development) of this
chapter shall be considered because they reduce the costs of complying
with the requirements of this chapter and the state water quality
requirements.41
Q. In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the
applicant shall consider the following:
(1) Total contributing drainage area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site's soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high-water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and wellheads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(9) Stream bank erosion.
(10) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(11) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(12) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(13) Maintenance requirements.
(14) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(15) Recreational value.
(16) Enhancement of aesthetic and property values.
R. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
sound engineering principles and practices in a manner that does not
aggravate existing stormwater problems. The municipality reserves the
right to disapprove any design that would result in construction in or
continuation of a stormwater problem area.
S. The applicant may meet the stormwater management criteria through
off-site stormwater management measures as long as the proposed
measures are in the same subwatershed as shown in Appendix A.42
41.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 105-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-301
1:163
T. Stormwater hotspots. Stormwater runoff from hotspots shall be
pretreated prior to surface water or groundwater infiltration to prevent
pollutant runoff. Industrial sites referenced in 40 CFR 125 are examples
of hotspots.
(1) Below is a list of examples of hotspots:
(a) Vehicle salvage yards and recycling facilities.
(b) Vehicle fueling stations.
(c) Vehicle service and maintenance facilities.
(d) Vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities.
(e) Fleet storage areas (bus, truck, etc.).
(f) Industrial sites based on Standard Industrial Classification
Codes.
(g) Marinas (service and maintenance areas).
(h) Outdoor liquid container storage.
(i) Outdoor loading/unloading facilities.
(j) Public works storage areas.
(k) Facilities that generate or store hazardous materials.
(l) Commercial container nursery.
(m) Contaminated sites/brownfields.
(n) Other land uses and activities as designated by an appropriate
review authority.
(2) The following land uses and activities are not normally considered
hotspots:
(a) Residential streets and rural highways.
(b) Residential development.
(c) Institutional development.
(d) Office developments.
(e) Nonindustrial rooftops.
(f) Pervious areas, except golf courses and nurseries [which may
need an integrated pest management (IPM) plan].
42.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 105-301 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-301
1:164
§ 105-302. Permit requirements by other governmental entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
(3) While streets and highways [average daily traffic volume (ADT)
greater than (30,000)] are not considered stormwater hotspots, it is
important to ensure that highway stormwater management
facilities are designed to adequately protect receiving streams and/
or groundwater.
(4) The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) NPDES stormwater
program requires some industrial sites to prepare and implement a
stormwater pollution prevention plan.
U. The following standards for protection of downgradient properties from
off-site conveyance must be accomplished:
(1) For any location where a new concentrated discharge of
stormwater from any frequency rainfall event, up to and including
the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour event, will flow onto a
downgradient property, the following are required:
(a) A drainage easement (or other legal agreement/approval) must
be obtained for conveyance of discharges onto or through
adjacent properties.
(b) The conveyance must be designed to avoid erosion, flooding, or
other damage to the properties through which it is being
conveyed.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by PADEP under regulations at Title 25, Pennsylvania
Code, Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by PADEP under
Title 25, Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by PADEP under Title 25, Pennsylvania Code, Chapter
105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on or
discharging to a state highway right-of-way or require access to or from
a state highway shall be subject to approval by PennDOT.
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers, or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by PADEP under Title 25,
Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 105.
§ 105-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-303
1:165
§ 105-303. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the municipality receives an approval from the PADEP
in compliance with Title 25, Chapter 102, of the Pennsylvania Code of
an erosion and sediment control plan for construction activities, if
applicable.
B. PADEP has regulations regarding erosion and sediment control under
Title 25, Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102.
C. In addition, under Title 25, Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 92, a PADEP
NPDES construction activities permit is required for regulated earth
disturbance activities.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate PADEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality. The
issuance of an NPDES construction permit [or permit coverage under
the statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements of
§ 105-403A.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by PADEP regulations, shall be available on the
project site at all times.
F. Whenever the vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such
activity must be in conformance with Chapter 102, Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Part 1, Commonwealth Pennsylvania, DEP, Subpart C,
Protection of Natural Resources, Article II, Water Resources, Chapter
102, Erosion Control, and in accordance with the Delaware County
Conservation District, as appropriate, and the standards and
specifications of the appropriate municipal government.
G. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) In order to ensure compliance with Chapter 102, the timing of the
installation and operation of the infiltration BMP shall be at the
discretion of the Municipal Engineer.
H. Soil erosion and sedimentation control; general regulations.
(1) All subdivisions and land developments are required to comply with
the Clean Streams Law of Pennsylvania and Chapter 102 of the
Rules of Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, as amended from time to time.
§ 105-303 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-303
1:166
(2) The landowner or developer shall be responsible for the submission
and approval of an application to the regional office of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for a permit
to allow any earthmoving activity where more than 25 acres are
disturbed at one time. All landowners or developers are required to
obtain such permit except as otherwise provided in Section 102.41,
Permits and Plans, of Chapter 102 of the Rules and Regulations of
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP),
as amended from time to time.
(3) The soil erosion and sedimentation control plan must be available
at all times at the construction site. The permit allowing
earthmoving activity shall be obtained by the landowner or
developer before any construction on the site shall begin.
(4) The sequence of soils stabilization to control soil erosion and
sedimentation shall be planned so as to compensate for seasonal
effects such as the inability to establish vegetation during winter
months, the influence of freezing, and the like.
(5) Measures shall be taken to preclude the tracking of mud, soil and
the like from construction vehicles and equipment onto streets
which serve the site. Such measures shall include temporary scrub
pads with collector sumps and cleaning devices, which
construction vehicles shall pass through prior to leaving the site.
(6) Erosion and sedimentation control measures.
(a) Measures used to control erosion and reduce sedimentation
shall, as a minimum, meet the latest revised standards,
specifications and/or regulations of:
[1] The United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service as adopted by the Delaware County
Conservation District in its Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook.
[2] The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection in its Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Manual.
[3] "Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in Developing Areas" by the United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, College Park, Maryland.
(b) Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be required
on all erosion and sedimentation control and stormwater
management plans for all subdivisions and/or land
developments within the Township. The Township or its
designated representative shall ensure and enforce
compliance with the appropriate standards.
§ 105-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-303
1:167
(7) All soil erosion and sedimentation control and grading activities
shall be performed in such a manner so as not to endanger or
damage public or private property or to cause physical damage or
personal injury. A landowner or developer shall be responsible for
any property damage or personal injury caused by his activities.
(8) There shall be no increase in discharge of sediment or other solid
materials from the site as a result of stormwater runoff; and, in the
event of any increase, the landowner and/or developer shall be
responsible.
(9) Soil erosion and sedimentation control devices, such as temporary
vegetation and mulch, temporary earthen berms, interceptor dikes,
ditches, diversion terraces, rock filter berms, crushed stone tire
scrubbers, silt basins, silt fences, and the like, appropriate to the
scale of operations, shall be installed concurrent with earthmoving
activities and whenever any situation is created which would
contribute to increased erosion.
(10) Earthmoving operations shall be minimized where possible and
practicable to preserve desirable natural features and the
topography of the site.
(11) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way that will minimize erosion.
(12) To the maximum extent possible, mature, healthy trees of 12 inches
or greater in caliper and other significant existing vegetation shall
be retained and protected. Such trees shall not be removed, except
as provided on the approved subdivision and/or land development
plan. The filling of soil more than five inches is presumed to extend
out from the tree as far as the tree's branches extend outward.
(13) Land disturbance shall be limited to the actual construction site
and an access strip. The amount of disturbed area and the duration
of exposure shall be kept to a practical minimum. Disturbed areas
shall be stabilized with vegetation, mulch, erosion control fabric,
and the like as soon as possible after earthmoving procedures.
(14) Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development. Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on
site wherever possible to facilitate groundwater recharge.
(15) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
critical areas during development. ("Critical areas" shall be
construed to mean those portions of the site which are extremely
vulnerable to soil erosion.)
(16) The permanent final vegetation and structural erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development in accordance with the approved plans.
§ 105-303 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-303
1:168
(17) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed
area is stabilized by the use of debris and sediment basins, silt
fences or other approved measures. Sediment deposits in basins,
silt fences, and the like shall be removed at periodic intervals
during the construction period, as directed by the Township.
(18) Procedures shall be established for protecting soils and rock or
geologic formations with water supply potential from
contamination by surface water or other source or disruption
caused by construction activity.
(19) Silt fences shall be utilized in lieu of straw bale silt barriers
downhill of all construction areas. In general, straw bale silt
barriers will be allowed only on projects with a construction period
of less than 60 days and where the uphill drainage area is less than
1/2 acre. In all applications, silt fences and straw bale silt barriers
shall be securely anchored in place and embedded into the soil.
(20) Silt fences or silt traps shall be placed at all inlets, headwalls, basin
outlets and similar drainage structures during the construction
period in order to prevent sediment from entering any
watercourse, storm drainage system, or other areas downstream.
(21) Crushed-stone tire scrubbers shall be placed at all entrances to
construction areas. Tire scrubbers shall be sufficient width and
length to prevent the transportation of sediment off of the
construction site.
(22) Temporary and permanent seeding and mulch specifications shall
be noted on all plans. The specifications shall include lime and
fertilizer rates of application, as well as other provisions regarding
procedures and materials. In critical areas, the Township may
require hydroseeding.
(23) During roadway grading, interceptor dikes shall be installed on all
roadway subgrades with slopes in excess of 5% to prevent erosion
of the subgrade. The interceptor dikes shall divert stormwater
runoff into silt traps or silt fences.
(24) The crushed stone base course for driveways, roadways and
parking areas shall be applied as soon as possible after grading
procedures, in order to prevent erosion of the subgrade.
(25) Drainage swales and ditches, and all slopes greater than 3:1, shall
be protected against erosive velocities with erosion control
measures such as erosion control fabric and other material as
approved by the Township.
(26) Energy dissipators and/or stilling basins shall be installed at the
outlet end of all storm drainage facilities.
§ 105-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-303
1:169
(27) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation,
regrading or other development, it shall be the responsibility of the
person causing such sedimentation to remove the accumulated
sediment from all adjoining or downstream properties, surfaces,
drainage systems and watercourses and to repair any damage at
his expense as quickly as possible.
(28) All necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures installed
under this chapter shall be adequately maintained by the developer
after completion of the approved plan or until such measures are
permanently stabilized as determined by the Township.
(29) In any construction in the Township, no construction trash, trees or
parts of trees or any foreign material shall be buried at the site.
Each contractor shall maintain a facility wherein all trash shall be
deposited and thereafter removed from the site to an approved
landfill. In the case of placement of fill, all fill must be approved by
the Code Enforcement Officer prior to placement of the same. Any
contractor desiring to place fill other than the natural earth on the
site shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer and request an
inspection. [Amended 9-7-2016 by Ord. No. 146]
(a) Whenever fill other than clean soil or earth is utilized, clean
soil shall be placed over the top of the fill to a depth sufficient
as determined by the Township to conceal all materials other
than clean soil or earth;
(b) All wooden materials shall be excluded from clean fill.
(c) If anything other than clean soil or earth is identified in the
clean fill material, prior to delivery onto the construction site,
the developer must document and certify the following
information to the Township:
[1] Origin of the material, location and prior use of clean fill
material;
[2] Name, address, phone contact of hauler/supplier of clean
fill material;
[3] Date and location of delivery of clean fill material;
[4] Statement of compliance with DEP criteria for
noncontamination of clean fill material, signed, dated and
notarized;
[5] All pieces of concrete and/or used asphalt to be broken
into pieces no larger than four-inch to six-inch pieces, and
is mixed with clean granular material. Asphalt and
concrete must be free of all construction debris (including
steel, wood, insulation, etc.) or other questionable
materials as determined by the Township; and
§ 105-303 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-303
1:170
§ 105-304. Nonstructural project design process (sequencing to
minimize stormwater impacts).
The design of all regulated activities shall include the following to minimize
stormwater impacts to reduce the surface discharge of stormwater, reduce
the creation of unnecessary impervious surfaces, prevent the degradation of
waters of the commonwealth, and maintain as much as possible the natural
hydrologic regime of the site:
(d) A CBR (compaction rate) 95% to 98% must be achieved, and
six-inch to eight-inch lifts must be adhered to during
compaction of the "clean fill." Compaction reports are required
for all structural fill.
A. The applicant may apply low-impact development (LID) methods such
as those listed in Appendix D, provided that use of this method does not
conflict with other local codes.43
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the design process follows the
sequence noted below. The goal of the sequence is to minimize the
increases in stormwater runoff and impacts to water quality resulting
from the proposed regulated activity:
(1) The following items in this subsection shall be addressed prior to
development of other stormwater management site plan design
elements:
(a) Prepare an existing resource and site analysis map (ERSAM)
showing environmentally sensitive areas, including, but not
limited to, steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands,
hydric soils, vernal pools, stream buffers, and hydrologic soil
groups. Land development, any existing recharge areas, and
other requirements outlined in the municipal SALDO shall also
be included.
(b) Establish a stream buffer according to § 105-306D.
(c) Prepare a draft project layout avoiding sensitive areas
identified in § 105-304B(1)(a).
(d) Identify site-specific existing conditions drainage areas,
discharge points, recharge areas, and Hydrologic Soil Groups
A and B (areas conducive to infiltration).
(e) Evaluate nonstructural stormwater management alternatives:
[1] Minimize earth disturbance.
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces.
[3] Break up large impervious surfaces.
43.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 105-303 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-304
1:171
§ 105-305. Infiltration volume requirements.
(f) Determine into what management district the site falls
(Appendix A), and conduct an existing conditions' runoff
analysis.
(2) The following items in this subsection may be addressed in any
order, provided that all items in § 105-304B(1) have been
completed.
(a) Satisfy the infiltration objective (§ 105-305) and provide for
stormwater pretreatment prior to infiltration.
(b) Provide for water quality protection in accordance with
§ 105-306, Water quality requirements.
(c) Provide stream bank erosion protection in accordance with
§ 105-307, Stream bank erosion requirements.
(d) Prepare a final project design to maintain existing conditions'
drainage areas and discharge points, to minimize earth
disturbance and impervious surfaces and, to the maximum
extent possible, to ensure that the remaining site development
has no surface or point discharge.
(e) Conduct a proposed conditions' runoff analysis based on the
final design that meets the management district requirements
(§ 105-308).
(f) Manage any remaining runoff prior to discharge through
detention, bioretention, direct discharge, or other structural
control.
A. Providing for infiltration consistent with the natural hydrologic regime
is required. Design of the infiltration facilities shall consider infiltration
to compensate for the reduction in the recharge that occurs when the
ground surface is disturbed or impervious surface is created.
B. If it cannot be physically accomplished, then the design professional
shall be responsible for demonstrating to the satisfaction of the
municipality that this cannot be physically accomplished on the site
(e.g., shallow depth to bedrock or limiting zone, open voids, steep
slopes, etc., vs. a financial hardship as defined in § 105-202). If it can be
physically accomplished, the volume of runoff to be infiltrated shall be
determined from § 105-305C(2) depending on demonstrated site
conditions and shall be the greatest volume that can be physically
infiltrated. For example:
(1) Any applicant (developer or redeveloper) shall first attempt to
infiltrate the volume required in § 105-305C(2)(a).
§ 105-304 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-305
1:172
(2) If the § 105-305C(2)(a) requirement cannot be physically
accomplished, then the applicant is required to attempt to infiltrate
the volume required in § 105-305C(2)(b).
(3) Finally, if the § 105-305C(2)(b) infiltration volume cannot be
physically accomplished, the applicant must, at a minimum,
infiltrate the maximum volume the site can accommodate.
C. Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed or
redeveloped areas shall be selected based on suitability of soils and
site conditions and shall be constructed on soils that have the
following characteristics:
(a) A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the BMP
and the top of the limiting zone.
(b) An infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional
stormwater volume and dewater completely as determined by
field tests conducted by the applicant's design professional.
(c) The infiltration facility shall be capable of completely draining
the retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) within three days (72
hours) from the end of the design storm.
(2) The size of the infiltration facility and Rev shall be based upon the
following volume criteria:
(a) Modified Control Guideline One (MCG-1) of the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices (PA BMP) Manual —
The retention (infiltration) volume (Rev) to be captured and
infiltrated shall be the net two-year, twenty-four-hour volume.
The net volume is the difference between the postdevelopment
runoff volume and the predevelopment runoff
volume. The post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour
duration precipitation shall not be increased. For modeling
purposes, existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious
areas must be considered meadow in good condition or its
equivalent, and 20% of existing impervious area, when
present, shall be considered meadow in good condition.
(b) Infiltrating the entire Rev volume in § 105-305C(2)(a) (above)
may not be feasible on every site due to site-specific limitations
such as shallow depth to bedrock or the water table. If it
cannot be physically accomplished, then the following criteria
from Modified Control Guideline Two (MCG-2) of the PA BMP
Manual must be satisfied:
[1] At least the first one inch of runoff from new or
replacement impervious surfaces shall be infiltrated.
§ 105-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-305
1:173
Rev = 1 (inch) * impervious area (square feet) ÷ 12
(inches) = cubic feet (cf)
An asterisk (*) in equations denotes multiplication.
[2] The retention volume value derived from the methods in
§ 105-305C(2)(a) or (b) is the minimum volume the
applicant must control through an infiltration BMP facility.
If site conditions preclude capture of runoff from portions
of the impervious area, the infiltration volume for the
remaining area should be increased an equivalent amount
to offset the loss.
[3] Only when the minimum infiltration requirement cannot
be physically accomplished, a waiver from § 105-305,
Infiltration volume requirements, is required from the
municipality.
D. Soils. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site shall be required to
determine the suitability of infiltration facilities. The evaluation shall be
performed by a qualified design professional and at minimum address
soil permeability, depth to at least two feet below the stormwater
management facility, and subgrade stability. The general process for
designing the infiltration BMP shall be:
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the site to determine general areas of suitability for
infiltration practices. In areas where development on fill material is
under consideration, conduct geotechnical investigations of
subgrade stability; infiltration may not be ruled out without
conducting these tests.
(2) Provide field tests such as double-ring infiltrometer or hydraulic
conductivity tests (at the level of the proposed infiltration surface)
to determine the appropriate hydraulic conductivity rate.
Percolation tests are not recommended for design purposes.
(3) Design the infiltration structure for the required retention (Rev)
volume based on field-determined capacity at the level of the
proposed infiltration surface.
(4) If on-lot infiltration structures are proposed by the applicant's
design professional, it must be demonstrated to the municipality
that the soils are conducive to infiltrate on the lots identified.
E. Infiltration facilities should, to the greatest extent practicable, be
located to avoid introducing contaminants via groundwater and be in
conformance with an approved source water protection assessment or
source water protection plan.
F. Roadway drainage systems should provide an opportunity to capture
accidental spills. Road de-icing material storage facilities shall be
§ 105-305 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-305
1:174
§ 105-306. Water quality requirements.
The applicant shall comply with the following water quality requirements of
this article:
designed to avoid salt and chloride runoff from entering waterways and
infiltration facilities. The qualified design professional shall evaluate
the possibility of groundwater contamination from the proposed
infiltration facility and perform a hydrogeologic justification study if
necessary.
G. The antidegredation analysis found in Chapter 93 shall be applied in
HQ or EV streams.
H. An impermeable liner will be required in detention basins where the
possibility of groundwater contamination exists. The municipality may
require a detailed hydrogeologic investigation.
I. The applicant should provide safeguards against groundwater
contamination for land uses that may cause groundwater contamination
should there be a mishap or spill.
A. To control post-construction stormwater impacts from regulated
activities and conform to state water quality requirements, BMPs which
replicate predevelopment stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions
must be provided in the site design such that post-construction
stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical, chemical, or
biological characteristics of the receiving waters. This may be achieved
by the following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions;
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMPs to provide filtering
of chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater runoff;
and
(3) Stream bank and stream bed protection: management of volume
and rate of post-construction stormwater discharges to prevent
physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
B. Developed areas shall provide adequate storage and treatment facilities
necessary to capture and treat stormwater runoff. The infiltration
volume computed under § 105-305 may be a component of the water
quality volume if the applicant chooses to manage both components in a
single facility. If the calculated water quality volume (WQv) is greater
than the volume required to be infiltrated as described in
§ 105-305C(2), then the difference between the two volumes shall be
treated for water quality by an acceptable stormwater management
practice(s). The required water quality volume (WQv) is the storage
capacity needed to capture and treat a portion of stormwater runoff
from the developed areas of the site.
§ 105-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-306
1:175
(1) To achieve this requirement, the following criterion is established:
(a) From Control Guideline 1 (CG-1) in the PA BMP Manual, the
water quality volume shall be the net two-year, twenty-fourhour
volume. The net volume is the difference between the
post-development runoff volume and the predevelopment
runoff volume. The post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour
duration precipitation shall not be increased. For modeling
purposes, existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious
areas must be considered meadow in good condition or its
equivalent, and 20% of existing impervious area, when
present, shall be considered meadow in good condition.
(2) This volume requirement can be managed by the permanent
volume of a wet basin or the detained volume from other BMPs.
Where appropriate, wet basins shall be utilized for water quality
control and shall follow the guidelines of the PA BMP Manual
referenced in Appendix B.44
(3) Release of water can begin at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert
of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the facility). The
design of the facility shall provide for protection from clogging and
unwanted sedimentation.
C. The temperature of receiving waters shall be protected through the use
of BMPs that moderate temperature.
D. If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through, or a water body
(i.e., lake, pond, and wetland) is present on the site, the applicant shall
create a riparian buffer extending a minimum of 50 feet to either side of
the top-of-bank of the channel, lake, or wetland. The buffer area shall be
planted with native vegetation and maintained in a vegetated state
(Refer to Appendix B, Pennsylvania Native Plant List, contained in the
PA BMP Manual).
(1) The following provisions also apply to riparian buffers on lots in
existence at the time of adoption of this chapter:
(a) If the applicable rear or side yard setback is less than 50 feet,
the buffer width may be reduced to 25% of the setback or 25
feet, whichever is greater.
(b) If a stream traverses a site in a manner that significantly
reduces the use of the site, the buffer may be either:
[1] Reduced to 25 feet on either side, with municipal approval;
or
[2] Reduced to 10 feet with municipal waiver; or
44.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 105-306 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-306
1:176
§ 105-307. Stream bank erosion requirements.
[3] If an existing buffer is legally prescribed (e.g., deed
covenant, easement, etc.) and it exceeds the requirement
of this chapter, the existing buffer shall be maintained.
(2) Permitted uses within the buffer include the following, subject to
municipal approval and provided that they comply with all federal,
state, and local regulations:
(a) Recreational trails. See Appendix H, Riparian Buffer Trail
Guidelines.45
(b) Utility rights-of-way.
(c) Bridges.
(d) Other uses subject to municipal approval.
E. If an existing buffer is legally prescribed (i.e., deed, covenant,
easement, etc.) and it exceeds the requirements of this chapter, the
existing buffer shall be maintained.
A. In addition to controlling the water quality volume (in order to minimize
the impact of stormwater runoff on downstream stream bank erosion),
the primary requirement to control stream bank erosion is to design a
BMP to detain the proposed conditions' two-year, twenty-four-hour
design storm to the existing conditions' one-year flow using the SCS
Type II distribution. Additionally, provisions shall be made (such as
adding a small orifice at the bottom of the outlet structure) to release
the proposed conditions' one-year storm for a minimum of 24 hours
from a point in time when the maximum volume of water from the oneyear
storm is stored in a proposed BMP (i.e., the maximum water
surface elevation is achieved in the facility). Release of water can begin
at the start of the storm (i.e., the invert of the water quality orifice is at
the invert of the facility).
B. The minimum orifice size in the outlet structure to the BMP shall be
three inches in diameter where possible, and a trash rack shall be
installed to prevent clogging. On sites with small drainage areas
contributing to this BMP that do not provide enough runoff volume to
allow a twenty-four-hour attenuation with the three-inch orifice, the
calculations shall be submitted showing this condition. When the
calculated orifice size is below three inches, gravel filters (or other
methods) are recommended to discharge low-flow rates subject to the
Municipal Engineer's satisfaction. When filters are utilized,
maintenance provisions shall be provided to ensure filters meet the
design function. All facilities shall make use of measures to extend the
flow path and increase the travel time of flows in the facility.
45.Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 105-306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-308
1:177
§ 105-308. Stormwater peak rate control.
A. Each watershed has been divided into either stormwater management
districts or release rate districts as shown on the respective
Management District or Release Rate Maps in Appendix A.46
(1) In addition to the watershed-specific requirements specified in
Tables 308.1 and 308.2 below, the erosion and sedimentation
control (§ 105-303), the nonstructural project design (§ 105-304),
the infiltration (§ 105-305), the water quality (§ 105-306), and the
stream bank erosion (§ 105-307) requirements shall be
implemented.
(2) Standards for managing runoff from each subarea in a watershed
for the two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year
design storms are shown in Tables 308.1 and 308.2. Development
sites located in each of the management/release rate districts must
control proposed conditions' runoff rates to existing conditions'
runoff rates for the design storms in accordance with the table.
B. General. Proposed conditions' rates of runoff from any regulated
activity shall not exceed the peak release rates of runoff from existing
conditions for the design storms specified on the Stormwater
Management District Watershed Map (Appendix A) and this section of
this chapter.
C. District boundaries. The boundaries of the stormwater management
districts are shown on an official map that is available for inspection at
the municipal and county planning offices. A copy of the official map at
a reduced scale is included in Appendix A. The exact location of the
stormwater management district boundaries as they apply to a given
development site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using
the two-foot topographic contours (or most-accurate data required)
provided as part of the SWM site plan.
D. Sites located in more than one district or watershed. For a proposed
development site located within two or more stormwater management
district subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall meet
the management district criteria for which the discharge is located. The
natural hydrology of each respective subarea shall be maintained, and
drainage shall not be redirected from one subarea to another. Under
circumstances where the applicant shows this cannot be accomplished,
a waiver is required by the municipality.
46.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 105-308 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-308
1:178
Table 308.1
Control Criteria for Chester Creek Watershed Stormwater
Management Districts
District Control Criteria
100% Post-development peak discharge for all design
storms must be no greater than
predevelopment peak discharges
75% Post-development peak discharge for all design
storms must be no greater than 75% of the
predevelopment peak discharges.
50% Post-development peak discharge for all design
storms must be no greater than 50% of the
predevelopment peak discharges.
Table 308.2
Peak Rate Control Standards in the Brandywine Creek
Watersheds
Proposed Condition
Design Storm Reduce to
Existing Condition
Design Storm
2 - year 50% of the pre 1 - year
5 - year 50% of the pre 5 - year
10 - year 50% of the pre 10 - year
25 - year 50% of the pre 25 - year
50 - year 50% of the pre 50 - year
100 - year 50% of the pre 100 - year
Post-development peak discharge for all design storms must be no
greater than 50% of the predevelopment peak discharges.
E. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. On-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site.
F. Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only
the proposed impact area utilizing stormwater management measures
shall be subject to the peak rate control standards noted above.
Unimpacted areas for which the discharge point has not changed are
not subject to the peak rate control standards.
G. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Downstream hydraulic
capacity analysis conducted at the direction of Chadds Ford Township
shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting
peak flow rates:
§ 105-308 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-308
1:179
§ 105-309. Calculation methodology.
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year storm event within
their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the channels
from erosion. Velocities shall be based upon criteria and
methodologies acceptable to the municipality.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
increased twenty-five-year storm event runoff without creating any
increased hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other hydraulic facilities
which must pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be
designed in accordance with PADEP Chapter 105 regulations (if
applicable) and, at a minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year
storm event runoff.
(4) Water quality requirements defined in § 105-306 must be met.
(5) Post-construction peak rates shall not exceed the existing peak
rates for the respective subarea.
(6) Meet the full requirements specified by Tables 308.1 and 308.2 and
§ 105-308A through G.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites with a drainage area of
greater than five acres shall be calculated using a generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRCS Soil Cover Complex
Method. Table 309.1 summarizes acceptable computation methods. The
method selected by the design professional shall be based on the
individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site. The use of the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges for
drainage areas greater than five acres shall be permitted only upon
approval of the municipality.
Table 309.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for SWM Site Plan
Method Developed By Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of full
hydrology computer model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans where
limitations are described in
TR-55
HEC-1/HEC-HMS United States
Army Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of a full
hydrologic computer model is
desirable or necessary
§ 105-308 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-309
1:180
Table 309.1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for SWM Site Plan
Method Developed By Applicability
Rational Method
(or commercial
computer package
based on Rational
Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For sites up to 5 acres, or as
approved by the municipality
and/or Municipal Engineer
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved by
the municipality and/or
Municipal Engineer
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the Soil Cover
Complex Method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return-period storms. Rainfall depths shall be according to
NOAA Atlas 14 values consistent with a partial duration series. When
stormwater calculations are performed for routing procedures or water
quality functions, the duration of rainfall shall be 24 hours.
C. The following criteria shall be used for peak rate runoff calculations:
(1) For development sites not considered redevelopment, the ground
cover used in determining the existing conditions' flow rates shall
be as follows:
(a) Wooded sites shall use a ground cover of "woods in good
condition." Portions of a site having more than one viable tree
measuring a diameter at breast height (DBH) of six inches or
greater per 1,500 square feet shall be considered wooded
where such trees existed within three years of application.
(b) The undeveloped portion of the site, including agriculture,
bare earth, and fallow ground, shall be considered as "meadow
in good condition," unless the natural ground cover generates
a lower curve (CN) number or Rational "c" value (i.e., woods)
as listed in Table F-1 or F-2 in Appendix F of this chapter.47
(2) For redevelopment sites, the ground cover used in determining the
existing conditions' flow rates for the developed portion of the site
shall be based on the following ground cover assumptions which
shall be used:
(a) For areas that are woods (as defined in Article II of this
chapter), predevelopment calculations shall assume ground
cover of "woods in good condition."
47.Editor's Note: Appendix F is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 105-309 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-309
1:181
(b) For areas that are not woods or not impervious surfaces,
predevelopment calculations shall assume ground cover of
"meadow."
(c) For areas that are impervious surfaces, predevelopment
calculations shall assume at least 20% of the existing
impervious surface area to be disturbed as "meadow" ground
cover.
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times-of-concentration (duration) and
storm events with rainfall intensities obtained from NOAA Atlas 14
partial duration series estimates, or the latest version of the PennDOT
Drainage Manual (PDM Publication 584). Times-of-concentration shall
be calculated based on the methodology recommended in the
respective model used. Times of concentration for channel and pipe
flow shall be computed using Manning's Equation.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the Soil Cover Complex Method shall be obtained from
Table F-1 in Appendix F of this chapter.
F. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table F-2 in Appendix F
of this chapter.
G. Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of pipes, culverts,
and storm sewers shall be consistent with methods and computations
contained in the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Design
Series Number 5 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-01-020 HDS No. 5).
Hydraulic computations to determine the capacity of open channels
shall be consistent with methods and computations contained in the
Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic Engineering Circular
Number 15 (Publication No. FHWA-NHI-05-114 HEC 15). Values for
Manning's roughness coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table F-3
in Appendix F of this chapter.
H. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
I. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using an acceptable
method. The design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a
calculation method that produces a full hydrograph. The municipality
may approve the use of any generally accepted full hydrograph
approximation technique that shall use a total runoff volume that is
consistent with the volume from a method that produces a full
hydrograph.
§ 105-309 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-310
1:182
§ 105-310. Other requirements.
§ 105-311. Design criteria for stormwater management.
A. All wet basin designs shall incorporate biologic controls consistent with
the West Nile Guidance found in Appendix H, PADEP document
363-0300-001, "Design Criteria - Wetlands Replacement/Monitoring,"
or contact the Pennsylvania State Cooperative Wetland Center
(www.wetlands.psu.edu/) or the Penn State Cooperative Extension
Office (www.extension.psu.edu/extmap.html).
B. Any stormwater basin required or regulated by this chapter designed to
store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment shall be
designed to provide an emergency spillway to handle flow up to and
including the one-hundred-year proposed conditions. The height of
embankment must provide a minimum of 2.0 feet of freeboard above
the maximum pool elevation computed when the facility functions for
the one-hundred-year proposed conditions' inflow. Should any
stormwater management facility require a dam safety permit under
PADEP Chapter 105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam
safety. Chapter 105 may require the passing of storms larger than the
one-hundred-year event.
C. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel not governed by
Chapter 105 regulations must be able to convey, without damage to the
drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year storm
event. The larger the events (fifty-year and one-hundred-year) must also
be safely conveyed in the direction of natural flow without creating
additional damage to any drainage structures, nearby structures, or
roadways.
D. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater management
facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be designed to convey the design
flow to or from the facility.
E. Roadway crossings or structures located within designated floodplain
areas must be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design
storm consistent with Federal Emergency Management Agency
National Flood Insurance Program - floodplain management
requirements.
F. Any facility located within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT
minimum design standards and permit submission requirements.
G. Adequate erosion protection and energy dissipation shall be provided
along all open channels and at all points of discharge. Design methods
shall be consistent with the Federal Highway Administration Hydraulic
Engineering Circular Number 11 (Publication No. FHWA-IP-89-016)
and the PADEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program
Manual (Publication No. 363-2134-008).
§ 105-310 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-311
1:183
A. Detention/retention basins.
(1) All outlet control structures shall be constructed of galvanized
steel, aluminum or concrete, properly anchored to prevent
flotation, and equipped with childproof, nonclogging trash racks
with overall design openings of 12 inches or greater in diameter,
except those openings designed to carry perennial stream flows.
(2) Temporary sedimentation controls shall be provided during
construction to prevent the flow of sediment through the basin
outlet pipe. Such measures may include temporary riser pipes,
rock-filled gabions, plywood stand-boxes, silt fences, and the like.
(3) Emergency spillways. Whenever possible, the emergency spillway
for basins shall be constructed on undisturbed ground. Emergency
spillways shall be constructed of reinforced concrete, vegetated
earth, concrete rubble, and the like. All emergency spillways shall
be constructed so that the basin berm is protected against erosion.
The minimum capacity of all emergency spillways shall be such that
the combined capacity of the emergency spillway and the principal
from the one-hundred-year design storm after development.
Emergency spillways shall extend along the upstream and
downstream berm embankment slopes. The emergency spillway
shall not discharge stormwater over earthen fill and/or easily
erodible material without adequate protection against erosion.
(4) Antiseep collars. Antiseep collars shall be installed around the
principal pipe barrel within the normal saturation zone of the basin
berms. The antiseep collars and their connections to the pipe barrel
shall be watertight. The antiseep collars shall extend to a minimum
of two feet beyond the outside of the principal pipe barrel. The
maximum spacing between collars shall be 14 times the minimum
projection of the collar measured perpendicular to the pipe.
(5) Basin outlets. Energy-dissipating devices (rip-rap, stilling basin,
concrete aprons, and the like) shall be placed at all basin outlets.
Rock-level spreader berms shall be required where basins do not
discharge into an existing drainage swale, ditch or channel.
Concrete endwalls shall be placed at all basin outlets. All basin
outlet pipes 12 inches in diameter or greater shall be equipped with
childproof devices.
(6) Slope of detention basin embankment. The maximum slope of
earthen basin embankments shall be 3:1. The top or toe of any
slope shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from adjacent property
lines, with the exception of the downstream property line, where
the toe of the embankment shall be placed a sufficient distance to
allow for energy-dissipating devices but in no case less than 30 feet
unless approved otherwise by the Township. Whenever possible,
the side slopes and basin shape shall blend with the natural
§ 105-311 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-311
1:184
topography. Straight side slopes and rectangular basins shall be
avoided whenever possible.
(7) Width of berm. The minimum top width of detention basin berms
shall be 10 feet.
(8) Construction specifications. The plans shall indicate the
construction specifications and compaction requirements for all
detention/retention basins.
(9) Slope of basin bottom. In order to ensure proper drainage of
detention basins, a minimum grade of 2% shall be maintained for
all sheet flow. A minimum grade of 1.0% shall be maintained for all
channel flow.
(10) Cut-off trench. A cut-off trench shall be excavated along the center
line of the dam on earth fill embankments. The minimum depth
shall be three feet. The minimum bottom width shall be 10 feet or
wide enough to permit operation of compaction equipment. The
side slopes shall be no steeper than 1:1. The trench shall be kept
free from standing water during the backfilling operations.
(11) Overflow system. An overflow system shall be provided to carry
flow to the detention basin when the capacity of the storm drain
pipe system is exceeded. The overflow system shall be of sufficient
capacity to carry the difference between the one-hundred year and
the ten-year peak flow rates.
B. Grading and landscaping of basins.
(1) Cuts and fills. No excavation or fill shall be made with a cut or fill
slope steeper than three horizontal to one vertical, except where
the excavation or fill is sufficiently stable to prevent sliding or
erosion and will not result in property damage or personal injury. A
written statement shall be required from a civil engineer licensed
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania having experience in soils
engineering certifying that he has inspected the site and that any
proposed deviation from the slope specified above should not
endanger any property or result in personal injury. Retaining walls
will be required if a stable slope cannot be maintained. Any
retaining wall design must be designed by an experienced
structural engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and approved by the Township. The toe of any cut or fill slope must
be located a minimum of 15 feet from adjacent property lines, with
the exception stated above.
(2) Retention/detention basins shall be designed to utilize the natural
contours of the land whenever possible. When such design is
impracticable, the construction of the basin shall utilize slopes as
shallow as possible to blend the structures into the terrain.
§ 105-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-311
1:185
(3) A minimum of six inches of topsoil shall be placed on all areas
affected by the basin construction (bottom of basin, side slopes, top
of berm, and the like).
(4) All earthen basins shall be stabilized with temporary and
permanent grasses or other approved ground covers within 15 days
after initial construction.
(5) Fencing and/or a suitable vegetation screening shall be provided
around all detention/retention basins unless the Board of
Supervisors determines that such screening is not necessary.
(6) Basins shall be installed prior to any earthmoving or land
disturbances which they will serve.
C. Subsurface disposal of stormwater.
(1) The design and construction of all subsurface facilities shall
provide proper procedures to prevent silt from clogging the
aggregate backfill.
(2) The following procedures and materials shall be required for all
subsurface facilities:
(a) Excavation for the infiltration facility shall be performed with
equipment which will not compact the bottom of the seepage
bed/trench or like facility.
(b) The bottom of the bed and/or trench shall be scarified prior to
the placement of aggregate.
(c) Only clean aggregate, free of fines, shall be allowed.
(d) The top and sides of all seepage beds, trenches, or like
facilities shall be covered with drainage filtration fabric.
(e) Perforated distribution pipes connected to centralized catch
basins and/or manholes with provisions for the collection of
debris shall be provided in all facilities. The perforated pipes
shall distribute stormwater throughout the entire seepage bed/
trench or like facility.
(f) A positive outlet pipe placed at or near the bottom of the
seepage bed and/or trench, or like facility, shall be provided.
(g) The landowner or developer shall be responsible for the proper
installation, operation and maintenance of all subsurface
stormwater management facilities. If, in the opinion of the
Township, the underground system is not functioning properly,
the landowner or developer shall be required to make the
necessary improvements/corrections to the system or provide
an alternate stormwater management facility which is
functional.
§ 105-311 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-311
1:186
D. Storm sewer system design.
(1) Design flow rate. The storm sewer system shall be designed to
carry a fifty-year peak flow rate, with a one-hundred-year peak flow
rate at all low points. The peak flow rate into each inlet shall be
indicated on the stormwater drainage stormwater management
plan. The design flow rate shall be determined by the rational
formula, Q=CIA.
(2) Pipe material and gage thickness. All storm sewers shall be either
reinforced cement concrete, corrugated aluminum, corrugated
galvanized steel pipe or high-density polyethylene pipe (HDPE).
Storm sewers shall be of the proper class and thickness to support
the above fill material. Pipe class and gage or thickness shall be
noted on the plans.
(3) Allowable headwater depth. At all inlets or manholes, the maximum
allowable headwater depth shall be one foot below the top of the
inlet grate or the manhole cover.
(4) Horizontal pipe deflections. A manhole or inlet shall be provided at
all horizontal deflections in the storm pipe system exceeding 5°.
(5) Minimum and maximum cover. A minimum of 18 inches of cover
shall be maintained over all storm drain pipes. The top of storm
drain pipes shall be at least 0.5 foot below subgrade elevation. The
maximum cover over storm drain pipes shall be 10 feet unless
approved otherwise by the Township.
(6) Storm sewer system outlets. Storm sewer system outlet pipes shall
extend to proposed stormwater management facilities, natural
watercourses, and the like. A concrete endwall shall be required on
all storm sewer system outlet pipes.
(7) Roof drains. Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge water
directly over a sidewalk, into any sanitary sewer line, or into a
street or paved area without a straight curbed gutter.
(8) The storm sewer system shall be designed to the more-restrictive of
the following: to collect stormwater at any point where three to five
cubic feet per second is accumulated during the design storm; and/
or inlets/manholes shall not be spaced more than 300 feet apart on
pipe sizes up to 24 inches in diameter and not more than 400 feet
apart on greater sizes.
(9) Inlets, manholes, grates, covers, frames, and the like shall conform
to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Roadway
Construction Standards (Publication No. 72) and Form 408
Specifications, and all amendments, revisions or updates thereto.
(10) All drainage channels shall be designed to carry a flow rate equal to
a one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm.
§ 105-311 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-311
1:187
(11) All drainage channels shall be designed to prevent the erosion of
the bed and bank areas. The flow velocity in all vegetated drainage
channels shall not exceed the maximum permissible velocity to
prevent erosion. Suitable bank stabilization shall be provided
where required to prevent erosion of the drainage channels. Where
storm sewers discharge into existing drainage channels at an angle
greater than 30° from parallel with the downstream channel flow,
the far side bank shall be stabilized by the use of rip-rap, masonry,
and/or concrete walls. The stabilization shall be designed to
prevent erosion and frost heave under and behind the stabilizing
media.
(12) Any vegetated drainage channel requiring mowing of the
vegetation shall have a maximum slope of three horizontal to one
vertical on those areas to be mowed.
(13) Inlet capacity. All inlets must be designed to accommodate the tenyear
peak flow rate, except at low points, where they shall
accommodate the twenty-five-year peak flow rate.
(14) Straight pipe sections. Wherever possible, all storm sewers shall be
designed to follow straight courses. No angular deflections of
storm sewer pipe sections in excess of 5° shall be permitted. No
vertical curves shall be permitted in the storm sewer system.
(15) Minimum grade and size. All storm drain pipes shall be designed to
maintain a minimum grade of 1.0%. All storm sewer pipes shall
have a minimum inside diameter of 15 inches.
(16) Pipe arches. Where headroom is restricted, equivalent pipe arches
may be used in lieu of circular pipes.
§ 105-311 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-311
1:188
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 105-401. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of
any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any earth
disturbance activity may not proceed until the property owner, applicant, or
his/her agent has received written approval of an SWM site plan from the
municipality and an adequate erosion and sediment control plan review by
the Conservation District, unless the project qualifies for an exemption in
§ 105-106.
§ 105-402. SWM site plan contents.
The SWM site plan shall consist of a general description of the project,
including sequencing items described in § 105-304, calculations, maps, and
plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and
erosion and sediment control plan by title and date. The cover sheet of
the computations and erosion and sediment control plan shall refer to the
associated maps by title and date. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible, neat,
and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall not be accepted for
review and shall be returned to the applicant. The following items shall be
included in the SWM site plan, when applicable:
A. General:
(1) General description of the project, including those areas described
in § 105-304B.
(2) General description of proposed permanent stormwater
management techniques, including construction specifications of
the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
(4) An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and
letters of adequacy from the Conservation District.
(5) A general description of proposed non-point-source pollution
controls.
(6) The SWM site plan application and completed fee schedule form
and associated fee.
(7) The SWM site plan checklist (Appendix C).48
48.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 105-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-402
1:189
B. Maps. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch
by thirty-six-inch sheets and/or shall be prepared in a form that meets
the requirements for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds
of Delaware County. If the SALDO has more-stringent criteria than this
chapter, then the more-stringent criteria shall apply. The contents of the
map(s) shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipal
boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of slopes greater
than 15%, five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other waters of the
commonwealth within the project area.
(4) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries, stream
buffers, existing drainage courses, areas of natural vegetation to be
preserved, and the total extent of the upstream area draining
through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and water lines within 50 feet of property lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(7) Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of
impervious area that would be added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(9) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(10) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(11) The date of submission.
(12) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size, with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(17) Location of all open channels.
§ 105-402 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-402
1:190
(18) Overland drainage patterns and swales.
(19) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(20) The location of all erosion and sediment control facilities.
(21) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(22) A statement, signed by the applicant, acknowledging that any
revision to the approved SWM site plan must be approved by the
municipality and that a revised erosion and sediment control plan
must be submitted to the Conservation District for a determination
of adequacy.
(23) The following signature block for the design engineer:
"I, (design engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby certify
that the SWM site plan meets all design standards and criteria of
the Chadds Ford Township Stormwater Management Ordinance."
C. Supplemental information to be submitted to the municipality:
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted by the applicant and shall include:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project
designed in accordance with § 105-304.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(e) Development stages or project phases, if so proposed.
(f) An operations and maintenance plan in accordance with
§ 105-702 of this chapter.
(2) An erosion and sediment control plan.
(3) A description of the effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes
and peak flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing
municipal stormwater collection system that may receive runoff
from the project site.
(4) A declaration of adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) district
§ 105-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-402
1:191
§ 105-403. Plan submission.
The municipality shall require receipt of a complete SWM site plan, as
specified in this chapter.
office when utilization of a PennDOT storm drainage system is
proposed.
D. Stormwater management facilities:
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When infiltration measures such as seepage pits, beds, or trenches
are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic tank
infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, loading ratios (guidelines presented
in the PA BMP Manual), and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
A. Proof of application or documentation of required permit(s) or
approvals for the programs listed below shall be part of the plan, if
applicable:
(1) NPDES permit for stormwater discharges from construction
activities.
(2) PADEP permits, as needed:
(a) PADEP joint permit application.
(b) Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway Management).
(c) Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management).
(3) PennDOT highway occupancy permit.
(4) Any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations.
B. The plan shall be coordinated with the state and federal permit process
and the municipal SALDO review process.
C. For projects that require SALDO approval, the SWM site plan shall be
submitted by the applicant as part of the preliminary plan submission
where applicable for the regulated activity.
D. For regulated activities that do not require SALDO approval, see
§ 105-301, General requirements.
E. Five copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted by the applicant for
review in accordance with established criteria and procedures:
(1) Two copies to the municipality accompanied by the requisite
municipal review fee, as specified in this chapter.
§ 105-402 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-403
1:192
§ 105-404. Stormwater management (SWM) site plan review.
(2) Two copies to the County Conservation District.
(3) One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
F. Any submissions to the agencies listed above that are found to be
incomplete shall not be accepted for review and shall be returned to the
applicant with a notification in writing of the specific manner in which
the submission is incomplete.
A. SWM plans shall be submitted to the municipality for review by the
Municipal Engineer for consistency with this chapter and the respective
Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan. Any plan found incomplete may
not be accepted for review and may be returned to the applicant. The
Municipal Engineer will review the SWM site plan for any subdivision
or land development against the municipal SALDO provisions not
otherwise superseded by this chapter.
B. The applicant shall respond to the Conservation District comments on
the SWM site plan prior to being considered for final approval by the
municipality.
C. For activities regulated by this chapter (§ 105-105), the Municipal
Engineer will notify the applicant and the municipality in writing, with a
copy to the Building Permit Officer, whether the SWM site plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan.
(1) If the Municipal Engineer determines that the SWM site plan is
consistent with this chapter, the Municipal Engineer will forward a
letter of consistency to the municipality, which will then forward a
copy to the applicant.
(2) If the Municipal Engineer determines that the SWM site plan is
inconsistent or noncompliant with this chapter, the Municipal
Engineer will forward a letter to the municipality, with a copy to the
applicant, citing the reason(s) and specific ordinance sections for
the inconsistency or noncompliance. Inconsistency or
noncompliance may be due to inadequate information to make a
reasonable judgment as to compliance with the stormwater
management plan. Any SWM site plans that are inconsistent or
noncompliant may be revised by the applicant and resubmitted
when consistent with this chapter.
D. For regulated activities under this chapter that require an NPDES
permit application, the applicant shall forward a copy of the Municipal
Engineer's letter stating that the SWM site plan is consistent with this
chapter to the Conservation District. PADEP and the Conservation
District may consider the Municipal Engineer's review comments in
determining whether to issue a permit.
§ 105-403 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-404
1:193
§ 105-405. Revision of plans.
E. The municipality will not grant preliminary or final approval to any
subdivision or land development for regulated activities specified in this
chapter if the SWM site plan has been found by the Municipal Engineer
to be inconsistent with this chapter. All required permits from PADEP
must be obtained prior to approval of any subdivision or land
development.
F. No building permits for any regulated activity specified in this chapter
will be approved by the municipality if the SWM site plan has been
found to be inconsistent this chapter, as determined by the Municipal
Engineer and Conservation District, or without considering the
comments of the Municipal Engineer and Conservation District. All
required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a
building permit.
G. The applicant shall be responsible for completing record drawings of all
stormwater management facilities included in the approved SWM site
plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with
the design plans shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer for final
approval. In no case will the municipality approve the record drawings
until the municipality receives a copy of an approved declaration of
adequacy and/or highway occupancy permit from the PennDOT district
office, NPDES permit, and any other applicable permits or approvals
from PADEP or the Conservation District. The above permits and
approvals must be based on the record drawings.
H. The municipality's approval of an SWM site plan shall be valid for a
period not to exceed five years, commencing on the date that the
municipality signs the approved SWM site plan. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not
been constructed, or, if constructed, record drawings of these facilities
have not been approved within this five-year time period, then the
municipality may consider the SWM site plan inconsistent or
noncompliant and may revoke any and all permits. SWM site plans that
are determined to be inconsistent or noncompliant by the municipality
shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 105-406 of this chapter.
A. A revision to a submitted SWM site plan under review by the
municipality for a development site that involves the following shall
require a resubmission to the municipality of a revised SWM site plan
consistent with § 105-403 of this chapter and be subject to review as
specified in § 105-404 of this chapter:
(1) Change in stormwater management facilities or techniques;
(2) Relocation or redesign of stormwater management facilities; or
(3) Is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on
the SWM site plan as determined by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 105-404 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-405
1:194
§ 105-406. Resubmission of inconsistent or noncompliant SWM site
plans.
An inconsistent or noncompliant SWM site plan may be resubmitted with
the revisions addressing the Municipal Engineer's concerns documented
in writing. It must be addressed to the municipality in accordance with
§ 105-403 of this chapter, distributed accordingly, and be subject to review
as specified in § 105-404 of this chapter. The applicable municipal review
and inspection fee must accompany a resubmission of an inconsistent or
noncompliant SWM site plan.
B. A revision to an already approved or inconsistent or noncompliant SWM
site plan shall be submitted to the municipality, accompanied by the
applicable municipal review and inspection fee. A revision to an SWM
site plan for which a formal action has not been taken by the
municipality shall be submitted to the municipality accompanied by the
applicable municipal review and inspection fee.
§ 105-405 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-406
1:195

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 105-501. Inspections.
§ 105-502. As-built plans, completion certificate, and final
inspections.
A. The Municipal Engineer or his municipal designee shall inspect all
phases of the installation of the permanent BMPs and/or stormwater
management facilities as deemed appropriate by the Municipal
Engineer.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Municipal Engineer or his
municipal designee determines that the permanent BMPs and/or
stormwater management facilities are not being installed in accordance
with the approved stormwater management plan, the municipality may
revoke any existing permits or other approvals and issue a cease-anddesist
order until a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved,
as specified in this chapter, and until the deficiencies are corrected.
C. A final inspection of all BMPs and/or stormwater management facilities
shall be conducted by the Municipal Engineer or his municipal designee
to confirm compliance with the approved SWM site plan prior to the
issuance of any occupancy permit.
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan for activities
involving proposed impervious surfaces of 1,000 square feet or greater
and for earth disturbances of 4,000 square feet or greater. The as-built
plans and all explanations of any discrepancies with the construction
plans shall be submitted to the municipality within three months of the
completion of construction of the SWM BMPs.
B. As-built plans shall show the location and as-built conditions of all SWM
BMP structures and include the following information: impervious
surfaces included in the approved SWM site plan; topographic
contours; and existing, proposed, and built impervious surfaces shown
in the as-built drawings.
C. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a design professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications.
D. The municipality will review the as-built submission for consistency
with the approved SWM site plan as well as actual conditions at the
project site. After receipt of the completion certification by the
municipality, the municipality may conduct a final inspection.
§ 105-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-502
1:197

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 105-601. Municipality SWM site plan review and inspection fee.
Fees have been established by the municipality to defray plan review and
construction inspection costs incurred by the municipality. All fees shall
be paid by the applicant at the time of SWM site plan submission. A
review and inspection fee schedule has been be established by resolution
of the municipal governing body based on the size of the regulated activity
and based on the municipality's costs for reviewing SWM site plans and
conducting inspections pursuant to § 105-501. The municipality shall
periodically update the review and inspection fee schedule to ensure that
review costs are adequately reimbursed.
§ 105-602. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the SWM site plan by the municipality and the Municipal
Engineer.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the SWM site plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 105-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-602
1:199

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 105-701. Performance guarantee.
§ 105-702. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance (O&M)
of stormwater controls and BMPs.
A. For all activities requiring submittal of an SWM site plan, the applicant
shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for the timely
installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
facilities as:
(1) Required by the approved SWM site plan equal to or greater than
the full construction cost of the required facilities; or
(2) The amount and method of payment provided for in the SALDO.
B. For other regulated activities, the municipality may require a financial
guarantee from the applicant.
A. The SWM site plan shall include a BMP operations and maintenance
plan that describes how the permanent (e.g., post-construction)
stormwater controls and BMPs will be properly operated, inspected,
and maintained.
B. Establish access easements that include all significant stormwater
controls, conveyances, and BMPs, and indicate a fifteen-foot perimeter
area surrounding these features that will provide the municipality
sufficient ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
C. The following items shall be included in the stormwater control and
BMP operations and maintenance plan, as applicable:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware
County, shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch
sheets. The contents of the maps(s) shall include, but not be limited
to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater controls and BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries, or other identifiable landmarks;
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
§ 105-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-702
1:201
(e) Other physical features, including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and water lines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added;
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings;
and
(i) Access easement boundaries.
(2) A description of how each permanent stormwater control and BMP
will be operated and maintained;
(3) The identity and contact information associated with the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance;
(4) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan; and
(5) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater controls and BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or
removed only after approval by the municipality.
D. The stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan for
the project site shall establish responsibilities for the continuing
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots that are to be separately owned
and in which streets, sewers, and other public improvements are to
be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater controls and BMPs
may, at the municipality's discretion, also be dedicated to and
maintained by the municipality.
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single owner or
if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, the operations and maintenance of stormwater
controls and BMPs shall be the responsibility of the landowner.
E. The municipality will make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 105-702 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-703
1:202
§ 105-703. Municipal review of a stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
§ 105-704. Adherence to an approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater control
and BMP required by an approved stormwater control and BMP operations
and maintenance plan or to allow the property to remain in a condition
which does not conform to an approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
§ 105-705. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater controls and BMPs.
§ 105-706. Stormwater management easements.
A. The municipality will review the stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan for consistency with this chapter and
any permits issued by PADEP.
B. The municipality will notify the applicant in writing whether or not the
stormwater control and BMP operations and maintenance plan is
approved.
C. The municipality will require an as-built plan per § 105-502 showing all
constructed stormwater controls and BMPs and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the approved operations and maintenance plan.
A. Prior to final approval of the site's SWM site plan (including plans for
private facilities constructed under the simplified method), the
applicant shall sign and record an operations and maintenance
agreement with the municipality covering all stormwater controls and
BMPs that are to be privately owned (refer to Appendix G). The
maintenance agreement shall be transferred with transfer of ownership
in perpetuity. The agreement shall be substantially the same as the
agreement in Appendix I of this chapter.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of
all permanent stormwater controls and BMPs. The agreement shall be
subject to the review and approval of the municipality.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the
municipality.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided to the
municipality by the applicant or property owner for access for
inspections and maintenance, the preservation of stormwater runoff
conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas, and for other stormwater
§ 105-703 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-706
1:203
§ 105-707. Recording of an approved stormwater control and BMP
operations and maintenance plan and related agreements.
§ 105-708. Municipal Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and
Maintenance Fund.
controls. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in any
agreement under § 105-705.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater controls and
BMPs will be placed, constructed, implemented, or permanently
maintained, as described in the stormwater control and BMP operations
and maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds for Delaware County, within 15 days of
approval of the stormwater control and BMP operations and
maintenance plan by the municipality:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 105-705; and
(3) Easements under § 105-706.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of failure on the part of the owner to comply
with this section.
A. Persons installing stormwater controls or BMPs shall be required to pay
a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater Control and BMP
Operation and Maintenance Fund to help defray cost of periodic
inspections and maintenance expenses. The amount of the deposit shall
be determined as follows:
(1) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be privately owned and
maintained, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections
performed by the municipality, as estimated by the Municipal
Engineer, for a period of 25 years. This is to be paid in a manner
specified by the municipality. After that period of time, inspections
will be performed at the expense of the municipality.
(2) If the stormwater control or BMP is to be owned and maintained by
the municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated costs for
maintenance and inspections for 25 years. The municipality will
establish the estimated costs utilizing information submitted by the
applicant.
(3) The amount of the deposit to the fund shall be converted to present
worth of the annual series values. The municipality shall determine
the present worth equivalents, which shall be subject to the
approval of the governing body.
§ 105-706 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-708
1:204
B. If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreational facility (e.g., ballfield or lake), the municipality may reduce
or waive the amount of the maintenance fund deposit based upon the
value of the land for public recreational purpose.
C. If, at some future time, a stormwater control or BMP (whether publicly
or privately owned) is eliminated due to the installation of storm sewers
or other storage facility, the unused portion of the maintenance fund
deposit will be applied to the cost of abandoning or demolishing the
facility and connecting to the storm sewer system or other facility. Any
amount of the deposit remaining after the costs of abandonment or
demolition will be used for inspection, maintenance, and operation of
the receiving stormwater management system.
D. If stormwater controls or BMPs are accepted by the municipality for
dedication, the municipality may require persons installing stormwater
controls or BMPs to pay a specified amount to the Municipal
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to help
defray costs of operations and maintenance activities. The amount may
be determined as follows:
(1) The amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the municipality.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
E. If a stormwater control or BMP is proposed that also serves as a
recreational facility (e.g., ballfield or lake), the municipality may adjust
the amount due accordingly.
F. The municipality may require applicants to pay a fee to the Municipal
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to
cover long-term maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
G. The municipality may require applicants to pay a fee to the Municipal
Stormwater Control and BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund to
cover stormwater-related problems which may arise from the land
development and earth disturbance.
§ 105-708 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-708
1:205

ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 105-801. Prohibited discharges.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the waters of this commonwealth
is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater discharges into the
municipality's separate storm sewer system that are not composed
entirely of stormwater, except as provided in Subsection C below, and
discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities;
(2) Potable water sources, including water line and fire hydrant
flushings;
(3) Irrigation drainage;
(4) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds);
(5) Air-conditioning condensate;
(6) Water from individual residential car washing;
(7) Springs and water from crawl space pumps;
(8) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains;
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
(10) Lawn watering;
(11) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used;
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater;
(13) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
D. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in § 105-801C significantly contribute to pollution of waters of
the commonwealth, or is so notified by PADEP, the municipality will
notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
§ 105-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-801
1:207
§ 105-802. Prohibited connections.
§ 105-803. Roof drains and sump pumps.
§ 105-804. Alteration of BMPs.
E. Upon notice provided by the municipality under § 105-801D, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
municipality, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
F. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in
§ 105-801C above:
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water, to enter the separate storm
sewer system, and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks.
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system which has
not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and
approved by the municipality.
B. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, connections
made in the past, regardless of whether the connection, drain or
conveyance was previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a
government agency or otherwise permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
A. Roof drains and sump pumps shall not be connected to sanitary sewers.
B. Roof drains and sump pumps shall not be connected to streets, storm
sewers, or roadside ditches, except on a case-by-case basis as
determined by the municipality.
C. Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas or
vegetative BMPs to the maximum extent practicable where
advantageous to do so.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater control or BMP, unless it is part of an approved
maintenance program, without the written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater control or BMP or within a drainage easement that would
limit or alter the functioning of the stormwater control or BMP without
the written approval of the municipality.
§ 105-801 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-804
1:208
ARTICLE IX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 105-901. Right of entry.
§ 105-902. Declaration of public nuisance; continuation of
violation.
§ 105-903. Enforcement generally.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of the stormwater controls or
BMPs in regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on or in any stormwater control or BMP in the
municipality such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/
or sampling of the discharges from such stormwater control or BMP.
C. If the property owner or representative does not grant access to the
municipality within 24 hours of notification, it will be a violation of this
chapter.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may, without limitation, require the following remedies:
(1) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) Elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) Abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) Implementation of stormwater controls and BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater controls and BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
§ 105-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-903
1:209
§ 105-904. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
§ 105-905. Violations and penalties.
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the municipality or its designee, and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development, or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other law or
regulation applicable to the regulated activity;
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development that constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life, health, or property of
others.
B. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit and at the request of the
applicant, the governing body shall schedule a hearing to discuss the
noncompliance if there is no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property. The expense of a hearing shall be the applicant's
responsibility.
C. A suspended permit or approval may be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The Municipal Engineer or his/her designee has inspected and
approved the corrections to the stormwater controls and BMPs or
the elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
D. A permit or approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot
be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit in accordance
with this chapter.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine as established by the municipality for each violation, recoverable
with costs. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense, and the applicable fines are cumulative.
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
§ 105-903 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-905
1:210
§ 105-906. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, and the municipality chooses to pursue enforcement action,
the municipality will provide written notification of the violation. Such
notification will state the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time
limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply within the time
specified will subject such person to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
All such penalties will be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the
municipality from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred to comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 105-907. Enforcement.
The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the SWM site plan shall be the responsibility of the municipality or its
designee.
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. A set of design plans approved by the municipality shall be on file and
available for viewing at the site throughout the duration of the
construction activity. Periodic inspections may be made by the
municipality or its designee during construction.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to undertake
any regulated activity under § 105-105 on any property except as
provided for in the approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any
control structure required by the SWM site plan pursuant to this
chapter or to allow the property to remain in a condition that does not
conform to the approved SWM site plan.
C. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor, or other qualified person verifying that all stormwater
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings per § 105-502.
D. After receipt of the certification by the municipality, a final inspection
shall be conducted by the municipality or its designee to certify
compliance with this chapter.
§ 105-905 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-907
1:211
§ 105-908. Appeals.
§ 105-909. Severability.
If any provision, clause, section or part of this chapter is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts hereof. It is declared as
the intention of the Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township that
this chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
§ 105-910. Repealer.
All ordinances, or parts of ordinances, conflicting with any provision of this
chapter are hereby repealed insofar as the same affect this chapter.
§ 105-911. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective five days after enactment as provided
by law.
E. An occupancy permit will not be issued unless the certification of
completion pursuant to § 105-907C(1) has been secured. The
occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner and/or applicant
for all subdivisions and land developments in the municipality.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of Chadds Ford Township or its
designee relevant to the provision of this chapter may appeal to the
Board of Supervisors within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Supervisors
relevant to the provision of this chapter may appeal to the County Court
of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place
within 30 days of the municipal decision.
§ 105-907 CHADDS FORD CODE § 105-911
1:212
Chapter 110
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 27.
Construction codes — See Ch. 59.
Sewers — See Ch. 95.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 105.
Zoning — See Ch. 135.
§ 105-911 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-911
1:213

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 110-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Chadds Ford Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1985."
§ 110-2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for purposes which are to provide for and
accomplish the following:
A. To assist in the harmonious, orderly, efficient and integrated
development of Chadds Ford Township.
B. To ensure that the arrangement and design of subdivisions and land
developments conforms to the Comprehensive Plan; the Official Sewage
Facilities Plan; Chapter 135, Zoning; and all other ordinances, codes,
regulations, plans and maps adopted in furtherance thereof.
C. To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the Township.
D. To assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation and
use.
E. To facilitate and accommodate prospective pedestrian and vehicular
movement, fire protection and the rendition of other essential services
through a coordinated system and design of streets.
F. To ensure the coordination and conformity of subdivision and land
development plans with the public improvement plans of the Township
regarding such facilities as streets, sewers and other facilities and
improvements.
G. To establish a uniform and equitable procedure for the review and
processing of subdivision and/or land development plans.
H. To establish standards to ensure that developments are
environmentally sound by requiring preservation of existing natural
features to the greatest possible extent in areas affected through
excavation, construction or other land development activities.
I. To establish minimum standards for the design and construction of
improvements, which aid in the use and enjoyment of land, such as
streets, sidewalks, adequate drainage and water and sewage facilities;
and which would aid in precluding adverse environmental effects, such
as sedimentation, soil erosion, flooding, deforestation and water
pollution.
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-3
1:215
§ 110-3. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be minimum requirements
necessary to meet the foregoing purposes. However, when interpreting such
requirements the following shall be noted:
§ 110-4. Authority and control.
In accordance with Article V, Section 501, of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968 (P.L. 805), as amended,49
the Chadds Ford Township Board of Supervisors shall have the authority
to regulate subdivision and/or land development within the Township by
enacting this chapter. Through such authority the following shall apply:
A. Where, owing to special or unique conditions, the life, health, safety or
property of persons may be menaced or jeopardized by the application
of any of the requirements of this chapter, more stringent or restrictive
requirements necessary to eliminate or alleviate such menace or
jeopardy may be applied or imposed by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Where, owing to special or unique conditions, the provisions of this
chapter will inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant,
reasonable exceptions to such provisions may be made by the Board of
Supervisors as will not be contrary to the foregoing purposes, or to the
public interest, upon prior recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
C. Where the provisions of this chapter impose more stringent
requirements than those of any statute, ordinance or regulation, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail; where the provisions of any
statute, ordinance, code or regulation impose more stringent
requirements than those of this chapter, such statute, ordinance, code
or regulation shall prevail.
D. Where it is desirable to effect economy and ingenuity in the layout of
subdivisions and land developments and to protect critical
environmental areas, modifications of plan requirements may be made
in accordance with the guidelines set forth in § 110-52 herein.
A. No subdivision, resubdivision or land development of any lot, tract or
parcel of land within the Township shall be made, and no street, alley,
sanitary sewer, capped sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other such
facilities in connection therewith, or other improvements of any kind,
shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or
travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting
thereon, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
Chapter 135, Zoning, as amended; and all other Township ordinances,
codes, regulations, plans and maps, as amended.
49.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 110-3 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-4
1:216
§ 110-5. Jurisdiction.
The Board of Supervisors shall have jurisdiction of subdivision and land
development within the Township. In order that the actions of the Board
of Supervisors under this chapter may be correlated with all relevant data
and procedures, the Board of Supervisors hereby designates the Township
Planning Commission as the agency to which the following responsibilities
are assigned:
B. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit to erect, alter or add to
any building or other structure or portion thereof upon land in a
subdivision or land development may be issued, and no building may be
erected in a subdivision or land development unless and until a
subdivision and/or land development plan, filed in accordance with this
chapter, has been approved and, where required, recorded unless and
until the required improvements in connection therewith along, upon or
through the lot or lots to be sold or built upon and to an existing
improved street, have been constructed and approved, or in lieu
thereof, the Township has been assured of the completion of such
construction, and the maintenance thereof, by means of a completion
and maintenance guarantee in the form of a bond or other security
sufficient to cover the cost of the required improvements, and their
maintenance, as set forth in Article VI of this chapter.
A. To review, upon filing with the Township Secretary, all applications for
either preliminary or final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans.
B. To engage in all preliminary consultations with the applicant relating to
such plans.
C. To make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning
approval, disapproval, modification and conditions of approval of such
plans.
D. To make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning the
rationale for the granting of modifications to the provisions,
requirements and standards of this chapter.
E. To determine whether or not any preliminary or final plan submissions
are complete and acceptable to the Township for the purpose of
establishing the date of filing.
§ 110-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-5
1:217

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 110-6. Application and interpretation.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated below:
§ 110-7. Definitions.
A. The present tense includes all other tenses; the singular includes the
plural, and the plural includes the singular; the masculine gender
includes the feminine and neuter; the word "used" includes the words
"designed" or "arranged"; the word "person" includes any individual,
estate, trust, fiduciary, partnership, association, corporation, or any
other organization or entity, including the principal officers thereof or
any person or entity acting directly or indirectly by, through, or under
any of the foregoing; the word "occupied" includes the words
"designed, or intended to be occupied"; the word "structure" includes
"building"; the word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is
always permissive and the word "will" is always directory; the words "as
amended" as applied to any statute, ordinance, code, regulation, plan or
map include replacements, supplements or restatements thereof; and
reference to a particular article, section or subsection which inherently
refers to other articles, sections or subsections includes all articles,
sections or subsections referred to.
B. The word "Township" means Chadds Ford Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania; the term "Board of Supervisors" means the Board of
Supervisors of the Township; and the term "Planning Commission"
means the Planning Commission of the Township.
C. The terms "such as," "including" and the like are intended to introduce
matters which are illustrative of the meaning of the sentence, clause or
phrase in which such terms appear without limiting or derogating from
the general application of the sentence, clause or phrase in which such
terms appear.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and
phrases have the meaning indicated herein:
ABUTTING OWNER — The owner of record of a parcel of land which
is contiguous, at any point, to the parcel to be subdivided and/or
developed or which has frontage on a common road or street (public or
private) across from the parcel to be subdivided and/or developed.
ACCELERATED EROSION — Removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of man's activities and natural processes
at a rate greater than would occur from natural processes alone.
§ 110-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:219
ACCELERATION LANE — An added roadway lane which permits
integration and merging of slower moving vehicles into lanes of the
main vehicular flow.
ACCEPTABLE OUTFALL — The point where stormwater can be
released to a channel or other body of water without causing erosion
to or sedimentation of the receiving channel or other body of water.
The outlet shall include structural and vegetative measures to assure
nonerosive velocities or rates of flow.
ACCESS — A way or means of approach to provide physical ingress to
and egress from a parcel, tract or other lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the principal
permitted building on a lot and used for purposes customarily
incidental to those of such principal building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use conducted on the same lot as a principal
permitted use to which it is related and which is located either within
the same structure(s) or in an accessory building or structure. A use
which is clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with,
a particular principal permitted use.
ADVERSE EFFECTS — Results contributing to a harmful or degraded
condition and/or producing an unfavorable outcome.
AGENT — Any person or entity, other than the landowner or developer,
who, acting upon written authority for the landowner or developer, files
subdivision and/or land development plans with the Township for the
purpose of obtaining approval thereof.
AGRICULTURE — The cultivating of the soil, the raising of livestock
and poultry and the harvesting of the products of the soil, including
horticulture and forestry, but excluding commercial greenhouses.
ALLEY — A right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the
side or rear of two or more lots.
ALTERATION — Any change in the exterior or structural portions of
a building; any change to or in a building which would alter its use
classification; or any change which would substantially alter an existing
sewage system, traffic condition or other infrastructure element.
ALTERNATIVES — Choices between or among two or more plans,
layouts, approaches, solutions and/or outcomes.
ANTECEDENT CONDITIONS — Specified characteristics of the land
surface (e.g., meadow) prior to a proposed disturbance or prior to
a rainfall event (e.g., amount of moisture in the soil); the basis for
calculating increases in runoff attributable to the disturbance or storms
which must be controlled.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application
for subdivision and/or land development, as hereinafter defined,
including his heirs, successors, assigns and grantees.
§ 110-7 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-7
1:220
APPLICATION FORM — A form available from the Township Secretary
(included in the Appendix of this chapter50) which is to be used to
provide information to aid in the review of a subdivision and/or land
development plan and for general administrative purposes.
APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION AND/OR LAND DEVELOPMENT —
The action taken to complete, sign and file the application form as
therein provided and as provided by this chapter, which shall also
include the filing of the number and type of plans, documents and other
submissions required by this chapter for the review and/or approval
of a preliminary plan and thereafter a final plan, and the necessary
fees in accordance with the prevailing application fees; an application,
whether preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to the conveyance or other transfer of lots and/or the commencement
of construction and development, including an application for the
approval of a subdivision plat or plan and an application for the
approval of a development plan. No application shall be complete,
considered filed or considered as accepted by the Township until all of
the foregoing requirements have been fulfilled.
ARCHITECT — A person duly registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to practice architecture.
BEARINGS AND DISTANCES — See "metes and bounds."
BENEFICIAL EFFECTS — Results contributing to an improvement in
condition and/or producing a favorable outcome.
BERM — A mound of earth which serves purposes such as directing the
flow of surface water runoff, preventing soil erosion or supporting plant
materials to aid in screening.
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES — Characteristics of the natural
environment manifest in its flora and fauna. The disposition of these
characteristics is typically expressed in vegetation and/or wildlife units
such as: tree, woodland or forest stands and related understory and
ground cover growth; and aquatic and terrestrial wildlife and/or their
habitats.
BLOCK — A developed area bounded by three or more streets.
BUILDABLE AREA — The area of a lot remaining after the minimum
yard and setback requirements of Chapter 135, Zoning, have been
met within which a principal permitted building shall be located. Such
setback requirements include yard setback and setbacks from flood
hazard and flood fringe areas, and such features as areas of steep
slope and very steep slope, and easements. Where a buildable area is
shown on a plan as extending into a flood hazard district, a steep slope
area, or any other area which may involve a conditional use or special
exception, those portions of the buildable area extending into any such
areas shall be delineated, depicted, and otherwise noted on all plans in
50.Editor's Note: Said application form is on file in the Township offices.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:221
an accurate and conspicuous manner to disclose the specific uses which
may occur in such areas.
BUILDER — A person, who is not necessarily the owner of the land or
agent of the same, who by contract or other agreement is charged with
the responsibility of construction of buildings or other structures, or of
making any construction improvements on any parcel of land.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by walls or
columns and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any
individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind
or nature.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The relation of the total ground floor area of
all buildings on a lot to the lot area on which they are located.
BUILDING LINE — The line which establishes the minimum depth of
front yard for the particular district as measured from the street line.
BUILDING PERMIT — A document issued by the Township granting
permission for the construction, repair, alteration of, or addition to a
structure.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the
principal permitted use of the lot on which it is situated.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured at a point 4 1/2 feet
from the ground surface at the center of the base of the tree.
CAPPED SEWERS — Sanitary sewage facilities which are installed and
capped where existing sanitary sewer facilities are not accessible and
available, but are proposed in the official Sewage Facilities Plan of the
Township. Such facilities shall include sanitary sewers, force mains,
pumping stations, and all other appurtenances necessary to serve the
entire subdivision and/or land development.
CARTWAY — That area of a road or other street within which vehicles
are permitted including travel lanes but not including shoulders, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks or drainage swales.
CATCH BASIN — An inlet designed to intercept and redirect surface
waters.
CHANNEL — An area which conveys the normal continuous or
intermittent flow of water.
CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of a line of
unobstructed vision from a point 4 1/2 feet above the center line of a
street to the nearest point at the top of an object four inches high on
the same center line and to another object 4 1/2 feet high on the same
center line.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of street center lines.
§ 110-7 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-7
1:222
COMMUNITY FACILITIES — The services which provide for various
community health, education, safety, leisure, and like needs and the
locations at which these services are provided. Typical community
facilities include schools, parks and recreation areas, libraries,
hospitals and other health-care facilities, fire protection, police,
ambulance and rescue service and postal services.
COMMUNITY ON-LOT OR ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM —
A system of sanitary sewage disposal structures which serve more than
one lot or one building which along with its appurtenant facilities is
administered and maintained by an organization or other entity having
the right and obligation to operate such system in accordance with
federal, state, county and Township regulations.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A well or series thereof with
facilities serving more than one lot or one building, which along with
its appurtenant facilities is administered and/or maintained by such
organizations as a homeowners' association or other entity having the
right or obligation to administer and/or maintain same in accordance
with federal, state, county and Township regulations.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Chadds Ford Township
Comprehensive Plan, as adopted and updated from time to time,
including maps, tables and text which constitute a policy guide for
decisions regarding land use, circulation, community facilities and
utilities in the Township.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is not appropriate to a particular
zoning district as a whole, but which may be suitable in certain
locations within the district only when specific conditions and factors
prescribed for such cases within Chapter 135, Zoning, are present.
Conditional uses and applications for permits therefor are allowed
or denied by the Board of Supervisors after recommendations are
provided by the Planning Commission in conjunction with subdivision
and/or land development plans and applications, unless no subdivision
and/or land development application is filed as to the tract on which a
conditional use is proposed, in which case they are allowed or denied
by the Board of Supervisors after recommendations are provided by the
Planning Commission.
CONDOMINIUM — A building or group of buildings in which units
are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities
are owned by all of the owners on a proportional, undivided basis, all
of which shall be owned and operated under the Pennsylvania Unit
Property Act of 1963, as amended.51
CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan filed as and forming a part of the
preliminary plan and the final plan detailing the measures to be taken
by the landowner or developer for the purposes of the protection of
watercourses, notable trees and other important natural features and
51.Editor's Note: The Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of 1963 was repealed 7-2-1980 by P.L.
286, No. 82. See now the Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:223
for the control of grading, soil erosion and sedimentation, and
stormwater management.
CONSTRUCTION — Any disturbance of the land or the erection of
structures thereon, including the cutting of trees or clearing of brush,
provided, however, that staking or the clearing for survey lines, or
performing engineering or other scientific tests to obtain data, shall not
be deemed as construction.
CONTINUOUS VISUAL BUFFER — A visually impenetrable screen
created through the effective use of plant materials, fencing, walls and/
or earthen berms.
CONTOUR — An invisible line on the surface of the earth along which
all points are at the same elevation above sea level. Such lines are
represented on maps relative to data furnished by such agencies as the
U.S. Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.) or other organizations duly certified
to produce such information.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street having vehicular access to and from another
street at one end and terminating in a vehicular turnaround at the other
end.
CULTURAL ENVIRONMENT — A representation of man's influence
on land and/or water through the use, organization, adornment and
maintenance of property and structures.
CULVERT — A structure designed to convey water under a street or
pedestrian walk.
CURB — A stone or concrete boundary marking the edge of the cartway
or paved area.
CUT — A portion of land or other area from which earth has been
removed or will be removed by excavation; or the depth below the
original ground surface or excavated surface.
DATE OF FILING — The date on which a complete application for
subdivision and/or land development, as herein defined, has been
submitted to the Township Secretary and accepted by the Township.
DATUM — A reference point from which elevations are measured. The
standard datum is sea level as established by the U.S. Geological Survey
(U.S.G.S.).
DECELERATION LANE — An added roadway lane that permits vehicles
to slow down and leave the main vehicular flow.
DEDICATION — A gift or other donation of property by the owner
thereof to the Township or other entity.
DEED — A legal document conveying an estate or other right, title or
interest in property.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Standards adopted pursuant to this chapter.
§ 110-7 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-7
1:224
DETENTION BASIN — A structure designed, built and used to retard
surface water runoff for a period of time sufficient to cause the
deposition of sediment and to reduce the velocity and volume of surface
flows leaving a site.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, equitable owner, or authorized agent of
such landowner who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land
or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
lots; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation,
landfill or land disturbance; any use or extension of the use of land.
DITCH — A small drainage channel.
DIVERSION CHANNEL — A channel constructed on, across, or at the
bottom of a slope.
DRAINAGE — A system for conveying surface water or groundwater
from the land by facilities or structures which serve to control or
otherwise manage runoff and minimize sedimentation and soil erosion
during and after construction or development.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted to use private land to
facilitate the flow of water as deemed necessary by the Township within
which the owner shall erect no permanent structures but may use the
land in any other way not inconsistent with the grantee's rights.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any trench, ditch, swale, gutter, pipe, culvert,
storm sewer or other similar depression or structure designed,
intended or constructed for the purpose of diverting surface water
or conveying surface water or groundwater from a subdivision, land
development area or contiguous areas.
DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan which depicts existing and proposed
drainage as required by this chapter.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any watercourse or trench, ditch, swale, gutter,
pipe, culvert, storm sewer or other similar depression or structure
in which water flows in a definite direction either continuously or
intermittently and has a definite channel, bed and banks, and includes
any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow.
DRIVEWAY — An individual or shared portion of a lot which provides
access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other
structure from a street.
DRYWELL — A covered pit with open jointed lining through which
water from roofs, basement floors or areaways may seep or leech into
the surrounding soil.
DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied exclusively for
residential purposes, including a mobile home.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:225
DWELLING UNIT — A building, or portion thereof, providing complete
housekeeping facilities for one family.
EARTHMOVING ACTIVITY — Land disturbance activity resulting in the
movement of earth or stripping of vegetative cover from the earth.
EASEMENT — A right, privilege or other interest granted or reserved
for the use of land for a particular purpose.
ECONOMIC AND FISCAL CHARACTERISTICS — Characteristics
related to the expenditures and revenues in conjunction with the
management of income of a household, private business, community,
association and/or government.
EGRESS — An exit.
ELEVATION — A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference
level; or a scale drawing of the front, rear or side of a building.
END LINE — The line which represents the termination area of a
shared driveway.
ENGINEER — A person duly registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to practice professional engineering.
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building,
an increase in size of another existing structure or an increase in that
portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.
ENVIRONMENT — The conditions, resources and/or characteristics
which exist within and surround the area to be affected by a proposed
subdivision and/or land development including: natural elements such
as land, water, air, minerals, natural flora and natural fauna; and manmade
components such as objects of historic or aesthetic significance,
infrastructure, and man-related attributes of a social and economic
nature.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT REPORT — An assessment
which objectively describes, analyzes and documents both the
beneficial and adverse environmental effects of a proposed subdivision
and/or land development and the measures to be undertaken to
mitigate adverse effects in accordance with the provisions set forth in
this chapter and Chapter 135, Zoning.
EXCAVATION — Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil,
rock, minerals, mineral substances or organic substances other than
vegetation from water or land or beneath the surface thereof, whether
exposed or submerged.
FILL — Material such as sand, gravel, earth and other suitable and
approved composition; or any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or
moved to a new location above the natural surface of the ground or on
top of a stripped or otherwise cut surface.
§ 110-7 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-7
1:226
FLOOD FRINGE AREA — An area which contains soils subject to
flooding as mapped by the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service. Such
areas are located primarily adjacent to a flood hazard area.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — An area which is comprised by the Special
Flood Hazard Area defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration, as shown as the
Floodplain Conservation District on the Chadds Ford Township Zoning
Map,52 and in accordance with Act 166, as amended, a setback of 50
feet from the banks of any watercourse.
FLOODING — A general or temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of areas from the overflow of inland waters and/or the
unusual and rapid accumulation of water on or under the ground.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to flooding from any source.
FORESTED AREAS — Those areas of extensive vegetation in which the
dominant plants are trees that are indigenous to the area.
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF STREETS, ROADS AND
HIGHWAYS — The categorization of streets, roads and highways
according to a hierarchy of service characteristics for which various
design standards have been established.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or part of a principal
permitted building used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and
used by the owner or tenant of such principal permitted building.
GRADE — The slope of a street, road, or other installation expressed as
a percent; or the elevation of existing, finished or proposed conditions
as hereinafter defined.
GRADE, EXISTING — The elevation, relative to a given datum, of the
ground surface prior to any excavation, cut or fill.
GRADE, FINISHED — The elevation, relative to a given datum, of the
ground surface after completion of any excavation, cut or fill.
GRADE, PROPOSED — The elevation, relative to a given datum, of the
ground surface proposed to be achieved by excavation, cut or fill.
GRADING — The changing of the surface of the ground by cutting,
filling or excavation, including land in its cut or filled condition.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of geologic structures
and rock or soil interstices which have the capacity to store water, or
permit the transfer of water to a geologic storage area.
GUARANTEE, COMPLETION — The financial security that may be
accepted by the Township as a guarantee that improvements required
as part of an application for subdivision and/or land development are
completed to the satisfaction of the Township. Such financial security
shall include, but is not limited to, performance bonds, federal or
52.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:227
commonwealth chartered lending institution irrevocable letters of
credit, and restrictive or escrow accounts in such lending institutions.
GUARANTEE, MAINTENANCE — The financial security that may be
accepted by the Township as a guarantee that improvements required
as part of an application for subdivision and/or land development will be
in first class condition, state of repair and working order for a specific
period of time. Such financial security shall be similar to that accepted
for a completion guarantee.
GUTTER — That portion within a street right-of-way, outside the
cartway, designed for surface drainage, whether paved or otherwise.
HISTORIC RESOURCES — Sites, areas, structures, trails and/or routes
which are valued due to their significance as example and/or locations
of events, customs, skills and/or arts of the past, including those having
a present significance.
IMPACT — The power of an event to produce changes in a condition. In
the context of impact exerted on the environment, changes which affect
the existing conditions and/or quality are of greatest concern.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which has materials that do not
normally absorb rainfall or surface water, such as buildings, paved
parking areas, paved walks and similar surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A body of water, such as a pond, detention or
retention basin, confined by a headwall, dike, floodgate or other barrier,
in the nature of a dam.
IMPROVEMENTS — Physical additions and changes to land such as
grading, paving, curbing, fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers,
capped sewers, storm sewers, storm drains, catch basins, culverts,
sidewalks, monuments, crosswalks, bridges, earthworks, street lights,
wells, on-site sewage disposal systems, street trees and other plantings,
and other structures that may be necessary to produce usable and
desirable land development.
IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT — A list of improvements approved by
the Township which the landowner or developer agrees to install as a
prerequisite to final plan approval.
IMPROVEMENT SPECIFICATIONS — Minimum standards for the
construction and other installation of improvements.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct the flow
of rain into storage in geologic structures, e.g., French drains, seepage
beds, seepage trenches, and the like.
INFRASTRUCTURE — The basic installations and facilities on which
the continuance and growth of a community depend, such as roads,
schools, electrical transmission facilities, transportation and
communication systems.
INGRESS — An entrance.
§ 110-7 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-7
1:228
INTERIOR LOT — Any lot which only has access to a street by an
easement or right-of-way such as a shared driveway and may be
characterized as "landlocked" in that said lot does not front on a
dedicated street; any lot which has limited frontage to a dedicated
street by virtue of being a flag-shaped lot.
INVERT — The lowest visible surface of a drainage conduit or channel.
LAND DEVELOPMENT[Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B] — Any
of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The record holder of legal title to land; the rightful
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition); a lessee if he is authorized
expressly under the lease to exercise the rights of the owner, of the
land which is the subject of an application for subdivision and/or land
development.
LAND PLANNER — A person who is recognized as a certified planner
by the American Institute of Certified Planners, an Institute of the
American Planning Association.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A person duly registered by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to practice landscape architecture.
LAND USE — The use for which land is used, arranged and the like
typically expressed in terms of the type of activity or development
which exists, such as agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, recreational, municipal and the like, whether such use is
principal or accessory.
LOAD BEARING FILL — Any facility, earthwork or fill placed in a
controlled manner and compacted to support structural foundations
and the buildings and other structures thereon, vehicular traffic or
improvements in accordance with the highest standards of professional
engineering.
LONG-TERM EFFECTS — Results which are manifest for, or extending
over, a long period of time.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots or tracts
of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure;
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features;
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:229
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit and which conforms to the provisions of this chapter, Chapter
135, Zoning, and all other Township ordinances, codes, regulations,
plans and maps.[Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
LOT AREA — The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any
street rights-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more
streets including shared driveways at their intersection, or upon two
parts of the same street including shared driveways forming an interior
angle of less than 135°.
LOT LINE — A property boundary line of any lot held in single and
separate ownership. In the case of any lot abutting a street including
shared driveways, the lot line for such portion of the lot as abuts such
street including shared driveways shall be deemed to be the same as
the street line, and shall not be the center line of the street, or any other
line within the street line.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line abutting a street including shared
driveways and coinciding with the street line. In the case of a corner
lot, whichever street abutting lot line is elected by the landowner
or developer when filing any application for subdivision and/or land
development subject to the approval of the Township Engineer and the
Planning Commission may be deemed the front lot line. In the case of
an interior lot, the landowner or developer when filing any application
for subdivision and/or land development may select the front lot line
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer and the Planning
Commission. The foregoing election does not apply in the case of a
street which is a shared driveway.
LOT LINE, REAR — A lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line. If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot
forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line
10 feet in length within the lot, between the side lot lines, parallel to
and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at a right angle to its depth along a straight line parallel to
the front lot line at the minimum required yard setback line.
MARKER — An iron pipe or steel bar 3/4 of an inch in diameter, and 30
inches in length.
METES AND BOUNDS — A method of describing the boundaries of
land by directions or bearings and distances from a known point of
reference, including the content of the land and each lot in square feet
and acres and fractions thereof.
§ 110-7 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-7
1:230
MITIGATION — The act of precluding a potentially adverse effect and/
or making a potentially adverse effect less severe through measures
which will improve a condition and/or lessen the impact.
MONUMENT — A permanent marker of stone or concrete, set to mark
a boundary or a control point in a survey which shall be six inches
square by 30 inches in length, on top of which is permanently inscribed
a center mark.
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT — A composition of land, water and/or air
represented by its inherent physical and biological resources.
NOTABLE TREES — Trees of twelve-inch caliper or greater which are
indigenous to the Township.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A document issued by the Township Code
Enforcement Officer allowing the occupancy or other use of a permitted
building or other structure and certifying that the building or other
structure and the use thereof has been constructed and will be used
in compliance with all applicable Township ordinances, codes,
regulations, plans and maps, as amended from time to time.
OFFICIAL MAP — A legally adopted map that conclusively shows the
location of such features as existing and proposed public streets,
watercourses and public grounds.
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — The plan adopted by the
Township and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection which sets forth recommendations for the
provision of adequate sewage systems in the Township in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537.53
ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL — A single system of piping, a septic
tank or other approved facility serving a single lot and collecting and
disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the soil through a septic
tank filter field.
ON-SITE WATER SUPPLY — An individual well serving one lot and/or a
water supply on a lot occupied or to be occupied and serving permitted
buildings.
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space, available for the parking
of one motor vehicle, of the size required in Chapter 135, Zoning. A
parking space shall include either covered garage space or uncovered
parking lot space located off the street right-of-way.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of water at a given
point and time resulting from a predetermined storm.
PERMEABLE — Porous to water or to other liquids.
PHYSICAL RESOURCES — Characteristics of the natural environment
manifest in its landforms, soils, geological structure of surface and/
or subsurface rock, minerals, natural bodies of water and/or man-
53.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:231
made impoundments, watercourses, groundwater and the like. The
disposition of these characteristics is typically expressed in
physiographic, topographic and/or hydrologic units, such as rock
formations, slopes, elevations, soil types, watersheds, surface water
types, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers or aquifer recharge areas and the
like.
PLAN — A draft, diagram or drawing or set thereof showing the present
and proposed physical features of and improvement to land and the
proposed development thereto; see also Article IV for classification and
requirements of plans. The term "plan" includes profiles, cross-sections
and the like.
PLAN, AS BUILT — A plan prepared by a surveyor or engineer showing
dimensions and locations of all improvements as actually constructed.
PLAN, FINAL — A subdivision plan and/or land development plan
prepared for official recording purposes depicting all features required
in §§ 110-19 and 110-20 herein and all plans, documents and
submissions required therein.
PLAN, IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION — A plan prepared by an
engineer, architect, or landscape architect showing the construction
details of streets, drains, sewers, bridges, culverts and other
improvements as required by this chapter, and shall include horizontal
plans, profiles and cross-sections.
PLAN, LAND DEVELOPMENT — A sketch, preliminary or final plan
including written and graphic documentation showing the provision for
development of a subject tract when plans of subdivision would not be
applicable.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a
number of dwellings and a minimum percentage of open space in
accordance with the requirements for planned residential development
of Chapter 135, Zoning.
PLANNING COMMISSION SECRETARY — An individual duly appointed
by the Board of Supervisors who serves as the Secretary for the
Township Planning Commission.
PLANNING CONSULTANT — A certified planner, recognized as such
by the American Institute of Certified Planners, an Institute of the
American Planning Association, who provides technical assistance to
the Township in matters such as subdivision and/or land development.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A subdivision and/or land development plan
filed as a basis for consideration and approval prior to preparation of a
final plan depicting all features required in § 110-19 herein including an
improvements construction plan, conservation plan and all other plans,
documents and submissions required therein.
PLAN, PROFILE — A plan prepared by an engineer, architect or
landscape architect, showing the vertical section of the existing grade
§ 110-7 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-7
1:232
and proposed grade along the center line of any proposed street and
any street appurtenances to be constructed or installed, which must
include cross-sections of the street and other improvements
construction.
PLAN, RECORD — A final plan prepared for recording by an engineer,
architect, landscape architect or surveyor, showing the ultimate width
of streets, the lot lines, easements and any other relevant information
pertaining to a subdivision and/or land development as required by this
chapter.
PLAN, SKETCH — A schematic plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating topographic, vegetative and other salient existing features
of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of the proposed
subdivision and/or land development in sufficient detail to allow for
disclosure of all significant review matters prior to the filing of a
preliminary plan for a proposed subdivision and/or land development.
PLANTING, SCREEN — A planting strip of a specified width and height
comprised of required plantings which create or provide a continuous
visual buffer.
PLANTING STRIP — A strip of land lying between the curbline, or edge
of the cartway, and the sidewalk or walkway, and any area requiring a
planting screen as specified in this chapter, Chapter 135, Zoning, or any
other Township ordinances, codes, regulations, plans and maps.
PLAT — A map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries
and location of individual properties and streets. A map or plan of a
subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or final.
POND — A natural or artificial body of water which retains water on a
year-round basis and is less than two acres in size. (The shoreline of a
pond shall be measured from the spillway crest elevation rather than
the permanent pool elevation should there be a difference in the two
elevations.)
PRIMARY EFFECTS — Results of direct nature which have a principal
influence on a particular condition or state.
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — An on-site or off-site system
in which sewage is collected, conveyed, treated and disposed by means:
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection;
in accordance with the Township's Sewage Facilities Plan; and
administered, operated and maintained by an approved homeowners'
association or other private entity.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.[Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:233
PUBLIC SEWER (PUBLIC SEWERAGE SYSTEM) — An off-site system in
which sewerage is collected, conveyed, treated and disposed by means:
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection;
in accordance with a Sewage Facilities Plan approved by the Township;
and administered, operated and maintained by a governmental agency,
authority, or commission.
PUBLIC WATER (PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM) — An off-site system in
which water is distributed and supplied by means: approved by the
state and Township; and administered, operated and maintained by an
organization which is regulated by a governmental agency, authority or
commission.
RESTRICTION — A limitation on property which may be created in
a deed, lease, mortgage, through certain zoning, subdivision or other
Township codes, ordinances, regulations, plans or maps or conditions
of approval of an application for subdivision and/or land development.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT — A restriction on the use and enjoyment of
land usually set forth in the deed.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division of lots or the relocation of
lot lines of any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and
approved or recorded; or the alteration of any streets or the
establishment of any new streets within any such subdivision.
"Resubdivision" does not include conveyances made so as to combine
entire existing lots by deed or other instrument.
RETENTION BASIN — A reservoir, formed from soil or other material,
which is designed to retain permanently a certain amount of
stormwater from a catchment area and which also may be designed
to detain temporarily additional stormwater runoff from the catchment
area. Retention basins also may receive fresh water from year-round
streams. Retention basins always contain water, and thus may be
considered man-made lakes or ponds.
REUSE — A use for an existing building or parcel or lot of land other
than the use for which it was originally intended or made.
REVIEW — An examination of the sketch, preliminary and/or final plan
by the Township Planning Commission, Township Engineer, planning
consultant, other Township officials, representatives and bodies and the
Board of Supervisors to determine compliance with this chapter and
its regulations, design standards and all other Township ordinances,
codes, regulations, plans or maps.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land granted or reserved for public or
private use.
ROAD — A type of street.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution, or the water-carried waste resulting
from the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing machines,
§ 110-7 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-7
1:234
sinks, dishwashers, or any other source of water-carried waste of
human origin.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe that conveys sanitary sewage.
SCALE — The relationship between distances on a map and the actual
ground distances.
SCREENING — The use of plant materials, fencing, walls and/or
earthen berms, or combinations thereof, to aid in the concealment of
such features as parking areas and vehicles within them, and to provide
privacy between two or more different land uses or activities; a visual
and/or sound buffer or other barrier.
SECONDARY EFFECTS — Results of an indirect nature which have
an influence on a particular condition or state derived from a primary
effect.
SEDIMENT — Deposited silt or other matter that is being or has been
moved from its site of origin by water or other means of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A structure designed and built to retain sediment.
SEPTIC SYSTEM — An underground system with a septic tank and
filter field used for the decomposition of domestic wastes and its safe
disposal.
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle that receives the discharge
of sewage from a building, sewer or part thereof, and is designed and
constructed so as to permit settling of solids from this liquid, digestion
of the organic matter, and discharge of the liquid portion into a disposal
area.
SEPTIC TANK FILTER FIELD — A system of open jointed pipes
intended to distribute septic tank effluent into the ground for
absorption and evaporation.
SERVICE ROAD — A separate and subordinate cartway abutting or
within the right-of-way of a street which is parallel to and connected at
controlled intervals with the principal cartway, and which serves as the
means of access to abutting lots.
SETBACK AREA — The area to be designated, delineated, depicted
and otherwise noted on any plan as separating buildings or groups of
buildings, or the area separating parking areas from loading zones from
buildings and groups of buildings or the lines of the buildable areas and
the lot lines. Setback areas also include the area separating a building
or a group of buildings or their parking areas from the street line and
other lines.
SEWAGE — The total of organic waste and waste water generated
by residential, industrial, commercial, institutional or other
establishments.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:235
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit used to collect and carry away sewage
or stormwater runoff from the generating source of origin to treatment
plants and to a receiving stream or other drainage way.
SEWERAGE — All effluent carried by sewers whether it is sanitary
sewage, residential, commercial or industrial wastes or stormwater
runoff; or the entire system of sewage collection, conveyance,
treatment and disposal.
SEWERED AREA — That portion of the Township designated in the
official Sewage Facilities Plan in which there is, or may be, constructed
a public sewer system.
SHADE TREE — A woody plant, usually deciduous, which normally
grows with one main trunk to a height in excess of 40 feet and has a
canopy which screens and filters, the sun in the summer, and winter,
respectively.
SHORT-TERM EFFECTS — Results which are manifest for, or extending
over, a short period of time.
SILT — Finely divided particles of soil or rock, often carried in cloudy
suspension in water and eventually deposited as sediment.
SITE — A tract or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots on a
tract which form an area for a development project.
SITE PLAN — Any plan for a subdivision or a land development,
whether sketch, preliminary, tentative, or final; any plan prepared for
an application for a conditional use or special exception; or any plan
prepared for the purpose of obtaining a building permit, grading permit
or any other permit.
SLOPE, STEEP — Those areas of land which are characterized by a
change in elevation of 15% up to 25% based on three consecutive
two-foot contours, which is six cumulative vertical feet of grade
change.[Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. N. 122; 10-8-2015 by Ord.
No. 141]
SLOPE, VERY STEEP — Those areas of land which are characterized
by a change in elevation in excess of 25% based on three consecutive
two-foot contours, which is six cumulative vertical feet of grade
change.[Amended 10-8-2015 by Ord. No. 141]
SOCIAL AND DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS — Characteristics
related to the distribution, density and vital statistics of populations.
SOIL EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, and
ice.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan and
related narrative report required in accordance with this chapter for
the control and mitigation of soil erosion and sedimentation.
§ 110-7 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-7
1:236
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test in accordance with criteria
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Sewage Enforcement Officer conducted to determine the suitability
of the soil for on-site sewage disposal facilities by measuring the
absorptive capacity of the soil at a given location and depth.
SOIL SURVEY — A report entitled "Soil Survey - Chester and Delaware
Counties, Pennsylvania," published May 1963 by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, and updated from time to time.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse or other discarded materials
including, but not limited to, nonliquid waste materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, institutional, agricultural and residential
activities.
SPECIMEN TREE — A shade tree or street tree.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground
water drainage but excludes sewage and residential, commercial and
industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — That water which accumulates from precipitation
and is manifest in surface runoff.
STORMWATER DETENTION — Any storm drainage technique that
retards or detains runoff, in rate, volume, or otherwise, such as a
detention or retention basin, parking lot storage, rooftop storage,
porous pavement, dry wells or any combination thereof.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan for controlling surface
water runoff so that it will preclude erosion or flooding and/or the
adverse effects of impervious areas on surface water runoff as required
by the Township ordinances, codes, regulations, plans and maps.
STREAM — A type of watercourse.
STREET — A public (dedicated) or privately owned (undedicated) rightof-
way, serving as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation to
furnish access to abutting lots and used to provide space for installation
improvements such as sewers, other utilities, street trees, sidewalks.
STREET, COLLECTOR —
MAJOR — A street intended to serve a principal role in collecting
traffic from minor collectors and local streets, and used primarily
as the means of access for through traffic within the Township
and to areas adjacent thereto, and from minor arterial or principal
arterial streets.
(1)
MINOR — A street intended to serve a principal role in collecting
traffic from local streets, and used primarily as the means of access
for through traffic between residential neighborhoods and other
areas within the Township and to areas adjacent thereto, and from
major collectors and arterials.
(2)
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:237
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the right-of-way
line of a public street, road, or highway legally open or between a lot
and a privately owned street or road over which the owners or tenants
of two or more lots, each held in single and separate ownership, have
the right of access.
STREET, LOCAL —
STREET, LOOP — A local street which has its only ingress and egress
at two points of the same connecting street, or, at one point with the
connecting street, as would be the case if the loop street were in the
form of a circle.
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL — A street intended to serve a principal
role in accommodating traffic from collector streets and in carrying
relatively large volumes of long distance traffic between principal
arterials and other minor arterials.
STREET, PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL — A street intended to serve a
principal role as a limited access highway with no grade crossings.
STREET, PRIVATE — A street not offered or required to be offered for
dedication or duly accepted by the Board of supervisors as a public
street.
STREET TREE — A shade tree within a street right-of-way not less than
3 1/2 to four inches in caliper. Street trees recommended for use in the
Township are listed in the Appendix of this chapter.54
STRIPPING — Cutting or any other activity which removes the
vegetative surface cover such as tree removal, clearing, grubbing and
removal of topsoil.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in or addition to the
supporting or structural members of a building or other structure, such
as the bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any
change which could convert an existing building or other structure into
a different structure, or adapt it to a different use.
(1) CUL-DE-SAC — See "cul-de-sac."
PRIMARY — A street intended to serve a principal role in providing
access to lots abutting thereon, and as a means of collecting traffic
from local secondary streets and gaining access to collector
streets.
(2)
SECONDARY — A street intended to serve a principal role in
providing access to lots abutting thereon and to loop and cul-desac
streets and as the means for gaining access to local primary
streets.
(3)
54.Editor's Note: Said listing is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 110-7 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-7
1:238
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object or improvement having an
ascertainable stationary location on land or in the water, whether or not
affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, conveyance or other transfer of
ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.[Amended 1-6-1992 by
Ord. No. 65B]
SURVEYOR — A person duly registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to practice surveying.
SWALE — An elongated depression in the ground which collects and
channels surface water runoff.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer (P.E.) licensed as
such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the
engineer for the Township; or a firm of such engineers employed by the
Township or retained as a consultant thereto.
TOWNSHIP SECRETARY — An individual duly appointed by the Board
of Supervisors who serves as Secretary to the Township.
TRACT — An area, lot, parcel, site, or property which is the subject of a
subdivision and/or land development application.
TRANSPORTATION (CIRCULATION) — A system for the movement of
people or goods, including conveyors such as streets and highways,
accessory facilities such as parking facilities and driveways, attributes
of conveyance such as traffic volumes, trip generation and traffic
controls.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is proposed
to be subdivided and/or developed or is otherwise designed, arranged,
intended or for which it is proposed or may be occupied or maintained.
UTILITIES — Facilities such as sewers, water mains, fire hydrants,
street lights and other facilities of the same general character;
installations of a community which pertain to their consumption and
emission characteristics, including facilities such as those used for
water supply, sewage disposal, refuse disposal, storm drainage,
communications and electrical transmission.
VISUAL RESOURCES — Characteristics of the natural and/or cultural
environment which are visible. The visual resources of a particular
area are typically expressed in terms of their visibility, character and/or
attractiveness relative to their amenity value and/or quality, or lack of
it.
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:239
WALKWAY — A thoroughfare for pedestrian travel.
WATERCOURSE — A stream with year-round or substantially yearround
flow such as a stream, creek or run.
YARD — An open area that lies between the permitted principal or
accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard shall
be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as
provided otherwise in Chapter 135, Zoning.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot along
the front lot line and extending in depth from the front lot line to
the nearest point of the permitted principal or accessory building or
buildings on the lot.
YARD LINE — A line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance there from
equal to the depth of the required yard.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot along the rear
lot line and extending in depth from the rear lot line to the nearest point
of the permitted principal or accessory building or buildings on the lot.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending the full depth of the lot along the side
lot line and extending in width from such side lot to the nearest point of
the permitted principal or accessory building or buildings on the lot.
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Chadds Ford Township Zoning
Ordinance, as amended; Chapter 135 of the Code of Chadds Ford
Township.
B. Words not defined above shall have the meaning given in the
Municipalities Planning Code;55 Chapter 135, Zoning; or other
Township codes and ordinances; and if not defined in the
aforementioned documents, the most recent edition of Webster's
Unabridged Dictionary. [Added 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
55.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 110-7 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-7
1:240
ARTICLE III
Plan Procedures
§ 110-8. General procedure.
Whenever any subdivision or land development is proposed, and before any
permit for the erection of a structure shall be granted, the landowner or
developer shall apply for and obtain approval of such proposed subdivision
or land development in accordance with the procedures set forth herein for
a preliminary plan and a final plan. Whenever a conditional use permit or
special exception is required by Chapter 135, Zoning, for any use proposed
or inherent in any proposed subdivision and/or land development, all
applications therefor shall be filed and all plans, documents and other
submissions required to accompany same shall be filed with the Township at
the same time of filing for review of a preliminary plan for subdivision and/
or land development. Further, whenever the landowner or developer opts to
do so, a sketch plan may be submitted in accordance with the procedures
for same set forth herein.
§ 110-9. Sketch plan.
A sketch plan for any proposed subdivision and/or land development may,
at the option of the landowner or developer, be submitted to the Township
Planning Commission for review. The submission of a sketch plan does
not constitute submission of an application for approval of a subdivision
and/or land development plan. However, it does represent a basis for an
informal discussion between the Planning Commission and the landowner
or developer which may prove to be valuable to the prospective applicant
in formulating plans, documents and other submissions for preliminary plan
approval. In the event that the landowner or developer submits a sketch
plan, the following shall apply:
A. Twelve copies of the sketch plan may be submitted to the Township
Secretary to be distributed as follows:56
(1) One copy shall be retained by the Township Secretary for Township
files.
(2) One copy shall be forwarded to the Township Engineer for review
and comment.
(3) One copy shall be forwarded to the Township Manager.
(4) Three copies shall be forwarded to the Board of Supervisors.
(5) Six copies shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission
Secretary, one of which shall be retained for Planning Commission
files and five of which shall be used for informal review and
discussion purposes by the Planning Commission.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 110-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-9
1:241
§ 110-10. Preliminary plan.
The preliminary subdivision and/or land development plan shall be prepared
in accordance with the requirements set forth in Article IV pertaining to
preliminary plan filing or submission. When a preliminary plan is filed the
following shall apply:
(6) In addition to the paper plans and documents submitted, the
landowner or developer shall submit an electronic copy of all
documents, plans, submittals, etc. in Adobe® Portable Document
Format (PDF) in a version recommended by the Township Manager.
Said PDF file(s) is to be delivered on compact disc (CD-R) media or
other media as recommended by the Township Manager.
B. In addition to furnishing copies of the sketch plan, the landowner or
developer shall identify the name, address and telephone number of the
holder of legal title to the land involved, the nature of the landowner's
interest in the land (whether holder of legal or equitable title or
otherwise), and the name, address and telephone number of the agent,
if any. Such information shall be provided in writing.
C. The sketch plan shall be submitted at least 14 days prior to the regular
monthly public meeting of the Township Planning Commission at which
the plan will be reviewed. Within this time period, the Township
Engineer will submit review comments on said plan by letter or
memorandum to the Secretary of the Planning Commission.
D. The Planning Commission shall review the sketch plan with the
landowner or developer if such person attends the regular monthly
public meeting of the Planning Commission. In the event such person
does not attend said meeting, the Planning Commission Secretary shall
indicate any and all review comments pertaining to the plan to the
landowner or developer by written correspondence.
E. The Planning Commission's review shall take into consideration the
requirements of this chapter and all other Township ordinances, codes,
regulations, plans and maps and pay particular attention to the
following: the arrangement, location and width of streets and their
relation to the topography of the site; the arrangement, size and
location of lots and proposed structures if any; drainage; the relation of
the subdivision and/or land development to the natural features of the
site; the potential further development of adjoining lands which may
not yet be subdivided; the compatibility of the sketch plan with the
Comprehensive Plan; and the requirements set forth in Article IV
pertaining to the sketch plan submission.
A. The applicant shall complete and sign the application form provided by
the Township and shall accompany such application form with the type
and number of plans, documents and other submissions required and
the appropriate filing fee(s). The applicant must identify the name,
address and telephone number of the record holder of legal title to the
§ 110-9 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-10
1:242
land involved (if different from the applicant) the nature of the
applicant's interest in the land (whether holder of legal or equitable
title or otherwise), and the name, address and telephone number of
the agent, if any. No application shall be deemed filed unless all
requirements have been met and all fees therefor paid in full.
B. Twenty black line or blue line prints of the plans forming preliminary
plan and 20 neatly bound, clear and legible copies of all required
documents and other submissions shall be submitted to the Township
Secretary to be distributed along with copies of the application form as
follows:57
(1) One copy of the application form and one copy of the plan(s) and
profiles shall be retained by the Township Secretary for Township
files.
(2) One copy to the Township Manager for review and comment.
(3) One copy of the application form and one copy of the plan(s),
documents and other submissions shall be forwarded to the
Township Engineer for review and comment.
(4) Three copies of the plan(s), documents and other submissions shall
be forwarded to the Board of Supervisors, one for each member.
(5) One copy of the application form and one copy of the plan(s),
documents and other submissions shall be forwarded to the
planning consultant for review and comment.
(6) Six copies of the plan(s), documents and other submissions and one
copy of the application form shall be forwarded to the Planning
Commission Secretary, one of each shall be retained for Planning
Commission files and five copies shall be used for review purposes
by the Planning Commission.
(7) Four copies of the plan(s), documents and other submissions and
one copy of the application form shall be forwarded to the
Delaware County Planning Department for review and comment.
(8) One copy of the plan(s), documents and other submissions shall be
forwarded to the Sewage Enforcement Officer for review and
comment.
(9) Two copies of the plan(s), documents and other submissions shall
be forwarded to the Delaware County Conservation District for
review and comment.
(10) In addition to the paper plans and documents submitted, the
landowner or developer shall submit an electronic copy of all
documents, reports, plans, submittals, etc. in Adobe® Portable
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 110-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-10
1:243
Document Format (PDF) in a version recommended by the
Township Manager. Said PDF file is to be delivered on compact disc
(CD-R) media or other means as recommended by the Township
Manager. Additional electronic files may be required by the
Township Engineer.
C. The preliminary plan and application for subdivision and/or land
development shall be submitted at least 21 days prior to the regular
monthly public meeting of the Township Planning Commission at which
the preliminary plan is to be reviewed. Within this time period, the
Township Engineer and the planning consultant may submit review
comments on said plan by letter or memorandum to the Secretary of the
Planning Commission with copies to the Township Secretary, the Board
of Supervisors and the Chairman of the Township Planning
Commission. The applicant shall notify the abutting owners that a
preliminary plan proposed for the subject tract has been filed. Such
notification shall occur at least 10 days prior to the aforementioned
meeting. Evidence of such notification shall be presented to the
Planning Commission at said meeting.
D. The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plan at its
regular monthly public meeting and discuss the plan(s) with the
applicant to determine if the plan meets the regulations and standards
set forth in this chapter and the other Township ordinances, codes,
regulations, plans and maps. The Planning Commission shall submit its
report to the Board of Supervisors for consideration at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Board following the completion of
the Planning Commission's review. A copy of said report will also be
given to the applicant.
E. During the course of the Planning Commission's review of the
preliminary plan and prior to any action by the Board of Supervisors
within the required ninety-day period, the preliminary plan may be
revised by the applicant. Eighteen copies of any revised preliminary
plan shall be submitted which shall note the dates of any and all
revisions and a summary of the nature thereof. Upon the submission of
the revised preliminary plan, (which shall not be comprised of any
plans, documents or other submissions theretofore submitted, unless
the Planning Commission specifies to the contrary), the applicant shall
sign a statement withdrawing any previously submitted preliminary
plan from consideration and shall stipulate that a new ninety-day time
period shall commence from the date of the Planning Commission's
meeting next following the filing of the revised preliminary plan. The
revised preliminary plan shall be submitted to the Township Secretary
at least 14 days prior to a regular monthly public meeting of the
Planning Commission. The revised preliminary plan shall be distributed
by the Township Secretary on the basis as set forth in § 110-10B herein.
F. After a report on the preliminary plan has been submitted to the Board
of Supervisors by the Planning Commission, the Board shall place such
preliminary plan on its agenda for review and action.
§ 110-10 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-10
1:244
G. Before acting on any preliminary plan, the Board of Supervisors or the
Planning Commission may hold a public hearing thereon after public
notice.
H. In acting upon the preliminary plan, the Board: [Amended 1-6-1992
by Ord. No. 65B]
(1) Shall review the report and/or written comments of the Planning
Commission, Township Engineer, planning consultant and county
agencies, and comments from public hearings, if any, to determine
its conformance to this chapter and all other Township ordinances,
codes, regulations, plans and maps.
(2) May modify any subdivision or land development plan requirement
upon the recommendations of the Planning Commission, and may
specify conditions, changes or additions thereto, which it deems
necessary.
(3) May make its decision to grant approval of a preliminary plan
subject to conditions, changes or additions.
(4) Whenever the Board of Supervisors approves a preliminary plan
subject to conditions, the applicant shall indicate in writing
whether such conditions are accepted or rejected within 15 days of
notification of the decision by the Board. Any approval by the Board
of Supervisors subject to conditions which is not accepted or
rejected by the applicant within the fifteen-day period shall be
rescinded automatically.
(5) In the case where the Planning Commission has concluded that the
preliminary plan meets all requirements of a final plan, then, upon
the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Board of
Supervisors may consider the preliminary plan as a final plan and
may act thereupon accordingly.
I. The Board of Supervisors shall render a decision on every preliminary
plan and communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days
following the date of the regular monthly public meeting of the
Planning Commission next following the date of the complete
application is filed, provided that should the Planning Commission
meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of such
application, the said ninety-day period shall be measured from the
thirtieth day following the day the complete application has been filed.
J. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to the applicant at
the address shown on the application form not later than 15 days
following the decision, or at the end of the above mentioned ninety-day
period, whichever shall occur first.
K. In the event the preliminary plan is not approved in terms as filed, the
decision shall specify the defects found in the preliminary plan for
§ 110-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-10
1:245
§ 110-11. Final plan.
The final subdivision and/or land development plan shall be prepared in
accordance with the requirements set forth in Article IV pertaining to final
plan submission. When a final plan is filed the following shall apply:
subdivision and/or land development and describe the requirements
which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite to the provisions
of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
A. Within one year after the date of approval of the preliminary plan, the
applicant shall file a final plan and all supplementary information, data
and documents together with a completed and signed application form
provided by the Township and the appropriate filing fees. No such
application shall be deemed filed unless all requirements have been met
and all fees therefor paid in full.
B. Unless an extension of time has been granted by the Board of
Supervisors upon written request of the applicant, a final plan filed
after the one-year period shall be considered a new preliminary plan
which shall be required to comply with all preliminary plan application
procedures and requirements of this chapter, and shall be subject to a
preliminary plan application fee.
C. The Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of the final plan in
sections, each covering approximately 1/3 of the entire area proposed
for subdivision and/or land development or 1/3 of the number of
buildings or other structures proposed for land development as shown
on the approved preliminary plan, provided that the first final plan
section shall be submitted within the aforementioned one-year period,
and the last final plan section shall be submitted within three years
after the date of preliminary plan approval.
D. The final plan shall conform in all respects to the preliminary plan as
previously reviewed, and to which approval or conditional approval was
granted, or the plan shall be considered as a new preliminary plan.
E. Twenty copies of the plans, documents and other submissions
comprising the final plan shall be filed with the Township Secretary who
shall distribute copies of the final plan along with copies of the
application form to those who also received the preliminary plan as set
forth in § 110-10B herein, provided that the required fees and financial
security associated with the completion guarantee have been filed
therewith.58
F. The final plan with the application for subdivision and/or land
development shall be submitted at least 21 days prior to the regular
monthly public meeting of the Township Planning Commission at which
the final plan is to be reviewed. Within this time period, the Township
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 110-10 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-11
1:246
Engineer and the planning consultant may submit review comments on
said plan by letter or memorandum to the Secretary of the Planning
Commission, the Board of Supervisors and the Chairman of the
Township Planning Commission.
G. The Planning Commission shall review the final plan at its regular
monthly public meeting and discuss the final plan with the applicant to
determine if the final plan meets the regulations and standards set forth
in this chapter and all other Township ordinances, codes, regulations,
plans or maps. The Planning Commission shall promptly submit its
report to the Board of Supervisors for consideration at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Board following the completion of
the Planning Commission's review. A copy of the report will also be
given to the applicant.
H. During the course of the Planning Commission's review of the final plan
and prior to any action by the Board of Supervisors within the required
ninety-day period, the final plan may be revised according to the
procedure for preliminary plan revisions and as set forth in § 110-10E
herein, and a new ninety-day review period will begin as also set forth
in § 110-10E.
I. After a report on the final plan has been submitted to the Board of
Supervisors by the Planning Commission, the Board shall place such
final plan on its agenda for review and action.
J. Before acting on any final plan, the Board of Supervisors or Planning
Commission may hold a public hearing thereon after public notice.
K. The Board shall within the review period: [Amended 1-6-1992 by
Ord. No. 65B]
(1) Review the recommendations of the Township Planning
Commission and other reviewing agencies.
(2) Determine whether the final plan meets the requirements of this
chapter, other ordinances of the Township, and other applicable
regulations.
(3) Approve or disapprove the final plan. Approval of the final plan may
include certain conditions of approval. Whenever the final plan is
approved subject to conditions, the applicant shall indicate in
writing whether such conditions are accepted or rejected within 15
days of notification of the decision by the Board. Any approval by
the Board of Supervisors subject to conditions which is not
accepted or rejected by the applicant within the fifteen-day period
shall be rescinded automatically.
L. The Board of Supervisors shall render a decision on the final plan and
communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days following the
date of the regular monthly public meeting of the Planning Commission
next following the date the complete application was filed, provided
§ 110-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-11
1:247
that should the said meeting occur more than 30 days following the
filing of the complete application, the said ninety-day period shall be
measured from the thirtieth day following the day the complete
application was filed.
M. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to the applicant at
the address shown on the application form not later than 15 days
following the decision, or at the end of the above mentioned ninety-day
period, whichever shall occur first.
N. In the event the final plan is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the final plan and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite to
the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
O. In the event the final plan is approved, it shall be signed by the
following individuals:
(1) An engineer, surveyor or other qualified professional employed by
the applicant, certifying that the monuments shown thereon exist
as located, and that all dimensions, topographic details and other
plan information is correct.
(2) The applicant, signifying his or her acceptance of the final plan
approval.
(3) The Township Engineer, signifying that he has examined the final
plan and that it conforms to all Township ordinances, codes,
regulations, plans and maps.
(4) Two of the Supervisors, signifying the approval of the final plan by
the Board of Supervisors.
(5) Three of the Planning Commission members, signifying the review
of the plan by the Planning Commission.
P. When properly signed, the Township Secretary shall distribute seven
copies of the final plan on behalf of the Board of Supervisors, as follows:
(1) Two copies shall be returned to the applicant, together with an
executed copy of the subdivision agreement.
(2) Two copies shall be forwarded to the applicant for recording
purposes in accordance with § 110-14 herein.
(3) One copy to the Secretary of the Township Planning Commission.
(4) One copy to the County Planning Department.
(5) One copy shall be retained by the Township Secretary.
Q. Approval of the final plan shall constitute approval of the subdivision
and/or land development as to the character and intensity, the
§ 110-11 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-11
1:248
§ 110-12. Plan requirements for recreational lands and facilities.
[Added 5-7-2008 by Ord. No. 120]
arrangement and approximate dimension of the streets, lots and other
proposed features, but shall not authorize the sale or transfer of lots, or
the development of land until construction is permitted to commence in
accordance with § 110-15 herein. Nor shall such approval constitute a
waiver or release, or assumption, by the Township of any requirements
of any Township ordinances, codes, regulations, plans or maps.
R. Every final plan approval shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) The applicant shall execute a subdivision and land development
agreement in accordance with § 110-13 herein.
(2) The applicant shall execute a completion guarantee in accordance
with Article VI herein, where deemed applicable by the Board of
Supervisors.
(3) The applicant shall tender a deed of dedication to the Township, if
requested by the Board of Supervisors, for public improvements,
easements and other appurtenances and improvements thereto,
after such improvements are completed and such completion is
certified as being satisfactory by the Township Engineer.
(4) The filing with the Township of copies of all required permits,
approvals, agreements, clearances and the like from all required
governmental agencies (such as the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, and/or the Township); authorities and companies which
may provide water supply or sewage disposal facilities; and
pipeline easement holders or others.
A. Residential subdivisions and land developments.
(1) In reviewing a sketch plan, preliminary plan or preliminary/final
plan for a proposed subdivision or land development, other than a
one-lot residential subdivision, the Township Planning Commission
shall consider the needs of the prospective residents for
recreational lands and/or facilities, whether on-site or off-site, and
shall discuss its findings in relation to the requirements of this
section.
(2) The Board of Supervisors, upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission, shall determine whether the public dedication of land
suitable for open space or recreation as intended by the developer;
or, upon agreement with the applicant or developer, the
construction of recreational facilities, the payment of fees in lieu of
setting aside such land, the private reservation of the land, or a
combination thereof, for park or recreation purposes is to be
imposed as a condition precedent to final approval of the plan. It is
the intent of the Township to further and more effectively
§ 110-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-12
1:249
implement the Chadds Ford Township Comprehensive Plan and the
Township Open Space Plan as they relate to open space, recreation,
and natural feature protection needs within Chadds Ford Township.
Residential development creates demands for local recreational
lands and facilities, and developers of residential land need to
contribute proportionately to meeting that demand. [Amended
9-4-2013 by Ord. No. 125]
(3) Land meeting other objectives.
(a) The Board of Supervisors, at its sole discretion, may determine
that land within the tract that meets other objectives can
satisfy some or all of the requirements of this section. It shall
be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate why such land is
a suitable alternative to recreational lands and/or facilities and
how such land will serve the residents of the development. In
reaching its decision, the Board shall evaluate the applicant's
proposal in relation to objectives and factors that may include,
among others:
[1] Opportunities for passive recreation.
[2] Protection of important and characteristic scenic and/or
natural features, particularly where such features are
delineated in the Chadds Ford Township Open Space Plan.
[3] Retention, creation, and/or improvement of important trail
linkages or corridors.
[4] Neighborhood or subneighborhood scale park areas
designed especially for the ages and needs of the
prospective new residents, e.g., tot lots, fitness trail, etc.
(b) The applicant must also demonstrate that the active
recreational needs of the residents are adequately addressed
by the applicant's proposal, and that the proposed alternative
is consistent with the Township's open space goals and
programs, including but not limited to those presented in the
Chadds Ford Township Open Space Plan.
(4) Where the Board of Supervisors determines that the preliminary
plan does not provide land and facilities meeting the criteria of
Subsection A(2) or (3) above, the Board of Supervisors may accept
a fee in lieu of the required recreational lands and facilities, as set
forth in Subsection A(8), below.
(a) The Board, in its sole discretion, may accept a combination of
land, facilities, and fee where that arrangement best meets the
purposes of this section and the needs of Township residents.
(b) Where a combination of land, facilities, and fee is proposed, the
applicant may request that, in determining the partial fee
§ 110-12 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-12
1:250
amount, the Board give appropriate credit for the value of any
improvements within the open space that may be proposed,
including trails. The Board may give the applicant credit for
some, all, or none of such value.
(5) In determining whether the applicant may pay a fee in lieu of
recreational lands and/or facilities within the proposed
development, the Board of Supervisors may, as it deems
appropriate, be guided by the following additional criteria:
(a) The provisions of the Township's Comprehensive Plan and
Open Space Plan.
(b) The proximity of the proposed development to existing or
proposed public open space and recreational areas.
(c) The natural and scenic characteristics of the tract on which the
development is proposed and their compatibility with active
and passive recreation.
(d) Any existing commitments of the Township to purchase or
improve land for open space and recreational purposes.
(6) The standards of this section are intended to apply to all residential
subdivisions and land developments, including applications
submitted for any single-family, two-family and multifamily
development, and mobile home parks.
(7) Where the Board determines that a set-aside of land and the
provision of recreational facilities within the tract proposed for
development will satisfy the requirements of this section, the
minimum amount of such land to be set aside shall be calculated on
the basis of one acre per 20 new dwelling units to be constructed
on the tract, or the proportional equivalent thereof. The type and
extent of recreational facilities shall be as determined appropriate
by the Board of Supervisors.
(8) Standards for the payment of fees in lieu of land and/or
recreational facilities.
(a) Where a fee is to be provided in lieu of the set-aside of land
and/or facilities for active recreation:
[1] The amount of the fee in lieu of recreational land shall be
equal to the fair market value of the land required by
Subsection A(7). The fair market value of one acre of land
shall be established by dividing the total Township
assessment of the previous year by the number of acres in
Chadds Ford Township, i.e., 5,568 acres. (By way of
example, the total assessment of Chadds Ford Township
for 2012 as established by the County of Delaware was
$533,017,484. $533,017,484 divided by 5,568 acres in
§ 110-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-12
1:251
Chadds Ford Township equals $95,728.71 per acre.
$95,728.71 divided by 20 units equals $4,786.00, the
amount of fee-in-lieu per dwelling unit.) [Amended
9-4-2013 by Ord. No. 125]
[2] The amount of the fee in lieu of recreational facilities shall
be equal to the amount determined by Subsection
A(8)(a)[1]. This fee shall be separate from and, where
applicable, in addition to the fee in lieu of recreational land
set forth in Subsection A(8)(a)[1]. The Board, at its sole
discretion, may accept a lesser fee amount for recreational
facilities, upon request of the applicant, based upon the
type, characteristics, and amounts of such facilities that
the Board would deem appropriate for the site. In so
determining, the Board may take into account the location
of the site, the recreational needs of the expected
population to be served, and the type and availability of
recreational facilities elsewhere in the Township.
[3] Where the Board of Supervisors determines that a
combination of land/facilities and fee is to be provided, the
amount of the fee shall be prorated in accordance with the
amount of land to be set aside and the value of facilities to
be provided.
(b) A note shall be placed on the plan submitted for final approval,
stipulating the amount of the fee to be paid, as established
through Subsection A(8)(a), and the means of payment,
consistent with Subsection A(8)(c).
(c) The full amount of the fee, as determined by Subsection
A(8)(a), shall be paid or otherwise secured in a manner deemed
acceptable by the Board of Supervisors, as a condition of final
plan approval and prior to recording the approved final plan.
(d) All fees received pursuant to this section shall be placed in a
special capital reserve fund for open space and recreation, the
purpose of which shall be to hold, invest and disburse such
monies. Disbursements from this fund shall be made from time
to time as the Board shall deem appropriate, only in
conjunction with the planning, purchase, improvement,
replacement, and addition to Township lands for use as open
space and recreation for the benefit of the citizens of the
Township as provided for in the Second Class Township Code59
or other applicable rules, regulations, or statutes. All sums
received for and deposited in the Open Space Fund shall be
held, invested, and reinvested in the same manner as other
funds of the Township, but shall not be considered part of the
general revenues of the Township.
59.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 110-12 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-12
1:252
(9) Characteristics and design standards for recreational lands and
facilities. In designing lands for recreational purposes within the
subdivision or land development plan, the following criteria and
standards shall be adhered to by the applicant. Areas shall be:
(a) Consistent with the Township's Comprehensive Plan and the
Township's Open Space Plan.
(b) Suitable for recreational uses, unless deemed acceptable by
the Board for other purposes, and in any case without
interfering with adjacent dwelling units, parking, driveways,
and roads.
(c) Comprised of open land which contains none of the following
features: floodplains, woodlands, slopes exceeding 15%,
wetlands, and surface waters, except where the Board
specifically accepts land with such features as satisfying the
purposes of this section, consistent with Subsection A(3),
above.
(d) Interconnected with park land or with open space areas on
abutting parcels wherever possible.
(e) Comprised of areas not less than 100 feet in width and not less
than 15,000 square feet of contiguous area, except that the
minimum width may be reduced to not less than 10 feet where
that portion of the open space is being used solely as a trail
corridor.
(f) Provided with sufficient perimeter parking when necessary,
and with safe and convenient access by adjoining street
frontage or other rights-of-way or easements capable of
accommodating pedestrian, bicycle, maintenance equipment,
and other vehicular traffic, and containing appropriate access
improvements.
(g) Undivided by any public or private streets, except where
necessary for proper traffic circulation, and then only upon
recommendation of the Township Engineer and Township
Planning Commission.
(h) Free of all structures, except those related to outdoor
recreational use.
(i) Suitably landscaped, whether by retaining existing natural
cover and/or by a landscaping plan, for enhancing open space
areas through plantings which are consistent with the
purposes of this section and which minimize maintenance
costs.
(j) Where the land is not dedicated to the Township, the land shall
be made subject to the terms of a conservation easement for
§ 110-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-12
1:253
the purpose of preserving the open space land for the purposes
intended.
B. Nonresidential subdivisions and land developments.
(1) Statement of intent. The Board of Supervisors, upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall require and
determine whether the public dedication of land, suitable for the
use intended, or, upon agreement with the applicant or developer,
the construction of recreational facilities, the payment of fees in
lieu of the public dedication of land, the private reservation of land,
or a combination thereof, for park or recreation purposes is to be
imposed as a condition precedent to final approval of the plan. It is
the intent of the Township to further and more effectively
implement the Chadds Ford Township Comprehensive Plan and the
Township Open Space Plan as they relate to open space, recreation,
and natural feature protection needs within Chadds Ford Township.
Nonresidential development creates additional demands upon local
recreational lands and facilities, and developers of nonresidential
land need to contribute proportionately to meeting that demand.
[Amended 9-4-2013 by Ord. No. 125]
(2) Required recreational lands and facilities or fees in lieu thereof.
(a) Except as exempted in Subsection B(2)(b), below, any proposed
nonresidential subdivision or land development shall provide
recreational lands and facilities. The Board of Supervisors may
accept, pursuant to Subsection A(4) herein, a fee in lieu of the
required recreational lands and facilities, and/or fees in lieu
thereof in accordance with the terms of this chapter. These
requirements are designed to address the demand for park and
recreational facilities resulting from the additional employees,
customers, and/or clients that will be generated by the
proposed development.
(b) Applications for subdivision or land development approval
where the principal uses are to be agricultural shall be exempt
from the provisions of this section.
(c) For commercial developments, the Board of Supervisors may
consider the permanent set-aside or dedication of on-site lands
and facilities, or a combination of land, facilities, and fees, or
the payment of a fee in lieu thereof. The applicant must
demonstrate how the chosen alternative will meet the
purposes of this subsection and the recreational demands
created by the proposed development. In deciding upon a
request, the Board shall also consider:
[1] Whether the location is especially important to
complement other existing or proposed recreational or
§ 110-12 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-12
1:254
open space lands, or to meet the needs of an area with
particularly strong demands;
[2] If the site is particularly well-suited in response to broader
public demand beyond that generated by the site itself;
[3] The potential relationship to future Township plans and
programs; and
[4] The factors in Subsection A(5), above.
(d) Where the Board determines that a set-aside of land and
facilities within the tract proposed for development will satisfy
the requirements of this section, the minimum amount of such
land to be set aside shall be calculated on the basis of 250
square feet of land meeting the criteria of this section to be set
aside per each 500 square feet of gross floor area, or portion
thereof, for the principal use of the property. The type and
extent of recreational facilities shall be as determined
appropriate by the Board of Supervisors.
(e) Characteristics and design of lands to be set aside shall be in
accordance with the standards in Subsection A(9), above.
(f) Responsibility for ownership and maintenance of on-site
recreational lands and trails facilities shall remain with the
developer or subsequent owner of the site, unless the Board
accepts an offer of dedication of some or all of the land.
(g) Where a fee is to be accepted in lieu of the set aside of land and
facilities: [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 122; 9-4-2013
by Ord. No. 125]
[1] The amount of the fee-in-lieu of recreational land/
recreational facilities shall be equal to 250 square feet of
land to be set aside per each 500 square feet of gross floor
area or part thereof. The value of the land shall be
determined to be equal to the fair market value of one acre
of land in Chadds Ford Township as set forth in
§ 110-12A(8)(a)[1] above. [By way of example. . .the total
assessment of Chadds Ford for 2012 as established by the
County of Delaware was $533,017,484. $533,017,484
divided by 5,568 acres in Chadds Ford equals $95,728.71
per acre. $95,728.71 divided by 43,560 square feet
(number of square feet in an acre) equals $2.19 per square
foot.] The Board in its sole discretion may waive or accept
a lesser amount for recreational facilities, upon request of
the applicant, based upon the type, characteristics, and
amounts of such facilities that the Board would deem
appropriate for the site. In so determining, the Board may
take into account the location of the site, the recreational
needs of the expected population to be served, and the
§ 110-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-12
1:255
§ 110-13. Subdivision and land development agreement.
Every applicant who seeks to obtain final plan approval shall execute an
agreement upon a form to be provided and approved by the Township
before the final plan is signed by the Board of Supervisors, and filed and
recorded in accordance with §§ 110-11P and 110-14 herein, respectively.
The agreement shall include but ned not be limited to the following:
type and availability of recreational facilities elsewhere in
the Township.
(h) Standards for the documentation, payment, deposit, and use of
any fees shall be those in Subsection A(8), above.
C. Where the fee is to be provided in lieu of the set aside of recreational
land and/or facilities, for residential or commercial development, the
amount of the fee-in-lieu shall be set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors. [Added 9-4-2013 by Ord. No. 125]
A. That the applicant agrees that he will accurately lay out and properly
construct all improvements and fulfill all practices according to the
plans, profiles, notes and other forms of documentation filed as part of
the final plan as approved, where any or all of these improvements or
practices are required as conditions of approval; and that the applicant
will file an as-built plan in accordance with § 110-16 herein to confirm
same.
B. That the applicant shall complete the improvements and engage in the
practices as referenced in § 110-11A herein within the time or times
specified by the Board of Supervisors, and in accordance with § 110-15
herein.
C. That the applicant guarantees completion and maintenance of all
improvements by means of acceptable forms of financial security to the
Township as set forth in Article VI herein.
D. That the applicant agrees to tender a deed of dedication to the
Township if requested by the Board of Supervisors for public
improvements, easements and other appurtenances and improvements
thereto, except that the Township shall not accept any offer of
dedication of same by ordinance or resolution until their completion is
certified as being satisfactory by the Township Engineer.
E. That the applicant shall pay the Township all of its costs in connection
with snow removal from the streets in the subdivision or land
development that are to be offered for dedication until such time as
such dedication is duly accepted by the Board of Supervisors.
F. That the applicant shall comply fully with all of the terms and conditions
of this chapter as the same relate to the subdivision or land
development and all other Township ordinances, codes, regulations,
plans and maps.
§ 110-12 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-13
1:256
§ 110-14. Recording of final plan.
§ 110-15. Commencement of construction of improvements.
G. That the applicant, in the event that any proposed street not be
intended to be offered for dedication or not accepted by the Board of
Supervisors, accept stipulations which shall be noted on the final plan,
such as the following:
(1) That the Township shall not be responsible for repairing or
otherwise maintaining any undedicated streets.
(2) That the method of assessing repair and maintenance costs of
undedicated streets shall be established in recorded deed
restrictions so as to be binding on all successors, assigns or
grantees.
(3) That if dedication be sought at any time, the street shall conform in
its entirety to Township design standards for same in all respects;
or that the owners of the lots shown on the approved final plan, at
their own expense, restore the street to conform with or otherwise
render the street in conformance with such standards.
A. Within 90 days after the applicant executes the subdivision and land
development agreement and the completion guarantee, as set forth in
Article VI herein, the applicant shall thereupon cause one copy of the
final plan to be recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds in and
for the County of Delaware, Pennsylvania, and shall notify the Board of
Supervisors in writing, certified mail return receipt requested, of the
date of such recording, and the Plan Book and page in which the same
has been recorded. Should the plan not be recorded within such period,
the action of the Board of Supervisors in approving the final plan shall
be null and void.
B. The final plan to be recorded shall be an exact counterpart of the
approved final plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds before proceeding
with the sale of lots or construction of buildings or other structures, or
improvements.
A. Upon filing with the Township of a copy of the Recorder of Deeds
receipt for the recording of the final plan, the Township Secretary shall
issue a subdivision and land development permit to the applicant. No
construction shall be commenced until the subdivision and land
development permit has been issued by the Township along with any
other Township permits, when applicable, such as a grading, soil
erosion and sedimentation control, and stormwater management
permit and/or a building permit.
B. No construction shall be commenced until the applicant files with the
Township Secretary all permits, approvals, clearances and the like from
§ 110-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-15
1:257
§ 110-16. As-built plan. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 122]
After final plan approval and upon completion of all required improvements,
the applicant shall submit an as-built plan prepared by an engineer or
surveyor showing the location, dimension and elevation of all improvements
in accordance with §§ 110-23 and 110-42 herein. Said plan shall indicate
that the resultant grading, drainage, and sedimentation and erosion control
practices are in conformance with the previously approved drawings and
specifications. Said plan shall note any and all deviations from the
previously approved drawings and specifications. Three paper copies and
one electronic copy of the as-built plan shall be filed with the Township
Secretary, who shall distribute one paper copy to the Board of Supervisors,
one paper copy to the Township Engineer, and one paper copy and the
electronic copy to the Secretary of the Township Planning Commission.
government agencies (such as those from the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and/or the Township); authorities and companies which may
provide water supply or sewage disposal facilities; and pipeline
easement holders or others.
C. The applicant shall commence construction of improvements within
three years from the approval date of the final plan, and unless such
construction shall have started and not been abandoned, the final plan
shall be null and void, and the approval therefor granted shall, at the
expiration of such three-year period, be revoked without further action.
§ 110-15 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-16
1:258
ARTICLE IV
Plan Requirements
§ 110-17. General requirements.
Subdivision and/or land development plans, with the exception of the sketch
plan, shall be prepared by an architect, land planner, landscape architect,
engineer, or surveyor, as defined in Article II herein, provided that all plans,
documents and other submissions comprising such plans shall be certified
as being correct by an engineer.
§ 110-18. Sketch plan.
As a sketch plan is not required under the terms of this chapter, the
submission thereof shall not be construed to mean or imply the submission
or filing of a subdivision and/or land development plan for approval.
Landowners or developers are urged for their own benefit to prepare a
sketch plan and to review the same with the Planning Commission prior
to the preparation of the preliminary subdivision and/or land development
plan. Such a review may be conducted for the purpose of engaging in a
discussion of the proposed use(s) and the location and arrangement of lots,
streets, improvements and other construction with regard to such items
as existing Township ordinances, codes, regulations, plans and maps, the
Comprehensive Plan, the site and its natural features, and adjoining areas
and facilities. When submitted, the sketch plan shall reflect the following:
A. Conformance with Article III, § 110-9, regarding sketch plan procedure,
and in particular:
(1) The submission of 12 copies of the sketch plan. [Amended
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 122]
(2) The submission at least 14 days prior to the regular monthly public
meeting of the Planning Commission.
B. Information such as the following, in order to engage in a meaningful
review and discussion:
(1) A location map which highlights the location of the tract within the
Township and depicts adjoining and nearby roads.
(2) Tract boundaries, with dimensions, and names of abutting owners.
(3) North arrow, scale and date.
(4) Streets on and adjacent to or near the tract, properly named or
identified.
(5) Natural features of the site related to existing topography, soils,
vegetation and watercourses, including such features as steep
slopes, very steep slopes, flood hazard areas, flood fringe areas and
other critical environmental areas.
§ 110-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-18
1:259
§ 110-19. Preliminary plan.
The preliminary subdivision and/or land development plan and all
accompanying maps and plans required by this chapter shall be drawn to
a scale of not more than one inch equals 50 feet and shall be submitted
on black line or blue line paper prints and sepia prints no smaller than 17
inches by 22 inches and no larger than 24 inches by 34 inches. If two or
more sheets are required a key shall be shown on each sheet, and an overall
index sheet (24 inches by 34 inches) shall be submitted. The preliminary
plan shall reflect the following:
(6) Man-made features of the site including existing buildings and
major structures.
(7) Proposed general street and lot layout.
(8) In the case of a land development plan, the proposed location of all
buildings and major structures, parking areas and other
construction and/or improvements.
(9) Proposed method(s) of water supply and sewage disposal.
A. Conformance with Article III, § 110-10 regarding preliminary plan
procedure, and in particular:
(1) The completion of the application form.
(2) The submission of 20 copies of the plans forming a part of the
preliminary plan, as well as 20 copies of all other required
documents and submissions.60
(3) Evidence of notification of the plan submission to the abutting
owners.
(4) The filing at least 21 days prior to the regular monthly public
meeting of the Planning Commission.
B. Illustrations and notes including the following:
(1) A location map which highlights the location of the tract within the
Township and depicts properties of abutting owners and adjoining
and nearby roads. The location map shall be drawn at the scale of
not smaller than one inch equals 2,000 feet.
(2) Proposed subdivision or land development name or identifying title.
(3) North arrow, scale and date.
(4) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, landowner,
developer and the authorized agent, if any.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 110-18 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-19
1:260
(5) Name and signature of engineer, surveyor, landscape architect,
land planner or architect responsible for having prepared the plans
forming a part of the preliminary plan and any other documents or
submissions forming a part of the preliminary plan.
(6) Tract boundaries, with dimensions, bearings and distances.
(7) When the preliminary plan includes only a portion of a landowner
or developer's entire tract or such portion is contiguous to another
tract of the landowner or developer, the dimensions, bearings and
distances of the balance of such entire tract or other tract shall also
be shown.
(8) Names and addresses of abutting owners.
(9) Zoning on and adjacent to the tract, including notes regarding the
relevant area and bulk regulations for each zoning district that
pertains to the tract, with an indication of conformance to same,
such as the percent of any lot area covered by impervious surfaces
and the percent of any lot area covered by buildings. In addition,
should the Floodplain Conservation District overlay the tract, the
following shall apply:
(a) Within the Floodplain Conservation District, flood hazard areas
and flood fringe areas shall be accurately and conspicuously
delineated, depicted and otherwise noted in accordance with
same described in Article XV of Chapter 135, Zoning, and
shown on the Floodplain Conservation District Map. Such
delineation and notation shall include graphic symbolism to
distinguish the flood hazard area and the flood fringe area, and
a brief but accurate summary of the regulations pertaining to
such areas.
(10) The use(s) proposed in the Chadds Ford Township Comprehensive
Plan which pertain to the tract.
(11) Existing contours at vertical intervals of two feet based on contour
information derived from the most recent U.S. Geological Survey
Quadrangles for West Chester, Pa. and Wilmington North, Del., Pa.,
unless the slope of the subject property is either steep or very
steep, in which case the contour information shall be derived from
an actual topographic survey for the property, consistent with
national mapping accuracy standards, due evidence of which may
be required by the Planning Commission. Slopes shall be
accurately and conspicuously directed as follows:
(a) Very steep slopes and steep slopes shall be shown for all
portions of the tract on the basis of a two-foot contour
interval.61
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 110-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-19
1:261
(b) Slopes from 0% to 4%, 4% to 10%, and 10% to 15% shall be
shown for all portions of the tract that are proposed for streets
and individual and shared driveways.
(12) Datum to which contour elevations refer, and reference to known,
established benchmarks and elevations.
(13) All existing surface water resources, such as watercourses, ponds
and springs, and other natural drainage features.
(14) Existing wooded areas, hedgerows and freestanding trees
generally indicating which are to be removed and which are to
remain.
(15) Soil types as identified in the Soil Survey of Chester and Delaware
Counties, including a listing of the soil characteristics pertaining to
slope, depth to seasonal high water table and depth to bedrock.
(16) All existing man-made features such as buildings, storm and
sanitary sewers, water mains, culverts, utility lines and pipe lines,
fire hydrants and the like.
(17) All existing streets, on or adjacent to the tract, including name,
right-of-way width and cartway width.
(18) All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way, and
dimensions, bearings and distances for same, and the purpose for
which such easements or rights-of-way have been established.
(19) Total acreage of the tract and the acreage and square footage of
the individual lots proposed therein, and the number of lots,
dwelling units, buildings and other structures proposed.
(20) A full plan of land development including the following:
(a) Proposed lot lines with dimensions, proposed minimum
setback areas, the proposed buildable area (using a dashed
line to reflect the minimum yard and setback requirements),
end lines of all shared driveways and lot numbers in
consecutive order.
(b) Proposed contours at vertical intervals of two feet.
(c) The first floor elevation of each proposed building.
(d) Location, alignment and width of all proposed streets, alleys,
driveways, rights-of-way and easements, and the identification
of street names, and the purpose for which private rights-ofway
or other easements are proposed.
(e) Location, size and invert elevation of all sanitary and storm
sewers and location of all manholes, inlets and culverts.
§ 110-19 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-19
1:262
(f) Building locations and parking areas in relation to industrial,
commercial or institutional land development and, when
applicable, provisions for traffic control, loading areas and
docks, and lighting.
(g) A preliminary landscaping plan depicting proposed street
trees, plantings within cul-de-sac turnaround areas, buffer
area plantings, and other plantings as required.
(h) Proposed public buildings, public areas, playgrounds, and
parcels of land proposed to be offered for dedication or
reserved for public use.
(i) Any proposed structures, improvements and/or construction in
addition to the above.
(21) Proposed location and method of water supply and sanitary sewage
disposal on each lot.
C. The preliminary plan shall also be accompanied by the following
materials:
(1) A copy of the deed for the subject tract.
(2) A statement of the types of buildings, other structures, and/or
dwelling units proposed to be constructed, indicating whether
same will be of uniform construction or different in design, and
whether same will be custom or production styled.
(3) An environmental impact assessment (EIA) report as set forth in
Article VII, § 110-52, herein.
(4) A preliminary timetable for the proposed sequence of the
subdivision and/or land development. The timetable shall indicate
the order in which construction activities will occur, and may either
be in letter form or shown as an overlay to the plan.
(5) A planning module for land development as required by Act 537,
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.62
(6) A written report indicating the feasibility of proposals for water
supply and sanitary sewage disposal.
(a) With regard to water supply, there shall be an objective
description of the ability of achieving a successful system for
an individual or community well, whenever such well is
proposed. The description shall reference geologic and
hydrogeologic data relative to groundwater conditions and
potential yields. In addition to such information regarding
water supply, the description shall indicate the demand for
62.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 110-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-19
1:263
water from the proposed subdivision and/or land development
and its related uses and users.
(b) With regard to sanitary sewage disposal, there shall be an
objective description of the ability of achieving a successful
system for the on-site disposal of sewage whenever such a
system is proposed. The description shall make reference soils
data relative to limitations for septic tank filter fields, and
indicate various indices of suitability for such a system, such as
permeability and depth to seasonal high water table. In
addition, percolation test results shall be discussed and
exhibited.
(7) A preliminary conservation plan, in accordance with § 110-20
herein.
(8) Whenever improvements are to be constructed or installed, a
preliminary improvements construction plan in accordance with
§ 110-21 herein.
(9) A draft of any proposed covenants or restrictions upon or against
the subdivision or any lot thereof, or upon or against any land
development subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor.
(10) When connection to public water and/or public sewer facilities is
proposed, assurance of the availability of such service. This
assurance shall be in the form of a letter signed by an officer of the
company or authority concerned, indicating their ability and
willingness to make such service available within the timetable
cited under § 110-19C(4) herein.
(11) When the proposed tract involves a gas pipeline, petroleum
products transmission line, electric power transmission line, or any
other pipeline or cable located thereon, a letter from the owner or
authorized agent of such a facility indicating minimum setback
distance requirements or a true and correct copy of the easement
or grant of record shall be filed.
(12) When the preliminary plan includes only a portion of the entire or
contiguous tract, a sketch plan which shows the prospective future
street system and other improvements of the remaining land.
(13) A list of all permits, agreements, approvals, clearances and the like
required to be obtained in connection with the proposed
subdivision and/or land development and the governmental
agencies, authorities and companies from which same are to be
obtained.
(14) A draft of all other plans, documents and submissions which by
terms of any Township ordinance, code or regulation may be
required by the Board of Supervisors for final plan approval, shall
be required in preliminary form and shall accompany and form a
§ 110-19 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-19
1:264
§ 110-20. Conservation plan.
A conservation plan, which shall accompany and become a part of the
preliminary and final subdivision and/or land development plan, shall be
drawn at the same scale as that of other plans forming a part of the
preliminary plan and the final plan. The conservation plan shall be filed as a
separate sheet or drawing in addition to that submitted in accordance with
§§ 110-19 and 110-22 herein. However, the information contained in said
plan shall be added so as to overlay with that delineated in conformance
with the requirements of §§ 110-19 and 110-22 herein, whereby the
attributes of the proposal such as tract boundaries, existing and proposed
contours, existing natural features, proposed subdivision and land
development layout, and the like are reflected. In addition to the foregoing,
the conservation plan shall reflect the following:
part of any preliminary plan when the application form for approval
thereof is filed.
(15) Certification as to the accuracy of the plan and details of such plans
shall be prepared in accordance with Act 367, known as the
"Professional Engineers Registration Law" (P.L. 913, No. 367, 63
P.S. § 151), as amended. [Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
(16) If the proposed lot(s) abuts on a street under the jurisdiction of the
state, a note shall be added to the preliminary plan to indicate that
a highway occupancy permit is required before a driveway or street
can access a state highway. [Added 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
A. The conservation plan shall be in complete conformance with the
design standards of Article V, in particular §§ 110-34 and 110-35. The
conservation plan shall indicate measures to be taken to protect surface
and groundwater resources, topography, vegetation and other natural
features through the control of grading, soil erosion and sedimentation
and stormwater management.
B. The plan, map, report, calculations and computations requirements for
the control of grading, soil erosion and sedimentation and stormwater
management shall be as follows:
(1) A map depicting the total watershed. A U.S.G.S. Quadrangle Map is
suitable as the source for such a map. However, the watershed area
must be highlighted or otherwise distinguished from other areas
outside the watershed.
(2) Maps and drawings showing all existing and proposed drainage
facilities affecting the subject property.
(3) A plan of the site at a scale of no less than one inch equals 50 feet,
prepared by a registered engineer including the following:
(a) All existing topographic features with a contour interval of at
least two feet, as per section § 110-19B(11).
§ 110-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-20
1:265
(b) Boundary survey information, as per § 110-19B(18).
(c) Location and description of all vegetative characteristics as
per § 110-19B(14), plus all other land cover characteristics.
(d) All existing utilities, as per § 110-19B(16).
(e) Soil types, as per § 110-19B(15).
(f) All proposed improvements such as proposed buildings,
driveways, stormwater management facilities, grading, soil
erosion and sedimentation controls and procedures, and the
like.
(g) Profiles of all proposed sewers, including elevation, sizes,
slopes and materials, at a scale of no less than one inch equals
50 feet horizontal and one inch equals five feet vertical, as per
§ 110-21.
(h) Staging of earthmoving activities and program of operation.
(i) Locations, dimensions and design details required for the
construction of all such facilities, as per § 110-21G.
(j) All soil erosion and sedimentation control measures,
temporary as well as permanent, and sufficient detail in order
to clearly indicate effectiveness of the plan.
(k) Project specifications relative to stormwater control, soil
erosion and sedimentation.
(l) When major control facilities, such as detention/retention
basins, are planned, soil structures and characteristics shall be
investigated. Plans and data shall be prepared and submitted
by a licensed professional engineer or geologist with
experience and education in soil mechanics. These submissions
should consider and offer design solutions for frost heave
potential, shrink-swell potential, soil bearing strength, water
infiltration, soil settling characteristics, fill and backfilling
procedures and soil treatment techniques as required to
protect the improvements or structures.
(4) The design computations for the stormwater drainage systems
including storm drain pipes and inlets, runoff control measures,
and culverts and drainage channels.
(5) A narrative report of the project stating the purpose and
engineering assumptions and calculations for control measures and
facilities. The following information shall be included:
(a) General description of the project.
(b) General description of accelerated runoff control plan.
§ 110-20 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-20
1:266
§ 110-21. Improvements construction plan. [Amended 12-14-2009
by Ord. No. 122]
Whenever improvements are proposed the improvement construction plan
shall accompany and become a part of the preliminary and final subdivision
and/or land development plans. Said plan shall be drawn at a ten-to-one
ratio of horizontal to vertical scale, whereby the horizontal scale shall be
at least 50 feet to the inch and the vertical scale shall be five feet to the
inch. However, the horizontal scale may be 40 feet to the inch with a vertical
scale of four feet to the inch, or 20 feet to the inch and two feet to the inch,
respectively, when directed by the Township Engineer. Said plan shall be
prepared by an engineer, and shall show thereon, or be accompanied by, the
following:
(c) General description of the soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan.
(d) Expected project time schedule, including anticipated start
and completion dates.
(e) The project's stormwater characteristics as related to its
location within the watershed(s).
(f) On-site detention methods.
(g) Methodology and basis of design computations.
(h) Brief description of soils and their characteristics.
(6) Stormwater drainage plan. A complete plan of the stormwater
drainage system showing all pipes, swales, channels, structures,
and detention basins shall be submitted as part of the stormwater
management plan. The drainage areas and the design flow into
each inlet or structure shall be delineated on a copy of the
stormwater management plan.
A. On all plans, profiles and other sheets which depict the information
required in this section, the following shall be provided:
(1) Proposed subdivision and/or land development name or identifying
title.
(2) North arrow, scale and date.
(3) Name of the landowner, developer and the authorized agent, if any.
(4) Name of the engineer responsible for having prepared the plan(s),
profile(s), cross-section(s), documents and/or other submissions
forming the improvement construction plan.
B. The horizontal plan shall show details of the horizontal layout of streets,
including:
§ 110-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-21
1:267
(1) Center line with bearings, distances, curve data and stations
corresponding to the profile.
(2) Right-of-way and curblines with radii at intersections.
(3) Beginning and end of proposed construction.
(4) Tie-ins by bearing and distances to intersections of all public
streets, with the names and widths thereof.
(5) Location of all proposed monuments with references thereto.
(6) Property lines and ownership of abutting properties.
(7) Location and size of all drainage structures, public utilities,
sidewalks, lighting standards, street name signs and other
improvements.
C. The profile shall be a vertical section of streets, with details of vertical
alignment including:
(1) Profiles and elevations at fifty-foot stations along the center line of
the existing ground surface and along both right-of-way lines as
well as the profile of the nearest connecting streets for a distance
of 100 feet beyond the boundary of the subdivision and/or land
development.
(2) Profiles and percentage of grade along the proposed center line;
and elevations at fifty-foot intervals at tangent points at grade
intersections and at either end of curb radii.
(3) The length of vertical curves, and elevations at twenty-five-foot
intervals.
D. The cross section of streets prepared in accordance with the design
standards in Article V, including:
(1) Right-of-way width and location and width of paving within the
right-of-way.
(2) Type, thickness and crown of paving.
(3) Type and size of curb, with detail of concrete chair.
(4) Grading of sidewalk areas.
(5) Location, width, type and thickness of sidewalk.
(6) Location of sewers and underground utilities, with sizes.
E. Horizontal plan of storm drains and sanitary sewers, which may be
shown on a separate drainage plan, including:
(1) Location and size of line with stations corresponding to the profile.
§ 110-21 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-21
1:268
§ 110-22. Final plan.
The final subdivision and/or land development plan and all plans forming a
part thereof required by this chapter shall be drawn to a scale of not more
than one inch equals 50 feet. Said plans shall be submitted on black line
or blue line paper prints and sepia prints no smaller than 17 inches by 22
inches and no larger than 24 inches by 34 inches. If the final plan is drawn
in two or more sections, a key map showing the location of the sections shall
(2) Locations of manholes or inlets with grade between and elevation
of flow line and top of each manhole or inlet.
(3) Property lines and properties of abutting owners, with details of
easements.
(4) Beginning and end of proposed construction.
(5) Location of laterals.
(6) Location of all other drainage facilities and utilities in the vicinity of
storm and/or sanitary sewer lines.
(7) Hydraulic design data for culverts and/or bridge structures, and
details of proposed handling of surface and/or subsurface drainage
problems.
F. Profile of storm drains and sanitary sewers, which may be shown on a
separate drainage plan, including:
(1) Profile of existing and proposed ground surface with elevations at
the top of manholes or inlets.
(2) Profile of storm drains or sewers showing the type and size of pipe,
grade, cradle (if any), manhole or inlet locations with the length
and slope of the pipe between structures shown, and elevations at
the flow line.
G. Plans and details of bridges, street trees, stormwater management
structures, erosion and sedimentation control structures, and all other
proposed improvements, containing sufficient information which would
customarily be included in working drawings and specifications for the
proposed construction and which would enable the Township Engineer
to perform an effective evaluation of the proposed improvements. Such
information shall be provided as typical cross-sections and details,
unless the Planning Commission determines that typical cross-sections
and details would not be appropriate to communicate the specific
measures needed to perform construction under steep slope, extreme
soil moisture or other varying site conditions where special
construction practices may be necessary. Such information shall also be
provided whenever any proposed improvement is not depicted on any of
the aforementioned plans, profiles, cross-sections, documents or other
submissions forming the improvements construction plan.
§ 110-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-22
1:269
be depicted on each sheet and an overall index sheet shall be submitted.
The final plan shall reflect the following:
A. Conformance with Article III, § 110-11, regarding final plan procedure,
and in particular:
(1) The completion of the application form.
(2) The submission of 20 copies of the plans forming a part of the final
plan as well as 20 copies of all other required documents and
submissions. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 122]
(3) Evidence of notification of the plan submission to the abutting
owners.
(4) The filing at least 21 days prior to the regular monthly public
meeting of the Planning Commission.
B. In addition to all illustrations and notes required under § 110-19B to
accompany the preliminary plan, the following shall be submitted:
(1) All dimensions shall be shown and noted in feet and hundredths of
a foot.
(2) Tract boundaries and individual lot boundaries with dimensions,
bearings and distances, closing with an error of not more than one
foot in 10,000 feet.
(3) Total acreage and square feet of the tract and total square feet of
the individual lots proposed therein to the hundredths of a foot; and
the number of lots, dwelling units, buildings and other structures
proposed.
(4) Lots and blocks numbered in a logical sequence.
(5) Location of permanent reference monuments indicated by an "X"
and the location of lot corner markers indicated by an "O."
(6) Pedestrian ways including all sidewalks, walkways, and pedestrian
rights-of-way and other improvements to be used for general public
use.
(7) A final landscaping plan indicating precise types, quantities and
sizes of proposed trees, shrubs and groundcovers, and other
landscaping elements.
(8) A signature block used for signing the final plan in accordance with
Article III, § 110-11O.
(9) The location of percolation test pits, whenever on-site sewage
disposal is proposed.
(10) The location of test pits where stormwater is to be disposed and a
listing of absorption rates, whenever seepage pits are proposed.
§ 110-22 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-22
1:270
(11) The following certifications, which shall be noted on the final plan:
(a) Certification of adequacy, by an engineer, of the proposed site
for the type of sewage disposal system which is proposed.
(b) The seal of the engineer responsible for having prepared the
plans forming a part of the final plan.
(c) A note indicating the intent to make an offer of dedication of
the streets and other improvements.
(d) A note indicating any area, street and other improvement not
to be offered for dedication or not to be accepted.
(e) A note indicating that the Township is not responsible for
construction or maintenance of any area not duly accepted by
the Board of Supervisors as dedicated for public use and
identifying the party responsible for such construction and
maintenance.
(f) Certification as to the accuracy of the plan and details of such
plans shall be prepared in accordance with Act 367, known as
the Professional Engineers Registration Law (P.L. 913, No. 367,
63 P.S. § 151), as amended. [Added 1-6-1992 by Ord. No.
65B]
C. In addition to all materials required under § 110-19C to supplement the
preliminary plan, the following shall be submitted for the final plan:
(1) A final timetable for the proposed sequence of the subdivision and/
or land development. The timetable shall indicate the order in
which construction activities will occur.
(2) A final conservation plan reflecting, in final form, the information
required under § 110-20.
(3) Whenever improvements are to be constructed or installed, a final
improvements construction plan, reflecting in final form, the
information required under § 110-21.
(4) Final documents for any proposed covenants or restrictions upon
or against the subdivision or any lot thereof, or upon or against the
land development subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor
and the final deed forms for all lots.
(5) An approved planning module for land development as required by
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537.63
(6) An engineer's report describing percolation test results and the
ability to create a successful system for on-site sewage disposal
whenever such a system is proposed.
63.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 110-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-22
1:271
(7) An engineer's report evidencing the ability to create a successful
system for on-site water supply whenever such a system is
proposed.
(8) Environmental impact assessment (EIA) report as set forth in
Article VII, § 110-52, herein.
(9) A bond, certified check or other security to guarantee the
completion and maintenance of improvements in accordance with
the provisions of Article VI, which shall:
(a) Be made payable to, or otherwise inure to the benefit of, the
Township.
(b) Be in an amount determined by the Township Engineer to be
sufficient to complete and maintain the improvements in
compliance with this chapter.
(c) Specify the time for the completion of the required
improvements in accordance with the final timetable presented
under § 110-22C(1) herein.
(10) Highway occupancy permit. [Added 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
(a) If the proposed lot(s) abuts on a street under the jurisdiction of
the state, a note shall be added to the preliminary plan to
indicate that a highway occupancy permit is required before a
driveway or street can access a state highway. No plan which
will require access onto a road under the jurisdiction of
PennDOT shall be finally approved unless the plan contains a
notice that a highway occupancy permit is required pursuant
to Section 420 of Act 428, known as the State Highway Law
(P.L. 1242, No. 428, 36 P.S. § 670-420), as amended, before
access to a state road is permitted. The Department of
Transportation shall, within 60 days of the date of receipt of an
application for a highway occupancy permit:
[1] Approve the permit, which shall be valid thereafter unless,
prior to commencement of construction thereunder, the
geographic, physical or other conditions under which the
permit is approved change, requiring modification or
denial of the permit, in which event, the Department shall
give notice thereof in accordance with regulations;
[2] Deny the permit;
[3] Return the application for additional information or
correction to conform with Department regulations; or
[4] Determine that no permit is required, in which case, the
Department shall notify the Township and the applicant in
writing.
§ 110-22 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-22
1:272
§ 110-23. As-built plan.
The as-built plan shall be drawn to the same scale as the final plan,
conservation plan and improvements construction plan certified to by the
engineer of the landowner or developer and approved by the Township
Engineer. Said plan shall indicate the actual location, dimensions and/or
elevations of all completed improvements, including but not limited to:
(b) If the Department shall fail to take any action within the sixtyday
period, the permit will be deemed to be issued. The plan
shall be marked to indicate that access to the state road shall
be only as authorized by a highway occupancy permit. The
Department shall not be liable in damages for any injury to
persons or property arising out of the issuance or denial of a
permit or for failure to regulate any access. Furthermore, the
Township shall not be held liable for damages to persons or
property arising out of the issuance or denial of a permit by the
Department.
(11) All other plans, documents and submissions which were filed in
preliminary form as required in § 110-19 herein shall be filed in
final form to accompany and form part of any final plan. [Amended
1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
A. Concrete monuments.
B. The edge of the cartway and top of the curb, for both sides of each
street.
C. Sanitary sewer main, manholes and laterals.
D. Storm sewers, inlets and culverts.
E. Water mains and fire hydrants.
F. Street lights.
G. Landscaping and screen planting.
H. Permanent sedimentation, erosion control and stormwater
management structures.
I. All easements.
§ 110-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-23
1:273

ARTICLE V
Design Standards
§ 110-24. General standards.
All subdivision and/or land development plans to be approved by the Board
of Supervisors must comply with the standards contained within this article.
Such standards shall be considered minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. In general, the
following shall apply:
§ 110-25. Monuments and markers.
A. Land shall be developed in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan;
Chapter 135, Zoning; and other ordinances, codes and regulations in
effect in the Township and with the Official Sewage Facilities Plan and
other Township plans and maps.
B. Land shall be developed in conformance with all pertinent statutes,
regulations, rules and codes of federal, state and county agencies
concerned with subdivision, land development, construction and
improvements or any activity arising out of or related thereto in any
way whatsoever.
C. The design of subdivisions and land developments shall preserve,
insofar as possible, the natural terrain, natural drainage, existing
topsoil and existing trees.
D. Land subject to hazards to life, health, or property, such as may arise
from fire, floods, disease or other causes, shall not be developed for
building purposes unless such hazards have been eliminated or unless
the plan shall show adequate safeguards against them.
E. All portions of a tract being developed shall be encompassed in lots,
streets, public lands or other proposed uses so that landlocked areas
shall not be created.
F. The name of any subdivision or land development shall not be similar to
or conflict with the name of any existing project in the Township, and
shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Monument locations must be shown on the final plan to define the exact
location of all streets and to enable the reestablishment of all street
lines. Monuments shall be placed at the following locations:
(1) At each intersection.
(2) At changes in direction of street lines, excluding curb arcs at
intersections.
(3) At each end of every cartway, excluding curb arcs at intersections.
§ 110-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-25
1:275
§ 110-26. Street design.
(4) At locations where topographical conditions obstruct sighting
between two otherwise required monuments.
(5) At other locations along the lines of streets as may be determined
to be necessary by the Township Engineer.
B. Monument locations defining the perimeter of the tract shall be
determined by the Township Engineer.
C. Markers shall be set at locations shown on the final plan as follows:
(1) At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or rear.
(2) At all angles in property lines of lots.
(3) At all other lot corners.
D. Markers required under § 110-25C shall be placed by an engineer or
surveyor when final grading has been completed. Such markers shall be
placed before any lot is conveyed.
E. Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the scored and marked
point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of lines to be marked,
and shall be set so that the top of the monument or marker is level with
the surface of the surrounding ground. Monuments and markers shall
consist of the following:
(1) Monuments shall be of concrete or stone with a minimum of six
inches by six inches by 30 inches. Concrete monuments shall be
permanently marked on top with an indented cross or drill hole of
1/4 inch in diameter which shall coincide exactly with the point of
intersection of the lines being monumented.
(2) Markers shall consist of iron pipes or steel bars 30 inches in length
and 3/4 of an inch in diameter.
F. Monuments shall be placed for all areas of land, improvements or
public easement to be offered for dedication prior to acceptance thereof
by the Township or other entity to which same are offered. Monuments
shall be placed by an engineer or surveyor and shall be inspected by the
Township Engineer before they are covered.
G. All elevations shown on plans must be based on datum from the U.S.
Geological Survey Quadrangles for West Chester, Pa., and Wilmington
North, Del., Pa.
A. Streets shall be designed in accordance with the following general
principles and criteria:
(1) The proposed street pattern and layout shall be properly and
logically related to existing streets and their functional
characteristics.
§ 110-25 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-26
1:276
(2) The proposed street pattern and layout shall be properly and
logically related to the topography of the land with regard to
grades and conditions of drainage. Grades of streets shall conform
as closely as possible to existing grade.
(3) The proposed street pattern shall be designed to enhance views
from the road and to create a greater variety of lot appearance
through a curvilinear alignment.
(4) The proposed street pattern and layout shall provide suitable
access to each lot and permit safe and convenient circulation of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(5) Every lot shall abut on a public street, except that four or fewer
residential lots may use a shared driveway, and thereby share the
required minimum lot width at the street line. All setback
requirements from streets shall apply to shared driveways.
(6) Provisions shall be made for the extension and continuation of
major and minor collector streets and local primary streets into and
from adjoining areas, except when topographical or hydrological
conditions shall make the same impracticable.
(7) All streets shall be platted to the boundary lines of the subdivision
or land development if the subdivision or land development adjoins
lands which may be developed in the future, and the same shall be
provided with easements for turnarounds.
(8) If lots resulting from subdivision are large enough to permit
resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided,
adequate street rights-of-way to permit further subdivision shall be
provided as necessary.
(9) Reserve strips controlling access to public ways will not be
permitted excepting where the control and disposal of the land
comprising such strips are placed within the jurisdiction of the
Township.
(10) Streets that are extensions of or in alignment with existing named
streets shall bear the names of such existing streets; new street
names shall not duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing
street names; and all street names shall be subject to the prior
approval of the Board of Supervisors and the Postmaster of the
local postal service districts.
(11) Where streets continue into adjoining municipalities, compatibility
of design, particularly with regard to cartway widths, shall be
employed to avoid abrupt changes in the cartway width or to other
improvements within the right-of-way.
(12) Streets shall be designed so as to avoid edge erosion through the
use of curbs and gutters as required in § 110-28 herein.
§ 110-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-26
1:277
B. Cul-de-sac streets shall be designed as follows:
(1) All cul-de-sacs, whether permanently or temporarily designed as
such, shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length, with a paved
turnaround having a minimum radius of 50 feet to the outside curb
or pavement line, and an additional ten-foot right-of-way outside
the pavement or curbline.
(2) The pavement width of the cartway leading to the turnaround shall
be a minimum of 24 feet and the right-of-way shall be a minimum of
50 feet. However, whenever a cul-de-sac is employed to service
industrial, commercial and institutional lots and/or land
development, then the minimum cartway width shall be 26 feet.
(3) When required for future extension, the turnaround right-of-way
shall be placed adjacent to the tract boundary with sufficient width
along the boundary line to permit extension of the street at full
width.
(4) Drainage of cul-de-sacs shall, whenever possible, be in the
direction of the open end thereof.
(5) All design standards in § 110-26C herein which are pertinent to culde-
sacs shall apply.
C. In addition to the aforementioned principles and criteria set forth in
§§ 110-26A and B, the following shall apply to all streets:
(1) The Township Planning Commission, in conjunction with the
Township Engineer, shall evaluate proposed streets according to
their functional classification, as defined by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation for state-owned and -maintained
roads, and as defined by the Township for Township-owned and -
maintained roads, and review all plans, documents and profiles to
determine their conformance to the cartway and right-of-way width
and other standards set forth in this section for various types of
streets according to the classification which they deem to be most
appropriate and logical.
(2) The following right-of-way and cartway widths shall apply:
(a) Every major arterial street shall have an eighty-foot right-ofway
and a cartway width as required by PennDOT.
(b) Every minor arterial street, major collector street and every
minor collector street in or adjacent to a subdivision or land
development shall contain a minimum right-of-way width of 60
feet, and a minimum cartway width of 36 feet.
(c) Every local primary street in or adjacent to a subdivision or
land development shall contain a minimum right-of-way width
of 50 feet and a minimum cartway width of 26 feet. For the
purposes of this chapter, streets proposed within the Light
§ 110-26 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-26
1:278
Industrial, B Business, POC and PBC Zoning Districts of the
Township shall be designed as local primary streets, as well
as the principal or major street proposed within any planned
residential development, R-A or R-M District.64
(d) Every local secondary street and every loop street in or
adjacent to a residential subdivision or land development shall
contain a minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet and a
minimum cartway of 24 feet; however, for any such street
which serves less than nine lots, the cartway may be reduced
to 20 feet.
(e) Right-of-way widths in excess of the aforementioned standards
shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional
width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. Such
slopes shall not be in excess of three to one.
(f) Additional cartway widths may be required by the Board of
Supervisors in specific cases for the following:
[1] Public safety and convenience.
[2] Access to off-street parking in commercial and industrial
areas and for planned residential development projects
and multifamily residential projects.
(3) A minimum grade of 1% shall be provided on all streets; a
maximum grade of 7% shall be permitted on all major and minor
collector streets, and 10% on all local streets.
(4) The finished road grade on all streets shall be carried the entire
width of the right-of-way. However, grading behind the curbs or
beyond the edge of the cartway may be modified, as determined by
the Township Engineer, provided the minimum sight distances are
maintained along the vertical and horizontal curvatures of the
street, provided no obstructions exist at intersections within the
clear sight triangle and provided that no sidewalks are required.
(5) Maximum slopes of banks measured perpendicular to the center
line of the street shall be three feet horizontal to one foot vertical in
fill areas and three feet horizontal to one foot vertical in cut areas.
(6) Vertical curves shall be used in all changes of grade exceeding 1%,
and shall be designed for maximum visibility and standards of
safety.
(7) The maximum grade on the approach to any intersection shall be
4% for the distance of 50 feet, measured from the nearest right-ofway
line of the intersecting street along the curbline or edge of the
cartway.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 110-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-26
1:279
(8) No cul-de-sac turnaround shall have a grade which exceeds 4%.
(9) The minimum radius at the center line for curves on local streets
shall be 150 feet; the minimum radius at the center line of collector
streets shall be 300 feet. The foregoing minimum radii shall apply
in all cases where the street deflects 10° or more, and variations in
radii may be permitted when topographic or other conditions so
require.
(10) A minimum curb or paving radius of 30 feet and a minimum radius
of 20 feet for right-of-way lines shall be provided at all local
secondary and loop street intersections; and minimum radii of 50
feet and 40 feet, respectively, as above shall be provided on all
other street intersections.
(11) A tangent of at least 100 feet, measured at the center line between
reverse curves, shall be required for all streets.
(12) Proper sight distance shall be provided with respect to both
horizontal and vertical alignment. A clear sight distance, as defined
in § 110-7 herein, shall be provided as follows:
(a) One hundred feet for local streets, measured along the center
line thereof.
(b) Two hundred feet for collector streets, measured along the
center line thereof.
(13) Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all street intersections
where there shall be a clear sight triangle of 75 feet, measured
along the center lines from the point of intersection. The triangular
shaped portion of land forming the clear sight triangle shall not
have anything erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists
entering or leaving the intersection.
(14) Right angle intersections shall be used whenever practical and no
intersection angle, measured at the center line, shall be less than
60°.
(15) No more than two streets shall cross at the same point.
(16) Proposed intersections along one side of an existing street shall
coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such
street, or offset by at least 200 feet from center line to center line.
(17) Intersections along major arterial, minor arterial, major collector
and minor collector streets shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet apart.
(18) Where a subdivision or land development borders an existing street
or intersection which is determined to be in need of improvement
based on the traffic/transportation analysis conducted as part of
the EIA report process as set forth in Article VII, § 110-52C(11),
§ 110-26 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-26
1:280
and according to the traffic control standards of Chapter 135,
Zoning, said street or intersection shall be improved to the full
extent as required in § 110-26C(2), with the following
considerations:
(a) This requirement shall apply only to Township roads and those
sides of intersections which pertain to Township roads, unless
the state imposes certain requirements along roads which they
own and maintain.
(b) Should the tract border any undersized road or intersection on
only one side, then the improvements shall take place only on
the side of the road or intersection which is tangent to the
tract.
(c) All improvements to be made to said roads and intersections
shall be determined by the Township Engineer.
(d) Land associated with the rights-of-way for undersized roads
and intersections shall be delineated, depicted and otherwise
noted on all subdivision and/or land development plans for the
subject tract and shall be offered for dedication with the
improvements associated therewith.
(19) When a subdivision or land development fronts on an existing
street having a right-of-way less than the minimum width required
in this chapter, an ultimate right-of-way line shall be established
with the following considerations:
(a) The distance of this ultimate right-of-way line from the center
line of the existing right-of-way shall be 1/2 the width of the
required minimum right-of-way.
(b) The ultimate right-of-way shall be delineated, depicted and
otherwise noted on all subdivision and land development plans
and shall be offered for dedication with the improvements
associated therewith.
(20) Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided to aid in
ingress and egress relative to major arterial, minor arterial, major
collector and minor collector streets, with the following
considerations:
(a) Where a subdivision or land development borders a state road,
the landowner or developer shall confer with the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) regarding specific
design standards for such lanes.
(b) Where a subdivision or land development borders a Township
road, the landowner or developer shall confer with the
Township Engineer regarding specific design standards for
such lanes.
§ 110-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-26
1:281
§ 110-27. Street construction.65
(21) Street signs similar to those which exist in the vicinity of the
property shall be provided and erected by the landowner or
developer at all intersections, subject to the prior approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
A. All materials used in the construction of streets, and the methods of
construction and drainage thereof, shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the most recent edition of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Publication 408 Specifications.
(1) Subgrade construction shall be performed in accordance with
PennDOT's Publication 408, Section 210, and the following
standards:
(a) The area within the limits of the proposed road surface shall be
shaped to conform to the line, grade and cross section of the
proposed road including the width to be occupied by shoulders.
(b) All large, loose rocks shall be removed or broken off to a depth
of nine inches below the base course.
(c) All unsuitable subgrade materials shall be removed or
stabilized.
(d) All wet or swampy areas shall be permanently drained and
stabilized.
(e) Fills shall be made with suitable materials and thoroughly
compacted for full width in uniform layers of not more than
eight inches in thickness.
(f) Subgrades shall be thoroughly compacted by rolling with a
three-wheel, ten-ton roller or similar equipment.
(2) Crushed aggregate base course construction shall be performed in
accordance with PennDOT's Publication 408, Section 300, and the
following standards:
(a) The base shall be a crushed stone base course thoroughly
compacted to a depth of not less than eight inches after
compaction by roller. The coarse aggregate for crushed stone
base shall conform to the grading requirements of No. 4
aggregate. Fine aggregate shall conform to the grading
requirements of No. 1 aggregate.
(b) Before spreading any material, the landowner or developer
shall place a sufficient number of grade stakes to represent the
finished grade of the proposed street as shown on the
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 110-26 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-27
1:282
approved plans and profiles. Said placement of stakes shall be
inspected by the Township Engineer.
(c) Prior to placing the coarse aggregate, a two-inch layer of
limestone screenings shall be spread over the subgrade to
serve as a bed for the coarse aggregate. This initial layer of
limestone screenings shall not be placed on a wet, frozen or
unsuitable subgrade.
(d) Coarse aggregate shall be spread uniformly on the prepared
bed as follows:
[1] Mechanical stone spreaders shall be used to spread the
material the full width of the base to the proposed curbs or
rolled gutters.
[2] In areas inaccessible to spreading equipment, the material
may be spread directly from trucks provided the
distribution is satisfactory to the Township Engineer.
[3] After each layer of material has been spread, it shall be
checked with approved templates and straightedges and
all irregularities shall be satisfactorily corrected prior to
rolling.
[4] The coarse material shall be rolled and thoroughly
compacted with a three-wheel, ten-ton roller. The rolling
shall begin at the sides and progress to the center of the
road. Rolling shall be parallel with the proposed center
line, uniformly lapping each preceding track, covering the
entire surface with the rear wheels and continuing until
the materials does not creep or wave ahead of the roller
wheels.
[5] Red flags shall be placed at the limits of satisfactorily
compacted coarse material. The flags shall be moved
ahead by the Township Engineer as additional material is
compacted, and no fine aggregate shall be spread over the
coarse material in advance of the flag marked sections.
(e) After the coarse aggregate has been satisfactorily rolled and
compacted, fine aggregate, suitably conditioned to assure
thorough filling of the voids in the coarse aggregate shall be
spread uniformly over the surface as follows:
[1] Approved mechanical equipment shall be used for
spreading the fine aggregate. However, in areas
inaccessible to spreading equipment, the Township
Engineer may permit manual spreading which shall be
performed in a sweeping motion with a square-pointed
shovel, alternately in opposite directions, until the voids
are completely filled.
§ 110-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-27
1:283
[2] Immediately following the aforementioned operation, the
fine material shall be broomed and rolled until the voids in
the coarse material are completely filled and the base
course is thoroughly compacted and firmly set. Brooms
attached to the roller and hand brooms shall be used to
uniformly spread the fine material.
[3] The rolling and brooming of the surface shall be continued
during the process of spreading the fine material. Rolling
shall begin at the sides and shall progress as stated in
§ 110-27A(2)(d)[4] herein.
[4] After the completion of the application and rolling of fine
materials, the surface shall be sprinkled with water and
rolled. The sprinkling and rolling shall be continued and
additional fine material applied where necessary until all
voids are filled and until a slight wave of grout forms in
front of the roller wheels. Brooms attached to the roller
and hand brooms shall be used to distribute the grout
uniformly into any unfilled voids. After the wave of grout
has been produced over the entire section of the base
course, this portion shall be left to dry. The quantity of fine
material and water used shall be determined by the
Township Engineer and shall be sufficient to provide a
smooth, hard monolithic surface.
(3) Bituminous pavement construction shall be performed in
accordance with PennDOT's Publication 408, Section 409, and the
following standards:
(a) The bituminous surface course shall be SUPERPAVE Asphalt
Mixture Design, which shall consist of a two-inch HMA binder
course, PG 64-22, 0.3 million to 3 million design ESALs, 19 mm
mixture; and a one-and-one-half-inch HMA wearing course, PG
64-22, 0.3 million to 3 million design ESALs, 9.5 mm mixture,
Skid Resistance Level H.
(b) All bituminous surface courses shall have a total thickness of 2
1/2 inches minimum after compaction.
(c) No visible moisture shall be present prior to the laying of each
course; and the air temperature shall be 40° Fahrenheit or
greater during the operation.
(d) All edges of bituminous pavement shall be kept straight and
sharp forming a clean cut line between the finished road and
the proposed curbs or rolled gutters.
(e) The completed road surface shall have a minimum slope from
the center to the edge of the pavement of a minimum of 1/4
inch per foot to a maximum of 1/2 inch per foot, except on
super elevated curves where the slope shall be not less than 1/
§ 110-27 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-27
1:284
§ 110-28. Curbs and gutters.
4 inch per foot and shall extend from the inside to the outside
edge of the paving.
(f) No road shall be constructed from November 1 to March 31
without written permission of the Township Supervisors.
A. Curbs and/or gutters shall be provided along all new streets in any
subdivision or land development. Raised vertical curbs, flush vertical
curbs and/or rolled gutters shall be constructed subject to the approval
of the Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the Township
Engineer and Planning Commission.
B. Raised vertical curbs shall be used where lot sizes are one acre or less,
in industrial, commercial, multifamily and planned residential
development projects; and where the gradient of any street as proposed
would be 4% or greater.
C. Flush vertical curbs may be used as a substitute for raised vertical
curbs when approved by the Board of Supervisors, upon the
recommendation of the Township Engineer and Planning Commission in
any residential subdivision where lot sizes are greater than one acre
and where the gradient of the street as proposed would be less than
4%.
D. Rolled gutters may be used as a substitute for raised vertical curbs or
flush vertical curbs, subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors,
upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer and Planning
Commission.
E. Curbs and rolled gutters shall be provided on both sides of the street
and shall be constructed in accordance with PennDOT's Form 408,
Section 630, and the following standards:
(1) Curbs shall be constructed with Class A cement concrete.
(2) Forms for the curb shall be of metal, except wood forms may be
used on sharp curves and short tangent sections when approved by
the Township Engineer.
(3) Excavation shall be made to the required depth as approved by the
Township Engineer, and the material upon which the curb is to be
constructed shall be compacted to a firm, even and dry surface.
(4) The concrete shall be placed in the forms in horizontal layers not to
exceed five inches and spaced sufficiently to eliminate all voids.
(5) The top surface of the curb shall be finished true to line and grade
in a smooth, neat and even manner by means of wood floats, and
the edges of the face and back of raised vertical curbs shall be
rounded to a radius of not more than 3/4 of an inch and 1/4 of an
inch respectively, while the concrete is still plastic.
§ 110-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-28
1:285
§ 110-29. Driveways.
(6) Contraction joints shall be spaced in uniform lengths or sections
not to exceed 15 feet six inches, except where shorter sections are
necessary for closures or curves, but no section shall be less than
four feet. Contraction joints may be either hand-formed or sawed
joints and may be 3/16 inch wide and two inches deep.
(7) Premolded expansion joints 3/4 of an inch in thickness shall be cut
to conform to the cross-section of the curb. They shall be placed at
the ends of sections of curved curbs at intervals of not more than
45 feet of straight curb, and at the end of each day's work.
(8) When curved curb joins with tangent curbs at curb returns and on
sharp curves where directed by the Township Engineer, there shall
be imbedded in the concrete, two-and-one-half-inch diameter steel
reinforcing rods, 24 inches long. Such rods shall extend 12 inches
into the curb on each side of the joint; and the portion of the rod
extending into the tangent curb shall be rendered bondless by a
coating of approved material, and enclosed in part in approved
tubes or caps.
(9) The forms shall not be removed during any time within 12 hours
after the concrete has been placed. After the forms are removed,
minor defects shall be filled with material composed of one part of
cement and two parts of fine aggregate. As soon as possible after
the removal of the forms, the spaces in front and back of the curb
shall be backfilled with materials approved by the Township
Engineer in layers of not more than four inches in depth, which
shall be thoroughly and mechanically compacted to the required
elevation and cross-section.
F. The dimensions of the curbs and gutters, unless specified otherwise by
the Township Engineer, shall be as follows:
(1) For raised vertical curbs, the dimensions shall be as shown in
PennDOT's Standards for Roadway Construction, Publication No.
72, 1981 edition, or any amendment thereto, Standard Drawing No.
RC-64, using the detail entitled "Plain Cement Concrete Curb."
(2) For flush vertical curbs a depth of 12 inches from finished grade
shall be used, and the curb shall be six inches across the top and
eight inches across the bottom tapered from the edge of the curb
which joins the street.
(3) For rolled gutters, the dimensions shall be subject to the approval
of the Township Engineer based on design criteria for varying
street gradient conditions and stormwater management
considerations. However, no rolled gutter shall measure less than
10 inches at its most concave point nor less than 24 inches in width.
§ 110-28 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-29
1:286
§ 110-30. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be required along new streets in any subdivision or land
development where the proposed lot sizes are one acre or less or for any
multifamily residential development project. Upon the recommendation of
the Township Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors may also
require sidewalks which would continue from those in existing
neighborhoods, or to provide access to community facilities, or to insure
safety of pedestrians in certain conditions with respect to existing or
prospective traffic. Sidewalks shall be designed as follows:
A. Driveways, either individual or shared, shall be provided for all
residences.
B. Any shared driveway which exceeds 1,000 feet in length or which
furnishes access to more than four lots must conform to all design
standards for local secondary streets as set forth in this article, except
that the pavement width may be reduced to 18 feet as determined by
the Board of Supervisors, upon the recommendation of the Township
Engineer and Planning Commission.
C. The width of any individual driveway shall be a minimum of nine feet
within the street right-of-way; and the width of any shared driveway
which is less than 1,000 feet in length shall be a minimum of 18 feet
within the street right-of-way.
D. A minimum grade of 1% shall be provided on all driveways. A maximum
grade of any driveway within the right-of-way of any street shall be 4%.
Within the property line exclusive of the right-of-way the maximum
grade of an individual driveway and a shared driveway which is less
than 1,000 feet in length shall be less than 15%, unless no other viable
alternative alignment or location is feasible, as acknowledged by the
Township Engineer.
E. The edge of the driveway shall be located not less than 40 feet from the
tangent point of the curb radius of corner lots.
F. All individual or shared driveways shall be surfaced with erosion
resistant materials, approved by the Township Engineer from the edge
of the street cartway to a point in the lot 25 feet from the right-of-way
line.
G. The surface of the driveway sloping toward the street shall be graded so
that no stormwater runoff from the property shall discharge upon the
street. Further, discharge of roof drains or downspouts onto a driveway
which slopes toward the street shall not be permitted and no drain pipe
from any basement sump pump, foundation drain, or any type of facility
shall be discharged onto the street.
H. A clear sight triangle of 25 feet shall be provided and maintained at
driveway intersections with streets.
§ 110-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-30
1:287
§ 110-31. Blocks and lots.
§ 110-32. Sanitary sewers.
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with PennDOT's Form
408, Section 676, pertaining to cement concrete sidewalks and the
following standards:
(1) Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width.
(2) Sidewalks shall be constructed with four inches of Class A
concrete, placed on an approved aggregate bed four inches in
depth, except at driveway crossings where the thickness of the
sidewalk shall be increased to six inches.
(3) When proposed sidewalks adjoin existing sidewalks which are
wider than four feet a tapered transition shall be constructed.
(4) Sidewalks shall be located within the street right-of-way three feet
from the right-of-way line. A grass planting strip shall be provided
between the curb and the sidewalk. The planting strip shall be
adequately graded and sodded to provide for proper stormwater
runoff.
A. Blocks shall not exceed 1,600 feet in length or be less than 500 feet in
length.
B. The side property lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the
right-of-way lines.
C. Blocks shall be two lot depths in width and, except for lots located at
street intersections, minor arterial streets or rural collector streets, no
lot shall front on more than one street.
A. In accordance with the official Sewage Facilities Plan, dwellings and/or
lots within a subdivision or land development shall be connected with a
public sanitary sewer system where accessible and available. Where
such sewer system is not yet accessible and available but is planned for
extension to the tract, the landowner or developer shall install sewer
lines and other facilities, including lateral connections, force mains,
pumping stations and all other appurtenances to provide adequate
service to each lot when connection with said sewer system is made.
Sewer lines shall be suitably capped at the limits of the subdivision or
land development, and the laterals shall be capped at the street rightof-
way. When capped sewers are so provided, on-site sewage disposal
facilities shall also be installed provided they are so located as to permit
the easiest and least expensive connection to the public sanitary sewer
system when such connection becomes available.
B. All sanitary sewer lines, lateral connections and manholes and other
facilities shall be constructed and installed, and shall provide service to
each lot in conformity with standards to be provided the landowner or
§ 110-30 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-32
1:288
§ 110-33. Water supply.
developer by the Township, or by the county, or other sewer authority,
at the cost and expense of the landowner or developer, and sanitary
sewer facilities shall not be used to carry stormwater.
C. When such sanitary sewer facilities are installed in accordance with
this section, the same shall be inspected by the Township Engineer
during such construction, at the cost and expense of the landowner or
developer, in accordance with the standards and procedures
established for inspection in Article VIII of this chapter.
D. When such sanitary sewer facilities are not to be constructed or
otherwise installed, on-lot, community on-lot, on-site and private
sewage disposal systems shall be constructed in accordance with
statutes and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and the Township, and as approved by the
Sewage Enforcement Officer. When on-lot, community on-lot, on-site
and private sewage disposal systems are to be utilized, the landowner
or developer shall furnish evidence of the feasibility and satisfactory
operation of the system to be utilized in the subdivision or land
development as required in Article IV herein.
E. A one-hundred-percent replacement area shall be provided for any onlot
disposal system or any sand mound system. Such replacement area
shall serve as an absorption area as necessary.66
F. No more than five lots may utilize a separate community on-lot sewage
disposal system in one portion of the tract.
G. No principal building or other principal structure shall be placed on a
lot used for a community on-lot disposal system.
A. Where a public water supply system is accessible and available to the
subdivision and/or land development, all mains, laterals and other
facilities for connection from the lots to such systems shall be installed
by the landowner or developer according to standards and materials
recommended by the Township Engineer.
B. When a public water supply system is accessible and available, the
landowner or developer shall install fire hydrants in order that there
shall be at least one hydrant within 600 feet of every dwelling or
structure intended for public use. Such fire hydrants shall be reviewed
relative to their location by the local fire company and shall be
energized prior to public dedication.
C. When no public water supply system is accessible or available to the
subdivision or land development, the landowner or developer shall
furnish evidence as part of any plan submission and filing of the quality
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 110-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-33
1:289
§ 110-34. Stormwater management.67
Stormwater management shall be regulated as set forth in Chapter 105,
Stormwater Management, of the Code of Chadds Ford Township.
§ 110-35. Soil erosion and sedimentation control.68
Soil erosion and sedimentation control shall be regulated as set forth in
Chapter 105, Stormwater Management, of the Code of Chadds Ford
Township.
§ 110-36. Trees and landscaping.
Standards for the planting of trees as part of screening requirements are
set forth in Chapter 135, Zoning, in Article XIX and § 135-161. In addition,
the following shall apply:
and adequacy of the water supply proposed to be utilized in the
subdivision or land development as required in Article IV herein. The
type and method of construction or other installation to be utilized in
the installation of individual or community water supply systems shall
be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors, the Township,
the county, and, where applicable, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
D. Wherever a public or community water system is provided, applicants
shall present evidence to the Board of Supervisors that the subdivision
or land development is to be supplied by a certificated public utility, a
bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal
authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of public convenience from
the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such
certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to
serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be
acceptable evidence. [Added 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
A. Street trees shall be planted along all new streets, and along any
existing street which abuts a subdivision or land development site.
B. A list of approved street trees for planting in Chadds Ford Township is
included in the Appendix69 according to their botanical name, and
common name.
C. All street trees shall be a minimum of 3 1/2 to four inches in caliper at
the time of planting.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
69.Editor's Note: Said listing is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 110-33 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-36
1:290
D. Requirements and standards for landscaping, in addition to that
specified above, shall be as determined by the Board of Supervisors,
upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission. The Board may
require plantings to reduce glare; to abate other nuisances; to enhance
the planting area in conjunction with a cul-de-sac; to fulfill screening
and other functional purposes; to comply with general standards of
§ 110-24 herein; and to fulfill the purposes of § 110-2 herein.
E. Shade trees of 12 inches caliper or more shall be preserved to the
extent possible, and the Board of Supervisors may require the
landowner or developer to plant one tree of not less than three inches in
caliper for each tree of 12 inches caliper or more to be destroyed.
F. The landowner or developer shall protect remaining trees from damage
during construction. The following procedures shall be followed in
order to so protect remaining trees:
(1) No more than five inches of soil shall be placed around the trunks
of trees which are to remain. For those trees which are to remain,
where more than five inches of soil are to be placed, tree wells shall
be constructed to preserve such trees.
(2) Trees within 25 feet of a building site or bordering entrances or
exits to building sites shall be protected by wooden slat snow
fencing to be placed around such trees.
(3) No boards or other material shall be nailed to trees during
construction, and no trees shall be sprayed with bright colored
paint.
(4) Heavy equipment operators shall avoid damaging existing tree
trunks and roots. Feeder roots shall not be cut closer than 25 feet
from tree trunks.
(5) Tree trunks and exposed roots damaged during construction shall
be protected from further damage by being pruned flush, and if
trunks are scarred they shall be traced out for proper healing.
(6) Tree limbs damaged during construction shall be sawed flush to
tree trunks and treated with tree paints as necessary.
(7) The operation of heavy equipment over root systems of such trees
shall be minimized in order to prevent soil compaction.
(8) Deciduous trees shall be given a heavy application of fertilizer to
aid in their recovery from possible damage caused by construction
operations.
(9) Construction debris shall not be disposed of near or around the
bases of such trees.
§ 110-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-37
1:291
§ 110-37. Recreation areas.70
Active and passive recreation areas shall be provided as required in Chapter
135, Zoning, within any planned residential development or multifamily
residential project.
§ 110-38. Topsoil retention.
No topsoil which is stripped in the subdivision or land development shall be
disposed of off the site. Topsoil shall be stockpiled in locations on the site
and in a fashion to minimize loss by erosion or otherwise and shall be spread
at the time of finished grading, to the extent of its quantity, to a depth of at
least three inches, especially over areas to be seeded or sodded or needing
rapid vegetative growth to preclude soil erosion.
70.Editor's Note: See also § 110-12, Plan requirements for recreational lands and facilities.
§ 110-37 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-38
1:292
ARTICLE VI
Improvements
§ 110-39. Completion of improvements. [Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord.
No. 65B]
§ 110-40. Completion guarantee.
In lieu of the completion of the streets and other improvements required as
a condition for the final approval of the subdivision and/or land development
plan as set forth in §§ 110-11R and 110-39 herein, the landowner or
developer may deposit financial security acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors (except as set forth in § 110-40E, herein) in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements, estimated, calculated
and determined in accordance with the following:
A. No subdivision and/or land development application shall be finally
approved unless the streets shown on such plan have been improved to
a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition, or improved
as required by this chapter and any walkways, curbs, gutters, street
lights, fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers and other improvements as required by this chapter have been
installed in accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the completion of
any improvements required as a condition for final plan approval,
including improvement or fees, the landowner or developer shall
deposit financial security with the Township in an amount sufficient to
cover the costs of such improvements or common amenities including,
but not limited to, roads, stormwater detention and/or retention basins
and other related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open space
improvements, or buffer or screen plantings which are or may be
required.
B. When requested by the landowner or developer, in order to facilitate
financing, the Board of Supervisors shall furnish the developer with a
signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plan
contingent upon the developer obtaining a satisfactory financial
security. The final plan (record plan) shall not be signed nor recorded
until the financial improvements agreement is executed. The resolution
or letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be
revoked if the financial security agreement is not executed within 90
days unless a written extension is granted by the Board of Supervisors.
Such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed
in writing at the request of the landowner or developer.
A. Such financial security shall include, but is not limited to, performance
bonds, surety bonds, federal or commonwealth chartered lending
institution irrevocable letters of credit, and restrictive or escrow
accounts in such lending institutions. Such bond or other security shall
provide for and secure to the Township the completion of all
improvements which may be required within one year or such other
§ 110-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-40
1:293
time that may be fixed by the Board of Supervisors for such completion.
Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal or commonwealth chartered lending institution, provided said
company or institution is authorized to conduct such business within
the commonwealth.
B. Amount of security. [Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
(1) The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of
the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the landowner or developer. The Township may
adjust the amount of the financial security annually, by comparing
the actual cost of the improvements which have been completed
and the estimated cost for the completion of the remaining
improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after either the
original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date of
completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Township may
require the landowner or developer to post additional security in
order to assure that the financial security equals said 110%. Any
additional security shall be posted by the landowner or developer
in accordance with this subsection.71
(2) The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by a landowner or developer and prepared by a
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
certified by such engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of
such cost. The Township, upon the recommendation of the
Township Engineer, may refuse to accept such estimate for good
cause shown. If the landowner or developer and the Township are
unable to agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be
recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer
licensed as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the
Township and landowner or developer. The estimate certified by
the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable, and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so
chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally
by the Township and the landowner or developer.
C. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting the financial security to complete the required
improvements, the amount of financial security may be increased by an
additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the first anniversary
date from the posting of financial security, or to an amount not
exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required improvements
as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year
period through an estimate of costs as set forth in § 110-40B above.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 110-40 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-40
1:294
§ 110-41. Release from improvement bond.
D. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of final plans by section
or stages of development subject to such requirements or guarantees as
to improvements in future sections or stages of development as it finds
essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the
development. As the work of installing the required improvements
proceeds, the party posting the financial security may request that the
Board of Supervisors release, or authorize the release, from time to
time, such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to
the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such request
shall be in writing addressed to the Board of Supervisors, whereupon,
the Board shall have 45 days from receipt of such request within which
to allow the Township Engineer to certify in writing to the Board that
said improvements have been completed in accordance with the
approved plans. Upon such certification the Board of Supervisors shall
authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of an
amount as estimated by the Township Engineer, fairly representing the
value of the improvements completed or, if the Board of Supervisors
fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the Board of Supervisors
shall be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested.
The Board of Supervisors may, prior to final release at the time of
completion and certification by the Township Engineer, require 10% of
the estimated cost of the aforementioned improvements to be retained.
The Township Engineer, in certifying the completion of work for a
partial release, shall not be bound to the amount requested by the
developer, but shall certify to the Board of Supervisors an independent
evaluation of the proper amount of partial releases. [Amended
1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
E. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
other facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction
and pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Township, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
A. Upon the completion of the required improvements, the landowner or
developer shall so notify the Board of Supervisors in writing, by
certified or registered mail, sending a copy thereof to the Township
Engineer. Within 10 days after receipt of such notice the Board of
Supervisors shall direct and authorize the Township Engineer to inspect
all of the said improvements for compliance with the terms of this
chapter.
B. Within 30 days after receipt of the aforementioned authorization from
the Board of Supervisors, the Township Engineer shall file a report in
§ 110-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-41
1:295
writing of such inspection with the Board of Supervisors and shall
concurrently mail a copy thereof to the developer by certified or
registered mail. Such report shall be detailed and shall clearly and
specifically indicate approval or rejection of such improvement, either
in whole or in part, and if such improvements, or any part or portion
thereof, shall not be approved, or shall be rejected by the Township
Engineer, such report shall contain a statement of the reasons for such
nonapproval or rejection.
C. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the landowner or developer,
within 15 days of receipt of the Township Engineer's report, in writing
by certified or registered mail of the action of the Board of Supervisors
with relation thereto. [Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
D. If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to comply
with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements
will be deemed to have been approved and the landowner or developer
shall be released from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty
bond or other security agreement. [Added 1-6-1992 by Ord. No.
65B]
E. If any part or portion of the said improvements shall not be approved, or
shall be rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the landowner or
developer shall correct and complete the same; and the same
procedure as set forth within this section shall be followed and applied.
[Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
F. The landowner or developer shall be responsible for maintenance of all
improvements until such improvements as are offered for dedication
are accepted by the Township. Ten percent of the completion guarantee
shall be retained as financial security until a maintenance guarantee as
provided for in § 110-44 herein has been posted and as-built plans are
verified and accepted by the Township Engineer. [Amended 1-6-1992
by Ord. No. 65B]
G. Where the Board of Supervisors accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion, the Board may require
the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of said
improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
plan for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as
otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements. [Added
1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
H. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final plan approval, the
Township shall not condition the issuance of building, grading or other
permits relating to the erection or placement of improvements,
§ 110-41 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-41
1:296
§ 110-42. As-built plan submission.
Within 30 days after completion of improvements and approval of same by
the Township, and before acceptance of such improvements, the landowner
or developer shall submit to the Board of Supervisors a corrected set of asbuilt
plans and profiles in accordance with §§ 110-16 and 110-23 herein.
§ 110-43. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
[Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
In the event that any improvements which may be required under this
chapter have not been installed as provided in this chapter, or in accordance
with the approved final plan, the Board of Supervisors may enforce the
bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If
the proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the
cost of installing or making repairs or correction to all the improvements
covered by such bond or security, the Board of Supervisors may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or
land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to
recover from the land developer the monies necessary to complete the said
improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
from legal or equitable action brought against the landowner or developer,
or both, shall be used solely for the installation of improvements covered by
such security.
§ 110-44. Dedication and acceptance of improvements.
Upon completion of the construction of improvements in accordance with
the approved subdivision or land development plan; the following conditions
shall apply to the offer of dedication of the same and the acceptance thereof:
including buildings, upon the lots of land as depicted upon the final
plan upon actual completion of the improvements depicted upon the
approved final plan. Moreover, if said financial security has been
provided, occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected
shall not be withheld following the improvement of the streets
providing access to and from existing public roads to such building or
buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition,
as well as the completion of all other improvements as depicted upon
the approved final plan, either upon the lot or lots or beyond the lot or
lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the reasonable
use of or occupancy of the building or buildings. [Added 1-6-1992 by
Ord. No. 65B]
I. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
landowner's or developer's right to contest or question by legal
proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the Board of
Supervisors or the Township Engineer. [Added 1-6-1992 by Ord. No.
65B]
§ 110-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-44
1:297
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have no obligation to take over and
make public any street or other improvement in or abutting a
subdivision or land development. If the Board of Supervisors elects to
accept an offer of dedication, such acceptance shall not occur unless
and until:
(1) The required improvements and monuments as shown on the
approved subdivision and/or land development plan, conservation
plan, and improvement construction plan shall have been certified
by the Township Engineer as having been constructed and installed
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and all other
ordinances, codes, regulations, plans and maps of the Township as
shall be applicable.
(2) A maintenance guarantee is provided through the posting of
financial security, such as that deemed to be acceptable to the
Township as set forth in § 110-40A herein. Such guarantee shall
assure the structural integrity of required improvements as well as
the functioning of said improvements, in accordance with the
design and specifications as depicted on the approved final plans
for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. Said financial security shall be in an amount equivalent
to 15% of the actual cost of installation of the required
improvements.
§ 110-44 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-44
1:298
ARTICLE VII
Additional Provisions
§ 110-45. Coordination with adjoining or nearby areas.
All proposed subdivisions or land developments shall be coordinated and
planned so as to be compatible with adjoining or nearby neighborhoods or
approved subdivisions or land developments to the end that harmonious
development will result. Such coordination shall also pertain to subdivisions
or land developments located adjacent to neighboring townships.
§ 110-46. Official Map incorporation.
Upon the recording of an approved subdivision and/or land development
plan, the streets, parks and other public improvements shown thereon shall
be and become a part of the Official Map of the Township, subject, however,
to the provisions of § 110-44 herein.
§ 110-47. Inspection of work and materials.
All work and materials shall be subject to inspection for conformity with the
terms of this chapter by the Township Engineer.
§ 110-48. Lot purchasers and mortgagees.
When a subdivision or land development plan has been approved and
recorded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the
improvements thereon completed and approved by the Board of
A. When any work or materials are determined by the Township Engineer
not to be in compliance with the terms of this chapter or any other
Township ordinance, code, regulation, plan or map, or at variance with
any permit issued therefor, the Township Engineer may, by notice in
writing or verbal order followed by notice in writing, direct that all
work upon improvements in the subdivision or land development
forthwith stop until such noncompliance or variance is corrected;
except as the Township Engineer may deem necessary to prevent injury
or damage to persons or property, no work shall thereafter be
performed upon the same except in accordance with the order of the
Township Engineer.
B. No underground pipes, works, lines, structures, subgrades or base
courses shall be covered until the same shall be inspected and approved
by the Township Engineer, and if the same have been covered contrary
to the provisions hereof, upon the order of the Township Engineer the
landowner or developer shall cause the same to be forthwith uncovered
so as to permit the inspection thereof.
C. When an inspection of any improvements shall be required, or desired
by the landowner or developer, the landowner or developer shall give
the Township Engineer 48 hours' notice in advance.
§ 110-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-48
1:299
Supervisors, or, in lieu thereof, an improvement bond or other security has
been furnished the Township, the purchasers and mortgagees of lots in the
subdivision or land development shall be relieved of any and all liability
for any deficiency in, lack of or failure to complete the said improvements
by the landowner or developer, and any failure to complete or properly
complete the said improvements shall not encumber any lot or lots in the
said subdivision or land development.
§ 110-49. Public hearing.
Before acting upon any subdivision and/or land development plan, the
Board of Supervisors may conduct a public hearing thereon, pursuant to
public notice.
§ 110-50. Notice to contractors.
The landowner and/or developer shall notify all builders and/or contractors
that they shall perform all work in accordance with the regulations and
requirements of this chapter, and such other Township ordinances, codes,
regulations, plans and maps as shall be applicable thereto.
§ 110-51. Modification of plan requirements.
The Township Planning Commission may recommend to the Board of
Supervisors that the plan requirements for a subdivision and/or land
development be modified or altered in order to encourage or promote
economy and ingenuity in the layout and design of subdivisions and land
developments; to more effectively protect unique and/or sensitive
environmental areas; or to more effectively conform to the purposes of this
chapter, as follows:
A. With respect to encouraging or promoting economy and ingenuity in
the layout and design of subdivisions and land developments, the
Township Planning Commission may recommend modifications to plan
requirements for, but not limited to, the following types of proposals:
(1) Those which may involve earth sheltered housing design.
(2) Those which may involve special forms of solar energy
conservation.
(3) Those which may involve the conversion, reuse and/or adaptation
of an existing structure or building.
B. With respect to more effectively protecting various critical
environmental areas, the Township Planning Commission may
recommend modifications to plan requirements for, but not limited to,
the following types of proposals:
(1) Those which would more effectively protect existing tree growth,
especially notable trees and stands of indigenous vegetation.
§ 110-48 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-51
1:300
§ 110-52. Environmental impact assessment report.
(2) Those which would minimize extensive grading and the
displacement of soil.
(3) Those which would enhance groundwater recharge.
(4) Those which would minimize surface water runoff and improve the
management of stormwater.
(5) Those which would preserve historic or cultural sites or structures.
(6) Those which would conserve prime agricultural lands and soils.
(7) Those which would minimize visibility of development and protect
the visual quality of ridges and other exposed areas.
C. In granting modifications to the landowner or developer, the Board of
Supervisors may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied
or modified.
A. In order to more effectively evaluate subdivision and/or land
development proposals, the applicant shall be required to disclose the
environmental consequences or effects of such proposals through the
submission of an environmental impact assessment (EIA) report.
(1) An EIA report shall be submitted with the preliminary plan for:
(a) Any development in the PRD District, and multifamily
development districts including R-A and R-M.
(b) Any development in the LI, POC, PBC, PBC-1, B and B-1
Districts. [Amended 6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 135]
(c) Any development for which a conditional use is required as per
Chapter 135, Zoning.
(d) Any development which is proposed to have more than 10
dwelling units; any development of any type which is proposed
on a tract greater than 15 acres in size; or any development
where the gross density is in excess of two dwelling units per
acre. [Amended 6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 135]
(2) An updated EIA report shall accompany and form a part of the final
plan for any of the above.
B. The EIA report shall contain text, tables, maps and analyses which
document the probable impact resulting from the proposed subdivision
and/or land development in accordance with the format and content
outline specified below.
C. Eighteen copies of the EIA report shall be submitted in accordance with
the format and content specified below. Within the EIA report, specific
§ 110-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-52
1:301
emphasis shall be directed toward the proposed project's effects on
and relationship to applicable site, neighborhood (including areas in
adjacent townships where applicable) and Township-wide resources,
conditions or characteristics. The EIA report shall include text, tables,
maps and analyses for the purpose of describing the project site,
proposed use(s), environmental characteristics and the environmental
effects of the proposal in accordance with the required disclosures
listed below. One or more plans or maps may be used to display the
required information, and the information shall be coordinated with
requirements set forth in Article IV.
(1) An identification of the site location and area through the use of a
location map drawn at a scale of not more than 2,000 feet to the
inch. The location map shall depict all streets, adjoining properties,
zoning district boundaries and municipal boundaries within 1,000
feet of any part of the tract. In the case of development of a section
of the entire tract, the location map shall also show the relationship
of the section to the entire tract.
(2) An identification of the site character and appearance through the
presentation of black and white photographs or copies thereof.
Such photographs shall provide a representation of what the site
looks like from the ground. Photographs should be properly
identified or captioned and shall be keyed to a map of the site.
(3) An identification of the nature of the proposals through the
presentation of the following:
(a) A site development plan including notes pertaining to the
number and type of lots or units, the square footage and/or
acreage of the tract and a depiction of the features which are
proposed, such as streets, driveways, parking areas, buildings
and other structures, and all impervious surfaces. The plan
shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet and may be
submitted as an attachment to the report. The plan shall reflect
all the information required under § 110-20 herein.
(b) Plans and elevations depicting the proposed size, square
footage, height, number of rooms (where applicable) of
buildings and/or other structures.
(c) A statement indicating the existing and proposed ownership of
the tract and, where applicable, the type of ownership,
operation and maintenance proposed for areas devoted to open
space or otherwise not under the control of a single lot owner.
(d) A statement indicating the proposed staging or phasing of the
project and a map depicting the boundaries of each stage or
phase of the project. Such boundaries shall be superimposed
on a version of the site development plan.
§ 110-52 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-52
1:302
(4) An identification of physical resources associated with the natural
environment of the tract including such features as topography,
soils, hydrology and the like. The identification of physical
resources shall include a narrative description of the qualitative
and quantitative aspects of each of the resources mentioned above.
In addition, these resources may be either incorporated into the
EIA report or submitted as attachments to the report.
(a) A map depicting the topographical characteristics of the tract.
Such map shall contain contours with at least two-foot
intervals; and shall depict slopes from 0% to 4%, 4% to 10%,
10% to 15%, 15% to 25%, and greater than 25%, as required in
Article IV.
(b) A map depicting the soil characteristics of the tract. Such map
shall depict all soil types and shall include a table identifying
soil characteristics pertinent to the proposed subdivision and/
or land development such as depth of bedrock, depth of water
table, flood hazard potential, and limitations for septic tank
filter fields.
(c) A map depicting the hydrological characteristics of the tract.
Such map shall depict surface water resources, their drainage
characteristics, watersheds and floodplains, and groundwater
resources. Surface water resources include features such as
creeks, runs and other streams, ponds, other natural bodies of
water, springs, wetlands, and any man-made impoundments.
Groundwater resources include features such as aquifers and
aquifer recharge areas.
(5) An identification of biological resources associated with the natural
environment of the tract including vegetation. The identification of
biological resources shall include a narrative description of each of
the resources mentioned above. In addition, these resources shall
be mapped at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet and may be either
incorporated into the EIA report or submitted as attachments to the
report.
(a) A map depicting the vegetation characteristics of the tract.
Such map shall define the locations and boundaries of the
wooded areas of the tract and shall note the types of vegetation
associations which exist in terms of their species types and
sizes. In addition, all trees 12 inches in caliper or greater shall
be accurately located on the map either as freestanding trees
or as tree masses.
(6) An identification of the land use conditions and characteristic
associated with the tract, such as current and past use, land cover,
and encumbrances, and the relationship of these to adjacent tracts.
The identification of land use conditions and characteristics shall
include a narrative description of the above. In addition, the
§ 110-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-52
1:303
following maps drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet shall be
incorporated into the EIA report or submitted as attachments to it.
(a) A map depicting the land cover characteristics of the tract.
Such map shall define existing features, including paved or
other impervious surfaces, wooded areas, cultivated areas,
pasture, old fields, lawns and landscaped areas and the like.
(b) A map depicting any encumbrances to the tract. Such map
shall define easements and other areas where certain use
privileges exist.
(c) A map depicting the land uses adjacent to the proposed tract.
Such map may be at the same scale as the location map.
(7) An identification of the historic resources associated with the tract
such as areas, structures and/or routes and trails which are
significant. Areas, structures and/or routes and trails included on
the National Register of Historic Places, the Pennsylvania
Inventory of Historic Places and the Historic American Building
Survey, and those identified in the Comprehensive Plan, shall be
identified. The identification of historic resources shall include a
narrative description of the above. In addition, a map drawn at a
scale of one inch equals 50 feet depicting historic resources shall
be incorporated into the EIA report or submitted as an attachment
to the report.
(8) An identification of the visual resources associated with the tract
such as areas which have a particular amenity value and areas
which offer interest in viewing the tract. The identification of visual
resources shall include a narrative description of the above. In
addition, a map drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet
depicting visual resources shall be incorporated into the EIA report
or submitted as an attachment to the report.
(9) An identification of the community facility needs associated with
the user and/or resident of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development. The community facility needs assessment shall
indicate in narrative form the type of services which will be in
demand. Where applicable, community facilities (such as schools,
park and recreation areas, libraries, hospitals, and other health
care facilities, fire protection, police protection, ambulance, and
rescue service) shall be discussed in terms of the ability of existing
facilities and services to accommodate the demands of future users
and/or residents of the lots and/or tract and the need for additional
or expanded community facilities.
(10) An identification of the utility needs associated with the user and/or
resident of the proposed subdivision and/or land development. The
utility needs assessment shall indicate in narrative form the type of
installations which will be in demand. Utilities (such as those used
for water supply, sewage disposal, refuse disposal, storm drainage,
§ 110-52 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-52
1:304
communications and electrical transmission) shall be discussed in
terms of the ability of existing utility installations to accommodate
the demands of the future users and/or resident of the lots and/or
tract; the need for additional or expanded utility installations; the
ability to achieve an adequate, potable quantity of water whenever
individual wells are proposed; the ability to achieve an adequate
system for on-site sewage disposal whenever such a system is
proposed; and the ability to achieve an adequate system for storm
drainage and stormwater management.
(11) An identification of the relationship of the transportation and
circulation system needs of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development to the existing street or highway network. A
discussion of this relationship shall be in narrative form and shall
indicate factors such as methods to be used for traffic control
within the tract and at points of ingress to and egress from it; and
expected traffic volumes generated from the subdivision and/or
land development including their relationship to existing traffic
volumes on existing streets for both peak-hour and nonpeak-hour
traffic conditions. In addition, there shall be a discussion of the
physical condition of existing streets which will service the
proposed subdivision and/or land development and what
improvements are proposed to remedy any physical deficiencies.
(12) An identification of the social and demographic characteristics
related to the proposed subdivision and/or land development. The
characteristics which shall be presented in narrative form shall
include a profile of the future users and/or residents of the lot and/
or tract including information such as the number of people
expected. Such information shall be related to initial and completed
subdivision and/or land development conditions.
(13) An identification of the economic and fiscal characteristics related
to the proposed subdivision and/or land development. The
characteristics which shall be presented in narrative form shall
include a profile of the Township, county and school district
revenues which the proposal may generate and the Township,
county and school district costs it may create. Such information
shall be related to initial and completed subdivision and land
development conditions.
(14) An identification of characteristics and conditions associated with
existing, construction related, and future air and water quality and
noise levels, vibration, toxic materials, electrical interference, odor,
glare and heat, fire and explosion, smoke, dust, fumes, vapors and
gases and/or radioactive materials.
(15) The implications of the proposed subdivision and land development
in terms of the type of beneficial or adverse effects which may
result from it, and the duration of these effects in terms of their
short-term or long-term nature. To indicate such effects, there shall
§ 110-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-52
1:305
be a discussion of the implications of the proposed subdivision
and/or land development to the resources, conditions and
characteristics described in Subsections C(4) through (14) above.
In addition to a narrative presentation of implications, the
applicant shall display where the subdivision and/or land
development adversely affects the tract's resources, conditions or
characteristics through the use of a map drawn at a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet wherein the areas adversely affected from
proposed development are highlighted. Such map may be either
incorporated into the EIA report or submitted as an attachment
to the report. Further, the applicant must demonstrate and specify
in the EIA report how and where the findings in the EIA report
and its attachments are reflected in the subdivision and/or land
development plan.
(16) Alternatives to the proposed subdivision and/or land development.
To indicate such alternatives, the applicant shall submit exhibits or
diagrams which will depict the type of alternatives described in
narrative form. The applicant shall comment on how alternatives
such as revised location, redesign, layout or siting of buildings,
roads and other structures, alternate methods for sewage disposal
and water supply, reduction in the size of proposed structures or
number of structures, and the like would preclude, reduce or lessen
potential adverse impact or produce beneficial effects.
(17) Probable adverse effects which cannot be precluded. In indicating
such effects a discussion shall be presented regarding whether
they will have primary or secondary implications, that is, whether
the adverse effects will have direct or indirect influence on a
particular resource, condition or characteristic.
(18) Measures to mitigate adverse effects. To indicate such measures,
the applicant shall submit exhibits or diagrams which will depict
the type of remedial, protective and mitigative measures described
in narrative form. These resources shall include those required
through existing procedures and standards, and those unique to a
specific project, as follows:
(a) Mitigation measures which pertain to existing procedures and
standards are those related to current requirements of the
state, county and/or Township for remedial or protective
action, such as sedimentation and soil erosion control,
stormwater runoff control, water quality control, air quality
control, and the like.
(b) Mitigation measures related to impacts which may be unique
to a specific subdivision and/or land development are those
related to efforts such as revegetation, screening, fencing,
emission control, traffic control, noise control, relocation of
people and/or businesses, land acquisition, and the like.
§ 110-52 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-52
1:306
(19) Any irreversible environmental changes which would occur due to
the proposed subdivision and/or land development should it be
implemented. To indicate such changes, the use of nonrenewable
resources during the initial and continued phases of the subdivision
and/or land development shall be discussed. Further, the loss of
environmental resources shall be indicated through a presentation
of the quantity of loss and related qualitative effects.
(20) An identification of the measures taken to provide sustainable
stormwater management to reduce the surface discharge of
stormwater, reduce the creation of unnecessary impervious
surfaces, prevent the degradation of waters of the commonwealth,
and maintain the natural hydrologic regime of the site to the
maximum extent practicable. The applicant shall demonstrate that
the design preserves existing environmental features beneficial for
stormwater management and minimizes increases in stormwater
runoff and impacts to water quality resulting from the proposed
regulated activity by: [Added 6-3-2015 by Ord. No. 135]
(a) Preparing an Existing Resource and Site Analysis Map
(ERSAM) showing environmentally sensitive areas, including,
but not limited to, steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams,
wetlands, hydric soils, vernal pools, stream buffers, and
hydrologic soil groups.
(b) Establishing a stream buffer in accordance with Chapter 105,
Stormwater Management.
(c) Preparing a draft project layout that avoids sensitive areas
identified in § 110-52C(20)(a).
(d) Identifying site-specific existing conditions drainage areas,
discharge points, recharge areas, and Hydrologic Soil Groups
A and B (areas conducive to infiltration).
(e) Implementing nonstructural stormwater management
alternatives, including:
[1] Minimize earth disturbance;
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces;
[3] Break up large impervious surfaces;
[4] Routing roof runoff over lawns;
[5] Reducing the use of storm sewers by utilizing swales and
other natural drainage features;
[6] Reducing street widths to the minimum cartway widths
outlined in § 110-26C, and
§ 110-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-52
1:307
[7] Using permeable paving materials where appropriate (i.e.,
driveways, overflow parking areas, emergency access
roads).
D. In making its evaluation, the Board of Supervisors and/or the Planning
Commission may request any additional information it deems necessary
to adequately assess potential environmental impacts. Further,
whenever any information requested in Subsection C above is not
applicable to the proposed subdivision and/or land development, the
Board of Supervisors, upon recommendations from the Planning
Commission, may waive certain requirements to address such
information upon a finding of such inapplicability. A written request for
a waiver shall be made by the applicant and shall be submitted at the
time when an application for subdivision and/or land development,
conditional use and/or special exception is made.
E. The EIA report shall be prepared by an engineer, architect, landscape
architect, or land planner.
§ 110-52 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-52
1:308
ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 110-53. Records.
The Township Secretary shall assign an application number to all
applications for preliminary plan and final plan approval. All matters
pertaining to such applications shall be filed in accordance with the
subdivision and/or land development application number. In addition, the
Township shall keep a record of its findings, decisions and
recommendations relative to all subdivision and/or land development plans
filed with the application for review. All such records shall be public
records.
§ 110-54. Schedule of application fees.
Upon the filing of an application for preliminary and final approval of a
subdivision and/or land development plan, the landowner or developer shall
pay to the Township Secretary to the use of the Township such fees as
the Board of Supervisors shall from time to time provide by ordinance or
resolution.
§ 110-55. Inspection fees. [Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
A. The landowner or developer shall pay to the use of the Township, and
upon invoice rendered by the Township, such charges as shall be made
by the Township Engineer or other Township inspector for the field
inspection of improvements in the subdivision or land development; but
in the event, owing to special or unusual conditions, specialized or
expert inspections, analyses or tests of improvements shall be required,
such inspections, analyses or tests shall be performed by persons or
firms selected by the Board of Supervisors, and the fees and costs of
such inspections, analyses or tests shall be paid by the landowner or
developer to the use of the Township upon invoice rendered by the
Township, in an amount equivalent to the actual cost thereof to the
Township.
B. All invoices shall be due upon presentation.
C. Any landowner or developer who is delinquent in the payment of
invoices shall be denied issuance of any further approvals or permits by
the Township, whether such approvals or permits pertain to the
development for which said invoice was rendered or any other land or
development within the Township.
D. The Township Building Inspector or Township Secretary shall revoke all
permits issued to landowners or developers who are delinquent in the
payment of any invoice.
§ 110-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-55
1:309
E. A landowner or developer who disputes an invoice as billed within 10
days shall state such objection to the Township Secretary in writing
upon receipt, via certified mail, return receipt requested.
F. Reimbursement by the applicant to the Township shall be based upon a
schedule established by ordinance or resolution. Such expense shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees
charged by the Township Engineer or consultant for work performed
for similar service in the community, but in no event shall the fees
exceed the rate or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant to the
Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
applicants.
(1) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant
shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify the
Township that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary, in which case the Township shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision and/or land development application or
any approval or permit related to development due to the
applicant's request over disputed engineer expenses.
(2) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Township and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of the expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and Township shall
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
review the said expenses and make a determination as to the
amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Township and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas (or if at the time there be no President
Judge, then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such
engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Township Engineer
nor any professional engineer who has been retained by, or
performed service for, the Township or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less then the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
§ 110-55 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-55
1:310
§ 110-56. Fees for review of plans. [Amended 1-6-1992 by Ord. No.
65B]
§ 110-57. Costs for material tests.
The landowner or developer shall pay to the use of the Township, and upon
invoice rendered by the Township, the cost of performing all material tests
determined by the Board of Supervisors to be necessary or desirable in
connection with the inspection or approval of all subdivision and/or land
development plans or improvements.
§ 110-58. Other fees.
The landowner or developer shall pay to the use of the Township, and
upon invoice rendered by the Township, all fees incurred by the Township
in the preparation of the subdivision and land development agreements,
improvement and maintenance bonds, escrow agreements and other
instruments deemed necessary or desirable by the Board of Supervisors in
connection with subdivisions or land developments.
§ 110-59. Remedies; violations and penalties. [Amended 4-5-1989
by Ord. No. 65A; 1-6-1992 by Ord. No. 65B]
Township shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but
otherwise the Township and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
A. The landowner or developer shall pay to the use of the Township, and
upon invoice rendered by the Township, the actual cost of all fees
incurred by the Township in the review of all subdivision and/or land
development plans by the Township Engineer, planning consultant,
Township Solicitor and such other professionals as are engaged by the
Township to review and evaluate subdivision and land development
plans. The need for such professionals, and the selection thereof, shall
be determined solely by the Board of Supervisors.
B. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fees,
the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify the
Township that such fees are disputed, in which case the Township shall
not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development application
due to the applicant's request over disputed fees.
C. In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the
amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the
applicant and Township shall follow the procedure for dispute
resolution set forth in § 110-55F.
A. Preventive remedies.
(1) In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and
maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct
§ 110-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-59
1:311
or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover
damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure
or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of
selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor
from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
(2) The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which
has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of any chapter provisions. This authority to
deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following
applicants:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation without regard as to
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting
of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee
for the development of any such real property, the Township may
require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an
interest an such real property.
B. Jurisdiction. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under § 110-59.
C. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township
as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed,
levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither
pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce
the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.
§ 110-59 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-59
1:312
§ 110-60. Collection of fines.
All fines collected for violations of this chapter, as provided in § 110-59
herein, shall be paid over to the Township.
Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge determining that
there has been a violation further determines that there was a
good faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating
the chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in
which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination
of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(2) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other that the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 110-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-60
1:313
Chapter 116
TAXATION
§ 110-60 CHADDS FORD CODE § 110-60
1:314
ARTICLE I
Tax Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 11-11-1976 by Ord. No. 35]
§ 116-1. Amount of discount.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes to Chadds Ford Township,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from
the amount of such tax upon making payment of the whole amount thereof
within two months after the date of the tax notice.
§ 116-2. Amount of penalty.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes to Chadds Ford Township,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, who shall fail to make payment of any such
taxes charged against them for four months after the date of the tax notice,
shall be charged a penalty of 10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes
by the Tax Collector and be collected by him.
§ 116-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-2
1:315

ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-29-1986 by Ord. No. 74; amended in its entirety at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 116-3. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of Chadds
Ford Township."
§ 116-4. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within Chadds
Ford Township, regardless of where the documents making the transfer
are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such
transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 116-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust,
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 116-4 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of
each class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members
of the same family. The business of agriculture shall include the leasing to
members of the same family of property which is directly and principally
used for agricultural purposes. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:
§ 116-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-5
1:317
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP — A partnership of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of
the interests in the partnership are continuously owned by members of
the same family. The business of agriculture shall include the leasing to
members of the same family of property which is directly and principally
used for agricultural purposes. The business of agriculture shall not be
deemed to include:
LIVING TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust, intended as a
will substitute by the settlor which becomes effective during the lifetime
of the settlor, but from which trust distributions cannot be made to any
beneficiaries other than the settlor prior to the death of the settlor.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
ORDINARY TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust or a living
trust, which takes effect during the lifetime of the settlor and for which
the trustees of the trust take title to property primarily for the purpose
of protecting, managing or conserving it until distribution to the named
beneficiaries of the trust. An ordinary trust does not include a trust that
has an objective to carry on business and divide gains, nor does it either
expressly or impliedly have any of the following features: the treatment of
beneficiaries as associates, the treatment of the interests in the trust as
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
§ 116-5 CHADDS FORD CODE § 116-5
1:318
personal property, the free transferability of beneficial interests in the trust,
centralized management by the trustee or the beneficiaries, or continuity of
life.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within Chadds Ford Township
including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines,
minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower
boundaries, trees, and other improvements, immovables or interests
which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or land, but
excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in an
industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate, or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
§ 116-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-5
1:319
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting, or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 116-6. Imposition of tax; interest.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate; provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executor
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for, and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof,
a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder whereon the date
§ 116-5 CHADDS FORD CODE § 116-6
1:320
§ 116-7. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 116-8. Excluded transactions.
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer then the tax levied by Chadds Ford Township under the
authority of that Act shall during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and
such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of
Chadds Ford Township, provided, however, that Chadds Ford Township
and any other political subdivision which imposes such tax on the same
person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective
rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively
different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate
permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by section shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which Chadds Ford Township is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
§ 116-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-8
1:321
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries that are entitled to receive the property
or proceeds from the sale of the property under the trust, whether
or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. A
trust clause which identifies the contingent beneficiaries by
reference to the heirs of the trust settlor as determined by the laws
of the intestate succession shall not disqualify a transfer from the
exclusion provided by this clause. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of a
living trust from the settlor of the living trust. No such exemption
shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a
copy of the living trust instrument.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
an ordinary trust to a specifically named beneficiary that is entitled
to receive the property under the recorded trust instrument or to a
contingent beneficiary where the transfer of the same property
would be exempt if the transfer was made by the grantor of the
property into the trust to that beneficiary. However, any transfer of
real estate from a living trust during the settlor's lifetime shall be
§ 116-8 CHADDS FORD CODE § 116-8
1:322
considered for the purposes of this article as if such transfer were
made directly from the settlor to the grantee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
a living trust after the death of the settlor of the trust or from a
trustee of a trust created pursuant to the will of a decedent to a
beneficiary to whom the property is devised or bequeathed.
(12) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from the trustee
of a living trust to the settlor of the living trust if such property was
originally conveyed to the trustee by the settlor.
(13) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(14) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or agreement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(15) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(16) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(17) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(18) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
§ 116-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-8
1:323
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(19) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(20) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transfer or for
commercial purposes.
(21) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, [68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its
primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities; or a transfer from
such a conservancy to the United States, the commonwealth or to
any of their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions; or
any transfer from such a conservancy where the real estate is
encumbered by a perpetual agricultural conservation easement as
defined by the act of June 30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43), known as the
"Agricultural Area Security Law," and such conservancy has owned
the real estate for at least two years immediately prior to the
transfer.
(22) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(23) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership.
(24) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate.
(25) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(26) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 116-8 CHADDS FORD CODE § 116-9
1:324
§ 116-9. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 116-8, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article, corporations
and associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 116-10. Acquired company.
§ 116-11. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article.
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
§ 116-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-11
1:325
§ 116-12. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 116-13. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds or any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 116-14. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Chadds Ford
Township based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from Chadds Ford Township.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
§ 116-11 CHADDS FORD CODE § 116-14
1:326
§ 116-15. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete
value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject
to tax under this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax
Statement of Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which
are exempt from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents
presented for affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy
of the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 116-16. Civil penalties.
§ 116-17. Tax to become lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
Chadds Ford Township all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2%
for use of the county, together with a report containing the information
as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 116-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-17
1:327
wholly or in part within the boundaries of Chadds Ford Township, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments, or interest therein, are described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until
discharge by payment, or in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas
of Delaware County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 116-18. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 116-19. Regulations.
The Township Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township is charged
with enforcement and collection of the tax and is empowered to regulate
and enforce reasonable regulations for enforcement and collection of the
tax. The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
§ 116-17 CHADDS FORD CODE § 116-19
1:328
ARTICLE III
Assessment for Fire Protection Service
[Adopted 12-7-2005 by Ord. No. 112]
§ 116-20. Authorization to enter into contracts.
The Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized and empowered to enter into
a contract or contracts with Chester Water Authority for the placement,
replacement, operation, maintenance and repair of fire hydrants in Chadds
Ford Township and the maintenance of water pressures approved by the
Fire Insurance Underwriters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania along
certain highways, streets, roads and alleys, within the Township to so as
provide fire protection service to and for nearby properties.
§ 116-21. Determination and collection of assessments.
The monies necessary for fulfilling the contract obligations with Chester
Water Authority with respect to such present and future fire hydrants
and fire protection service shall be assessed as follows: The Township
Supervisors shall by resolution annually assess, or cause to be assessed,
the actual cost and expense of such fire protection services by an equal
assessment upon all properties, whether or not exempt from taxation by
existing law, abutting upon said highways, streets, roads and alleys, or
portions thereof, and upon properties within 780 feet of any fire hydrant
benefited thereby based upon the assessment of property for county
purposes. No such assessment shall be levied against any farm land or land
used as an aviation field or against other property not benefited thereby.
Such assessment, including an amount equal to the cost of collection, shall
be collected in the same manner as taxes. (The Township Tax Collector
shall receive the same commission as received on the Township tax.) The
Township Treasurer shall receive all such assessments collected for fire
protection and keep the same in a separate account and shall pay the same
out only upon orders signed by the Chairman of the Board of Supervisors,
attested by the Township Secretary. The Township Treasurer shall make a
report to the Auditors of the Township annually.
§ 116-22. Billing method.
The assessment for fire protection service shall be billed on the annual
Township real estate tax bill and shall be separately stated thereon.
§ 116-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-22
1:329

ARTICLE IV
Mercantile and Business Privilege Tax
[Adopted 12-6-2006 by Ord. No. 116]
§ 116-23. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Chadds Ford Township
Business Privilege Tax Ordinance of 2006."
§ 116-24. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the
Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257,72 as amended.
§ 116-25. Definitions and word usage.
A. The singular shall include the plural, and the plural, the singular. Words
used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter
genders. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the
future.
B. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS — Conduct or exercise of any trade, occupation, profession,
financial business or other commercial activity, the sale of merchandise
or other tangible personal property, the sale of real estate by brokers
or agents, the rental of personal property or real estate and the
performance of any service or services to the general public or a limited
number thereof within, irrespective of whether it is conducted from an
office located within the Township, or attributable to a place of business
within the Township of Chadds Ford, except to the extent that such
business is excluded from the imposition of the tax hereby imposed by
any statute, regulation or judicial interpretation thereof.
FINANCIAL BUSINESS — The services and transactions of banks and
bankers, of trust, credit and investment companies, of holding
companies, of dealers and brokers in money, credits, commercial paper,
bonds, notes, securities, stocks and monetary metals and of factors
and commission merchants, except to such extent as such business is
excluded from the imposition of the tax hereby imposed by any statute,
regulation or judicial interpretation thereof.
GROSS RECEIPTS — Cash, credit or property of any kind or nature,
received or allocable or attributable to business conducted in the
Township of Chadds Ford without deduction therefrom on account of
the cost of property sold, of the material used or the labor, the service
performed or any other cost of doing business. "Gross receipts" shall
exclude, however, those items which are:
72.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 116-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-25
1:331
Discounts allowed to purchasers as cash discounts for prompt
payment of their bills.
(1)
Charges advanced by a seller for freight, delivery or other
transportation for the purchaser in accordance with the terms of a
contract of sale.
(2)
Received upon the sale of an article of personal property which was
acquired by the seller as a trade-in to the extent that the gross
receipts in the sale of the article taken in trade does not exceed the
amount of the trade-in allowance made in acquiring such article.
(3)
Refunds, credits or allowances given to a purchaser on account of
defects in goods sold or merchandise returned.
(4)
Taxes collected as agent for the United States, the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and/or its political subdivisions.
(5)
Based on the value of exchanges or transfers between one seller
and another seller who transfers property with the understanding
that property of an identical description will be retraded at a
subsequent date; however, when sellers engaged in similar lines
of business exchange property and one of them makes payment
to the other in addition to the property exchanged, the additional
payment received shall be included in the gross receipts of the
seller receiving such additional cash payments.
(6)
Receipts by dealers from sales to other dealers in the same line
where the dealer transfers title or possession at the same price for
which he acquired the merchandise.
(7)
Transfers between one department, branch or division of a
corporation or other business entity of goods, wares and
merchandise to another department, branch or division of the same
corporation or business entity and which are recorded on the books
to reflect such interdepartmental transactions.
(8)
Receipts from utility service of any person or company whose rates
and services are fixed and regulated by the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or from any public utility services rendered by
any such person or company or on any privilege or transaction
involving the rendering of any such public utility service.
(9)
Receipts from goods and articles manufactured in the Township,
from the by-products of such manufacture, from minerals, timber,
natural resources and farm products manufactured, produced or
grown in the Township, or from preparation and processing
thereof, or from any business relating to manufacturing,
production, preparation or processing of materials, timber and
natural resources or farm products by manufacturers, producers
and farmers with respect to goods, articles and products of their
own manufacture, production or growth, including transportation,
(10)
§ 116-25 CHADDS FORD CODE § 116-25
1:332
NONPROFIT CORPORATIONS OR ASSOCIATIONS —
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association, corporation or other legal entity, except individuals
employed for a wage or a salary, nonprofit corporations or associations
as defined in this article, agencies of the United States government,
agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, political subdivisions
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and any authority or
instrumentality created or organized under and pursuant to any act of
assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term "person," as applied
to an association, shall mean the partners or members thereof and, as
applied to a corporation, the officers thereof.
SERVICE — Any act or instance of assisting, helping or benefiting
another for a valuable consideration in money or money's worth.
loading, unloading, damaging and storage of such goods, articles,
products or by-products.
Receipts of nonprofit corporations or associations organized and
operating under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or
another state or associations organized for religious, charitable or
educational purposes, agencies of the government of the United
States or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; the business of
any political subdivision or of any authority created or organized
under and pursuant to any act of assembly; or membership dues,
fees or assessments of charitable, religious, beneficial or nonprofit
organizations, including but not limited to sportsman's clubs,
recreational clubs, golf clubs and tennis clubs, and Girl and Boy
Scout troops and council.
(11)
Organizations not for profit for the establishment and maintenance
of a public or private college, secondary and elementary school
or other educational institutions for the academic instruction and
cultivation of the mind and/or the inculcation of moral and spiritual
values, but not including an institution or organization directed
primarily to physical training or development of physical or
manipulative skills or any organization organized as such solely or
primarily for the purpose of evading this article.
(1)
Organizations not for profit, such as a convent, monastery, church
or similar institutions, but not including one organized for a
purpose not otherwise permitted by any such organization or solely
or primarily as a religious institution for the purpose of evading this
article.
(2)
Organizations not for profit, organized and operating for the relief
of poverty, the advancement of education, the advancement of
religion or the promotion of health, government or other municipal
purpose, but not including any organization organized as such
solely or primarily for the purpose of evading this article.
(3)
§ 116-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-25
1:333
§ 116-26. Registration of businesses.
§ 116-27. Amount of tax.
For the tax year beginning January 1, 2007, and for each tax year thereafter,
the Township hereby imposes an annual business privilege tax on every
person engaging in a business, as defined in this article, in the amount of
$100. Persons engaged in more than one business in the Township shall pay
a separate tax for each separate business.
TAX COLLECTOR — A person duly appointed by resolution of the
Supervisors of the Township of Chadds Ford to administer and collect
the within tax.
TAX YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning the first day of
January and ending the 31st day of December in each such year.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business
that is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar
days.
TOWNSHIP — Township of Chadds Ford.
A. For the tax year beginning January 1, 2007, and each tax year
thereafter, every person who engages in or who continues to engage in
or thereafter begins to engage in a business at an actual place of
business in the Township shall, on or before the 30th day of January of
each tax year, but in tax year 2007 on or before June 1, 2007, make
application for registration for each place of business in the Township
to the Tax Collector.
B. Every person subject to the tax imposed by this article who commences
business subsequent to the due date for registration designated in
Subsection A shall make application for registration to the Tax Collector
within 30 days of commencing such business.
C. Each application for registration shall be signed by the applicant, if a
natural person, and, in the case of an association or a partnership, by a
member or partner thereof, and, in the case of a corporation, by an
officer thereof. The application shall be made on a form furnished by
the Tax Collector and shall be accompanied by the annual tax of $100.
The Tax Collector shall thereupon issue a certificate of registration to
the applicant which shall not be assignable and which must be
displayed at every business location or produced on demand. In the
event of loss, defacement or destruction of any such certificate, the
applicant to whom the certificate has been issued shall apply to the Tax
Collector for a new certificate, for which a fee as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors shall be charged for such
replacement certificate.73
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 116-25 CHADDS FORD CODE § 116-28
1:334
§ 116-28. Exemption.
Any person required to pay a business privilege tax under the provisions of
this article shall be exempted from paying such tax if such person's annual
gross receipts are $15,000 or less.
§ 116-29. Responsibilities of collectors and persons claiming
exemption.
§ 116-30. Confidentiality.
Any information gained by the Tax Collector or any official, agent or
employee of the Township as the result of any application, investigation
or verifications required or authorized by this article shall be confidential
except for official purposes, proper judicial order or as otherwise provided
by law.
§ 116-31. Recovery of overdue payments; cost of collection;
disposition.
A. The Tax Collector is empowered and shall be charged with the duty of
collecting and receiving all fees, taxes, fines and penalties imposed by
this article and of keeping such records as necessary to reflect all
amounts received by him, from whom received, and the date or dates of
such receipt, together with such other records as the Collector shall
deem necessary and appropriate.
B. In the event that any person required by this article to register or to pay
the tax imposed hereby neglects or refuses to register or to pay the tax,
then in such event the Tax Collector or his duly appointed agents shall
assess said person the $100 tax. In all cases of assessment, the Tax
Collector or his duly appointed agents shall give the person assessed
written notice in which shall be stated the taxpayer's name, if known,
the business, business address, the determined amount of gross
receipts and the amount of the tax assessed as due.
C. The burden of proof is hereby imposed upon any person claiming an
exclusion of gross receipts for tax purposes by virtue of the definition of
that term or an exemption from the payment of the tax hereby imposed
to prove by clear and convincing evidence the legal right to such
exclusion or exemption to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector, including
the submission of all books, records and documents upon which such
claim is based.
A. All fees, taxes, interest and penalties due and unpaid under this article
shall be recoverable by the Tax Collector, the Township or the Township
Solicitor as other debts due the Township are now by law enforceable or
as provided under the Local Tax Enabling Act. All such remedies shall
be cumulative, and none shall be deemed to be exclusive.
§ 116-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-31
1:335
§ 116-32. Limitation of taxing power.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any person or any
business or any part of any business not within the taxing power of the
Township under the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution
and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 116-33. Violations and penalties.
If any person shall purposefully fail to register and pay the tax due, the
Tax Collector may, 90 days after the notice of assessment described in
§ 116-29B, impose a penalty of $100 if the taxpayer has not either paid the
assessment or challenged the assessment in writing.
B. If for any reason any fee, tax, interest or penalty is not paid when due
and suit is brought for the recovery thereof, the person liable therefor
shall, in addition, be liable for all costs of collection together with an
attorney's reasonable commission for collection.
C. All fees, taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered
under the provisions of this article shall be paid into the general fund of
the Township for the use and benefit of the Township.
§ 116-31 CHADDS FORD CODE § 116-33
1:336
ARTICLE V
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 119]
§ 116-34. Definitions and word usage.
§ 116-35. Levy of tax.
A. When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency
designated by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax
herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, firm or corporation engaged in any
occupation, trade, business or profession within the limits of the
political subdivision who is not subject to any other Township tax, such
as school or Township.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the
Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1251, Section 13, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned
on or performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision,
for which compensation is charged or received, whether by means of
salary, wages, commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of
Chadds Ford Township, a Second Class Township organized under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 116-35 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year;
a calendar year.
B. "He," "his" or "him" indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter.
A. For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and
assessed, pursuant to the Local Tax Enabling Act74 and the local
services tax, which levy commenced January 1, 2009, upon the privilege
of engaging in an occupation with a primary place of employment
within Chadds Ford Township during the tax year. Each individual who
74.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 116-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-35
1:337
§ 116-36. Amount of tax.
Beginning with the effective date of this article, the amount of the tax levied
under § 116-35 of this article is the sum of $52 per annum.
§ 116-37. Duty of employers.
Each employer within Chadds Ford Township, as well as those employers
located outside Chadds Ford Township but who engage in business within
the Chadds Ford Township, is hereby required to collect from each of the
employees engaged by him and having an occupation within Chadds Ford
Township who is subject to the tax, the said tax of $52 per annum and
make a return and pay the same over to the Occupational Tax Officer. Each
employer is hereby required to deduct said tax from each employee in his
employ whether said employee is paid by salary, wages, commission or
fees, where part or all of such services are performed within Chadds Ford
Township.
§ 116-38. Filing of returns; failure of employer to pay tax.
Each employer shall file a return showing the number, names and addresses
of employees in his employ subject to this tax and compute the tax on forms
to be supplied to him by the Occupational Tax Officer. If the employer fails to
exercises such privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall
pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52, assessed on a prorata
basis, in accordance with the provisions of this article. [Amended
11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 123]
B. Use of funds.
(1) This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as the same
may be allocated by the Board of Supervisors from time to time:
(a) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services;
(b) Road construction and/or maintenance;
(c) Reduction of property taxes; or
(d) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa. C.S.A. Chapter
85, Subchapter F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
(2) Chadds Ford Township shall use no less than 25% of the funds
derived from the tax for emergency services. [Amended
11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 123]
C. This tax is an addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by Chadds Ford Township. The tax shall be no more than $52 on
each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the number of
political subdivisions within which a person maybe employed.
§ 116-35 CHADDS FORD CODE § 116-38
1:338
file said return and pay said tax, whether or not he makes collection thereof
from the salary, wages, commissions or fees paid by him to said employee,
the employee shall be responsible for the payment of said tax. The failure
of any employer residing either within or without Chadds Ford Township to
make such return and/or pay such tax shall not relieve the employee from
the responsibility for making the returns and paying the tax.
§ 116-39. Dates for determining liability.
§ 116-40. Self-employed persons and individuals having more than
one occupation.
§ 116-41. Nonresidents working in Township.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place
of business outside Chadds Ford Township but who perform services of
any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within Chadds
Ford Township are hereby required to be bound by and subject themselves
to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this article
with the same force and effect as though they were residents of Chadds
Ford Township. Any individual engaged in an occupation within Chadds
Ford Township and any employee of a nonresident employer may for the
A. The employer shall file his return as set forth in § 116-38 of this article
on July 1 of each year, showing the number of employees subject to such
tax that were employed by him from January 1 to June 1 of such year,
and pay the tax thereon.
B. Such employer shall make a supplemental report on December 30 of
each year showing the number of additional employees subject to the
tax that were employed by him since the filing of the last return and
shall pay the tax thereon.
A. All self-employed individuals who perform services of any type or kind
or who engage in any occupation or profession within Chadds Ford
Township who are subject to this tax by reason of not paying any other
Township taxes shall be required to comply with this article and pay the
tax to the Occupational Tax Officer on June 15 of each year or within 30
days if engaging in an occupation in Chadds Ford Township after June
15 of any year.
B. Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within
Chadds Ford Township shall be subject to the payment of this tax on his
principal occupation, and his principal employer shall deduct this tax
and deliver to him evidence of deductions on a form to be furnished to
the employer by the Secretary, which form shall be evidence of
deduction having been made and, when presented to any other
employer, shall be authority for such employer not to deduct this tax
from the employee's wages but to include such employee on his return
by setting forth his name, address and the name and account number of
the employer who deducted this tax.
§ 116-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-41
1:339
purpose of this article be considered a self-employed person, and in the
event this tax is not paid the Occupational Tax Officer shall have the option
of proceeding against either the employer or the employee for the collection
of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 116-42. Administration of tax.
§ 116-43. Suit for collection; interest and penalty.
§ 116-44. Exemptions and refunds. [Added 11-21-2011 by Ord. No.
123]
A. The Secretary shall furnish the Occupational Tax Officer with a tax
duplicate of all persons who are subject to the tax under this article.
B. It shall be the duty of the Occupational Tax Officer to collect the taxes
hereby imposed, to accept and receive payments of this tax, and to keep
a record thereof showing the amount received by him from each
employer or self-employed person together with the date the tax was
received.
C. Chadds Ford Township may prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination of
the payroll records of any employer subject to the article and the
examination and correction of any return made in compliance with the
article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which
overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Occupational Tax Officer shall have the
right of appeal to the Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township.
D. The Secretary is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or if no return was made to ascertain the tax due.
Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the Secretary
the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, Chadds Ford Township may
sue for the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article,
together with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of said tax shall be due and payable beginning with the
due date of said tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate
of said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the
recovery of this tax, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be
responsible and liable for the costs of collection, including reasonable
attorney's fees.
§ 116-41 CHADDS FORD CODE § 116-44
1:340
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within Chadds Ford Township is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for the calendar year. In addition, the following persons are also
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with Chadds Ford
Township's Tax Collector and with the person's employer affirming
that the person reasonably expects to receive earned income and
net profits from all sources within Chadds Ford Township of less
than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption
certificate is filed. The exemption certificate shall have attached to
it a copy of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from
employment within Chadds Ford Township for the year prior to the
fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted
from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until
otherwise instructed by Chadds Ford Township or except as
required by § 116-44A(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax
from the person during the calendar year or the remainder of the
calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies.
Employers shall ensure that the exemption certificate forms are
readily available to employees at all times and shall furnish each
new employee with a form at the time of hiring. The exemption
certificate form shall be the uniform form provided by Chadds Ford
Township.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by Chadds Ford Township that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within Chadds Ford
Township equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
§ 116-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-44
1:341
§ 116-45. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision. [Added 11-21-2011
by Ord. No. 123]
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for
that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within Chadds Ford Township in an amount equal
to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall
withhold the local services tax from the person under § 116-44B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
§ 116-44B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the remainder
of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from the person,
for the first payroll period after receipt of the notification under
§ 116-44B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount of tax that was not
withheld from the person due to the exemption claimed by the
person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll amount due for
that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld per payroll
period for the remaining payroll periods in that calendar year shall
be the same amount withheld for other employees. In the event the
employment of a person subject to withholding of the tax under this
subsection is subsequently severed in that calendar year, the
person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due, and
Chadds Ford Township may pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in § 116-44B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
(5) Refunds shall be available within three years after the due date for
filing a return or one year after actual payment, whichever is later,
in conformity with the Local Taxpayers' Bill of Rights, for any
amounts paid in error or overpaid. This provision shall be
retroactive to January 5, 2009, the date the local services tax was
first enacted by the Township.
C. Refunds. Chadds Ford Township, in consultation with the Tax Collector
and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund
claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption,
which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general
municipal law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on
overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75
days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the
last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject
to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1. Chadds Ford Township or the
Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds
to exempt persons.
§ 116-44 CHADDS FORD CODE § 116-45
1:342
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person to
work in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period, the
priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the following
order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
§ 116-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-45
1:343
Chapter 121
VEHICLES, ALL-TERRAIN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 89. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 125.
§ 121-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as "Chadds Ford Township All-Terrain
Vehicle Safety Ordinance of 1987."
§ 121-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE (ATV) — Any unlicensed motorized two- , three- ,
or four-wheeled or track, and including dirt bikes (licensed or otherwise),
vehicles not licensed for public highway use.
§ 121-3. Consent required.
No person shall, except as provided herein, operate any of the above, as
hereinbefore defined, within the Township of Chadds Ford unless the user
thereof has first given his name and address to the owner or the lessee in
possession of the premises where he intends to operate and has obtained
the written consent of such owner or lessee, as the case may be, on the
form provided by the Supervisors of the Township of Chadds Ford. Prior to
operating an ATV on such property, duplicate signed copies of said consent
shall be filed with the Township Secretary either in person or by mail. No
registration with the Township or filing fee shall be required. The consent
of the owner or lessee shall continue in effect until the end of the current
year in which the consent is obtained, as will be specified on said written
consent, unless prior thereto the owner or lessee in possession of the land
shall revoke such consent in writing. In granting such consent, the owner
or lessee may stipulate the type of ATV for which consent is granted.
§ 121-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall,
upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a Magisterial
District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, be
guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days. Each day or portion thereof that such violation
continues or is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
§ 116-45 CHADDS FORD CODE § 121-4
1:344
Chapter 125
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
All-terrain vehicles — See Ch. 121.
offense, and each section of this chapter that is violated shall also
constitute a separate offense.75
B. Any Township constable or any police officer duly authorized to enforce
the law within the Township of Chadds Ford is hereby authorized to
seize, remove and destroy any ATV or similar vehicle which is used in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 121-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 121-4
1:345

ARTICLE I
Parking Regulations
[Adopted 2-5-1986 by Ord. No. 68]
§ 125-1. Definitions and interpretation.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this article, have the meaning herein indicated:
§ 125-2. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 125-3. Parking, stopping and standing prohibited at all times.
[Amended 12-29-1986 by Ord. No. 68A; 8-3-1988 by Ord. No. 68B;
4-4-1990 by Ord. No. 68C; 7-1-2004 by Ord. No. 10377]
No person shall park, leave unattended, stand or stop an attended motor
vehicle at any time along the shoulder or side or within the right-of-way of
any of the following roads or designated portions thereof. Such streets are
hereby designated a tow-away zone and any Supervisor, Fire Marshal or any
A. Words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania,76 as now in force,
or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. A Supervisor and/or the Township Fire Marshal shall have the following
powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time of
emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Township in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any person
who shall operate or park a motor vehicle in violation of any such
regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any
sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulations, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in § 125-4 hereof for a violation of such nature.
76.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 125-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-3
1:347
police officer may order a vehicle towed from such street in accordance with
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353(a)(1)(x).
Name of Street Side Location
Brandywine Drive Both Entire length
Creek Road Both North of Baltimore Pike to the
Township line
Oakland Road Both From Wilmington-West Chester Pike
for a distance west of Wilmington-West
Chester Pike
Station Way Road West Starting at Baltimore Pike proceeding
south for a distance of 210 feet
U.S. Route 1 (Baltimore
Pike)
North From Wilmington-West Chester Pike
for a distance of 1,000 feet
U.S. Route 1 (Baltimore
Pike)
South From Station Way Road east to Creek
Road
Wilmington-West
Chester Pike
West From Baltimore Pike south to Ridge
Road
Wilmington-West
Chester Pike
West From Oakland Road to Baltimore Pike
§ 125-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with
any provision of this article or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed $300,
except that the maximum fine for failure to comply with § 125-3 hereof shall
not exceed $10 for the first offense or $50 for any succeeding offense.
§ 125-3 CHADDS FORD CODE § 125-4
1:348
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
[Adopted 6-29-1986 by Ord. No. 70]
§ 125-5. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 125-6. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as amendments to ordinances Chadds Ford Township.
§ 125-7. Temporary and emergency regulations.
The Township Supervisors, State Police or Chadds Ford Township Police, if
appointed, shall have the power to regulate traffic and parking temporarily
and in time of emergency.
§ 125-8. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the police officers of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and Township Supervisors, who are hereby given authority
to direct traffic on the highways and intersections Chadds Ford Township
in accordance with the provisions of this article and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 125-9. Use of sidewalks by motor vehicles.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any sidewalk in the
Township; nor shall any person operate a motor vehicle upon or across any
sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a driveway or alley
at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall have been
properly cut down for the purpose.
§ 125-10. Speed limits. [Amended 4-4-1990 by Ord. No. 70A;
amended 5-1-1991 by Ord. No. 70B; 8-7-1991 by Ord. No. 70C]
A. Words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania,78 as now in force,
or as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. The terms “curbline” and “curb,” as used in this article, shall mean the
side boundary of a street, road or highway, including but not limited to a
raised boundary of a side line.
C. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
78.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 125-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-10
1:349
§ 125-11. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those highways described below:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 125-12. One-way highways. [Amended 8-7-1991 by Ord. No. 70C]
A. The speed limit for all traffic along the highways or parts thereof
described below is established at the rate of speed indicated, provided
that there shall be erected, in accordance with the laws in such cases
made and provided, signs thereon establishing a twenty-five-mile-perhour
speed limit zone:
Name of Highway
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Bullock Road 25 Extra length
Heyburn Road
[Amended
1-15-2004]
25 Entire length (from Baltimore
Pike to Smithbridge Road)
Marshall Road [Added
7-2-2044 by Ord. No.
129]
25 Entire length (from Route 202 to
the eastern municipal boundary
with Concord Township)
Station Way Road 25 From Creek Road to Baltimore
Pike
B. Any person violating Subsection A is guilty of a summary offense under
the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code and shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine and costs as specified in the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code.
A. The highways or parts of highways described below are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Highway
Direction
of Travel Limits
Station Way Road North From Creek Road to Baltimore
Pike
B. Any person violating Subsection A is guilty of a summary offense under
Section 3308(b) of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code and shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine and costs as provided by the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 125-10 CHADDS FORD CODE § 125-13
1:350
§ 125-13. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle or tractor to make a
U-turn on any of the highways or parts thereof described below:
Name of Highway Location
(Reserved)
§ 125-14. Turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the intersections described below:
Name of Highway
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn At Intersection Of
(Reserved)
§ 125-15. Center structures at intersections.
All vehicular traffic shall keep to the right of the following structures or
barriers located in the center of the specified intersections:
Structure On
(Name of Highway) At Intersection Of
(Reserved)
§ 125-16. Through highways.79
The highways described below are hereby established as through highways,
and the operator of every vehicle or tractor upon approaching any such
highway at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where
there are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals) shall
come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any such
through highway:
Name of Highway
Baltimore Pike
Brandywine Drive
Brintons Bridge Road
Creek Road
Bullock Road
Harvey Road
Heyburn Road
Marshall Road
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 125-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-16
1:351
Name of Highway
Baltimore Pike
Oakland Road
Ridge Road
Ring Road
Smith Bridge Road
Webb Road
Wilmington-West Chester Pike
§ 125-17. Stop intersections. [Amended 9-3-1997 by Ord. No. 70D80]
A. The following intersections in Chadds Ford Township (in addition to
intersections with the through highways established by § 125-16) are
established and/or reaffirmed as stop intersections, and official stop
signs shall be erected, or ratified if previously erected, in such a
position as to face traffic approaching the second-named street (the
intersecting or through street) on the first-named street (the stop
street) in the direction or directions indicated for that intersection.
Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the firstnamed
or stop street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall stop
the vehicle as required by Section 3323(b) of the Vehicle Code, and
shall not proceed into or across the second-named or intersecting or
through street until he or she has followed all applicable requirements
of that section of the law.
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Ardmoor Lane Bullock Road South
Atwater Road Webb Road West
Beechwood Circle Ridge Road South
Bellefaire Lane Brintons Bridge Road North
Bullock Road Ring Road East
Bullock Road Creek Road West
Buttonwood Drive Ring Road West
Carnation Lane Harvey Road East
Carriage Path Bullock Road North
Coopers Hawk Lane Ridge Road South
Dogwood Hill Land Ring Road East
Heyburn Road Baltimore Pike North
Heyburn Road Ridge Road North
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 125-16 CHADDS FORD CODE § 125-17
1:352
Stop Street
Intersection or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Heyburn Road Ridge Road South
Heyburn Road Smith Bridge Road South
High Ridge Road Ridge Road South
Hillock Lane Heyburn Road East
Holly Tree Lane Heyburn Road West
Hunters Lane Webb Road North
Kelly Drive Smith Bridge Road South
Longview Drive Summit Drive North
Marshall Road Wilmington-West
Chester Pike
West
Oakland Road Brintons Bridge Road North
Oakland Road Harvey Road North
Oakland Road Harvey Road South
Oakland Road Webb Road North
Oakland Road Webb Road South
Pheasant Lane Ridge Road South
Ravens Drive Ridge Road North
Ridings Boulevard Ridge Road North
Ridings Way Ridings Way East
Ridings Way Ridings Way West
South Rocky Hill Road Ridge Road South
Southview Path Wilderness Way West
Spring Lane Harvey Road East
Summit Drive Wilmington-West
Chester Pike
East
Talley Ho Drive Heyburn Road East
Talley Ho Drive Ridge Road South
Top of the Oaks Heyburn Road West
Walnut Ridge Road High Ridge Road South
Wilderness Way Smith Bridge Road South
Wilderness Way Southview Path South
Woodland Drive (north) Wilmington-West
Chester Pike
West
Woodland Drive (south) Wilmington-West
Chester Pike
West
§ 125-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-17
1:353
§ 125-18. Yield intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established as yield right-ofway
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named highway as to face traffic approaching the secondnamed
highway in the direction or directions indicated. All vehicles and
tractors approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway,
in the direction or directions indicated, shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the second-named highway
so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time that the
operator of such vehicle or tractor is moving across or within such
intersection.
Yield Sign On
Direction of
Travel At Intersection Of
(Reserved)
§ 125-19. No-passing zones.
The zones described below are hereby established as no-passing zones, and
it shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to pass any other vehicle
which is proceeding in the same direction:
Name of Highway Limits
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25, or such higher amount
established by the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101
et seq., and costs.
§ 125-17 CHADDS FORD CODE § 125-19
1:354
Chapter 126
VEGETATION, RESTRICTED
§ 126-1. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter are enacted to control the planting, growing
or cultivating of bamboo in Chadds Ford Township so as to prevent the
spread of noxious vegetation and the trespass of noxious vegetation onto
public and private properties and onto public rights-of-way. Therefore, it is
the intent of this chapter to ensure that the vegetations named herein do
not become a threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 126-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PLANT — A living organism exemplified by trees, flowers, grasses, shrubs,
herbs, mosses, ferns, et al. The word "plant" shall be understood to mean
any and all parts of a plant, including stem and stalk, leaves, seed pods,
flowers and fruit, and roots.
RESTRICTED VEGETATION — Any plant that is determined by the Chadds
Ford Township Board of Supervisors or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
to be injurious to public health, crops, livestock, agricultural land or other
property. Such vegetation is listed in § 126-3.
§ 126-3. Vegetations restricted.
§ 126-4. Regulations governing running bamboo.
A. All species of running bamboo, including Acidosasa, Arundinaria,
Bashania, Brachystachyum, Chimonobambusa, Gelidocalamus,
Indocalamus, Indosasa, Ochlandra, Phyllostachys, Pleioblastus,
Pseudosasa, Sasa, Sasaella, Semiarundinaria, Shibataea, and
Sinobambusa.
A. No person, firm, corporation, property owner, or tenant shall plant,
cause to grow or cultivate any running bamboo on any lot or parcel of
ground, subject to the following exceptions:
(1) The root system of the running bamboo plants is entirely contained
within an aboveground planter, barrel or other container of such
design, material and location as to prevent the spread of the
running bamboo root system beyond the confines of the container
in which it is contained; or
(2) The root system is planted in the ground but is entirely contained
within a barrier, constructed in accordance with the following
specifications:
§ 125-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-4
1:355
§ 126-5. Complaint; notice; order for removal and compliance.
(a) The barrier itself shall be composed of a high-density
polypropylene or polyethylene, with a thickness of at least 40
mils;
(b) The barrier shall be secured and joined together by stainless
steel clamps or stainless steel closure strips designed to be
used with such barriers;
(c) The barrier shall be installed at least 30 inches deep;
(d) At least three inches of the barrier must protrude above
ground level around the entire perimeter of the bamboo;
(e) The barrier shall slant outward from bottom to top.
(3) Whether planted or growing in a container, as described herein, all
bamboo plants shall be located, controlled and maintained so that
no part of the plant is closer than 10 feet from any public right-ofway
or property line.
B. The owner of any property in Chadds Ford Township on which running
bamboo is growing in violation of § 126-4A(3) shall remove all parts of
the running plant(s) that are closer than 10 feet from any public rightof-
way or property line. If the violation is the result of encroachment of
the root system, the owner of the property shall remove all running
bamboo plant(s) from the property or shall install the barrier described
in § 126-4A(2).
A. Whenever a complaint is received by the Township regarding the
encroachment of any restricted vegetation onto a public right-of-way
and/or neighboring property, or whenever the Township on its own
observations and inspections determines that there is an encroachment
of restricted vegetation onto a public right-of-way, the Township shall
take the necessary steps to verify that a violation of this chapter has
occurred. If a violation has occurred, the Township shall give notice to
the landowner to control and/or remove the offending restricted
vegetation plant.
(1) The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, properly addressed and with sufficient postage. Notice
by certified mail shall be deemed complete on the date of personal
delivery. If the certified mail is marked "refused," "unclaimed" or
otherwise undeliverable by the United States Postal Service, notice
will be sent by regular mail and by posting the notice on the
property.
(2) The notice shall specify the nature of the violation.
(3) The notice shall state specifically what must be done by the
responsible party to correct the violation and come into compliance
§ 126-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 126-5
1:356
§ 126-6. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner or possessor of a property determined by any court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter shall be subject to pay a
fine of $100 per day for each day that the violation persists as well as court
costs, legal fees and any other fees incurred by the Township to enforce this
chapter against the responsible party. Each day of a continuing violation
shall constitute a separate offense, for which a separate fine shall be levied.
Chapter 129
WATER CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 59.
§ 129-1. General policy and applicability.
No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, governmental, or public
building or structure of any kind which is constructed or remodeled and in
which plumbing, water piping or water fixtures are to be installed, extended
or altered in any way, and for which construction a permit is required to
be obtained from the Township of Chadds Ford unless the new, extended
or altered plumbing, water piping and other water using fixtures therein
conform to the requirements and standards of § 129-2 of this chapter. The
provisions of this chapter shall apply to any such building or structure for
which such a building permit is issued, or would otherwise be required to
be issued but for such an exemption, on or after the date of adoption.
§ 129-2. Performance standards for plumbing fixtures and fittings.
with this chapter. The notice shall specify, as appropriate, the
practices and processes to be followed and shall set a time frame
for compliance.
(4) The notice shall state that failure to comply with the compliance
time frame will result in the removal of the offending vegetation by
the Township and that the responsible party will be billed for all
costs incurred by the Township. The Township may, in its
discretion, elect to issue a citation daily until such time as the
offending restricted vegetation or root system is removed, and the
notice should so advise the responsible party.
(5) Compliance with the provisions of the notice shall be subject to the
inspection of the Chadds Ford Township Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 126-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-2
1:357
§ 129-3. Special provisions.
§ 129-4. Official review and modification.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, modify, add to, or remove
from the standards and restrictions herein.
§ 129-5. Violations and penalties.81
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by the Township before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not
more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees,
incurred by the Township in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment
shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by
A. Water closets and associated flushing mechanisms. The water
consumption of water closets shall not exceed an average of 1.6 gallons
per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80 psi. The
fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements of the
ANSI A112.19.2M and ANSI A112.19.6M.
B. Urinals and associated flushing mechanisms. Urinal water consumption
shall not exceed an average of 1.5 gallons per flush cycle over a range
of test pressures from 20 to 80 psi. The fixtures shall perform in
accordance with the test requirements of ANSI A112.19.2M and ANSI
A112.19.6M.
C. Showerheads. Showerhead discharge rates shall not exceed 3.0 gallons
of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80 psi.
The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements of
ANSI A112.18.1M.
D. Faucets. Sink and lavatory faucet discharge rates shall not exceed 3.0
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
psi. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements
of ANSI A112.18.1M.
A. Special purpose equipment. The performance standards of § 129-2 shall
not apply to fixtures and fittings such as emergency showers, aspirator
faucets, and blowout fixtures that, in order to perform a specialized
function, cannot meet the specified standards.
B. Exemptions. Any person(s) may apply to Chadds Ford Township for an
exemption to the terms of this chapter, which may be granted by the
Board of Supervisors, upon proof that some other device, system or
procedure will save as much or more water as those set forth herein, or
that those set forth herein cannot be complied with, without undue
hardship.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 129-2 CHADDS FORD CODE § 129-5
1:358
the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to
the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
Chapter 135
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 39.
Construction codes — See Ch. 59.
Heliports and helistops — See Ch. 77.
Massage establishments — See Ch. 87.
Noise — See Ch. 89.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 105.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 110.
§ 129-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129-5
1:359

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 135-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Chadds Ford Township
Zoning Ordinance," as amended.
§ 135-2. Purpose.
The zoning regulations and districts set forth in this chapter are designed
to advance the following purposes of Chadds Ford Township:
§ 135-3. Community development objectives.
The community development objectives of Chadds Ford Township are as
follows:
A. To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical
community development, proper density of population, emergency
management preparedness and operations, provision of adequate light
and air, and public requirements such as vehicle parking and loading
space, transportation, sewage, water, recreational facilities, and public
grounds; the provision of a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for
domestic, commercial, agricultural or industrial use, and other public
requirements; as well as preservation of the natural, scenic and historic
values in the environment and preservation of forests, wetlands,
aquifers and floodplains.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life
or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
C. To accommodate reasonable overall community growth, including
population and employment growth, and opportunities for development
of a variety of residential dwelling types and nonresidential uses.
A. Instill order in the growth and development of the Township.
B. Recognize land as a valuable resource and allocate its uses judiciously
so that it may be conserved, not wasted.
C. Maximize the opportunity for range of choice in residential living
arrangements.
D. Promote sound economic development to attain a stable future tax
base.
E. Minimize the conflict between residential and other types of land use.
F. Develop sound financial planning.
§ 135-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-3
1:361
G. Recognize that the quality and character of future residential
development, as well as other suburban development, is directly related
to the improvement and extension of various public utilities.
H. Develop a secondary highway system of local roads to provide
convenient internal circulation and access to primary roads, and at the
same time consider the major highway system and its possible effects
upon the Township.
I. Protect and conserve the unique and interesting natural and historic
areas which are important to the community and offer cultural
opportunities and enrichment to the people of the Township and the
region.
§ 135-3 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-3
1:362
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 135-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meaning herein indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the main building
on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the main
building.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
AGRICULTURE — The cultivating of the soil, the raising of livestock
and poultry and the harvesting of the products of the soil, including
horticulture and forestry but excluding commercial greenhouses.
ALLEY — A right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the
side or rear of two or more lots.
ALTERATION — Any change in the exterior or structural portions of
a building; any change to or in a building which would alter its use
classification; or any change which would substantially alter the type or
method of sewage disposal system.
ANTENNA — Any device or mechanism used in the collection,
transmitting, routing or receiving of telecommunications transmissions,
radio signals or radio frequency energy, including, but not limited
to, use by or in the provision of wireless communications, cellular
communications, personal communication services, and/or electronic
networking.
ANTENNA HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the base
of an antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the
antenna support structure, including any antenna affixed thereto. If
the antenna support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average
between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the
antenna height.82
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application
for subdivision and/or land development, as hereinafter defined,
including his heirs, successors, assigns and grantees.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that provides residents
the assistance to age in place, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in which food, shelter and personal assistance or
supervision are provided for four or more persons who do not require
the services in, or of, a nursing home, but who do, because of their age
or disability, require assistance or supervision in matters such as dress,
82.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “antenna support structure,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 152.
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:363
bathing, diet, evacuation of a residence in the event of emergency or
assistance with medication. This facility may additionally include indoor
ancillary uses when provided for the exclusive use of the residents,
staff and guests (i.e., common dining facilities, social, recreation and
exercise facilities, beauty salon, etc.).[Added 8-5-2015 by Ord. No.
134]
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent change of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundredyear
flood" or "one-percent annual chance flood").[Added 8-26-2015
by Ord. No. 140]
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a
base flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually
expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).[Added 8-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 140]
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a onepercent
or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.[Added 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — A building or group of buildings
containing less than 10 guest rooms, converted or designed for the
temporary lodging of transient guests, provided that no room shall have
cooking facilities of any kind. Such establishments shall furnish to the
occupants lodging services, such as maid service and the furnishing
and laundering of linen, and typically do provide accessory eating
and drinking facilities for serving morning breakfast and/or afternoon
tea. Such establishments are typically converted from single-family
residences, schools, churches and the like, and are occupied by
resident innkeepers.
BILLBOARDS and OFF-PREMISES SIGNS — Any sign, as defined
herein, which advertises an establishment, person, activity, product,
event or service which is unrelated to or not available on the premises
where the sign is located. Each face of a billboard shall constitute a
separate billboard.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
BOARD — The Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.83
This facility shall not include outdoor ancillary uses such as athletic
fields, athletic courts, and/or game areas. Outdoor passive uses
may be allowed as permitted by conditional use.
(1)
Assisted living residences do not include facilities which provide
any type of goods or services of any kind to any persons not then
resident at the facility.
(2)
§ 135-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-4
1:364
BUFFER AREA — An area as regulated by § 135-160 adjacent to a
property boundary which is landscaped and maintained for a width as
required in certain districts of this chapter, and in a manner as required
in § 135-161.
BUFFER PLANTING STRIP — A strip of land within the required buffer
area which shall be landscaped and maintained for a width as required
in certain districts of this chapter, and in a manner as required in
§ 135-161.
BUILDING — Any roofed structure supported by walls or columns
which is intended or used for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any
individual(s), animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any
kind. Included shall be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used
for human habitation.
BUILDING LINE — That line beyond which no portion of a structure or
building may be erected toward the sides, front or rear of any lot. The
building line shall coincide with the internal measurements of the open
spaces for the front, side and rear yards.84
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A statement signed by the Code
Enforcement Officer setting forth that a building, structure or use
legally complies with this chapter and other applicable codes and
regulations and that the same may be used for the purposes stated
therein.
CERTIFIED HISTORIC DISTRICT — A historic district which has been
delineated by Chadds Ford Township and certified for historical
significance by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission in
accordance with Act 167.
CERTIFIED HISTORIC STRUCTURE — A building or structure
identified by Chadds Ford Township and listed in the National Register
of Historic Places or located within a registered historic district and
certified by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of the Interior as
being of historical significance to the district.
COLLOCATION — The mounting of one or more antennas on an existing
tower, or on any structure, that has been approved by the Township to
support at least one antenna.[Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 152]
COMMERCIAL RECREATION FACILITY — A facility operated as a
business, and open to the public for a fee, for the purposes of health
and fitness, exercise, racquetball, swimming and like sports and
activities.[Added 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 151]
83.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "Board of Historical and Architectural Review,"
which immediately followed this definition, was amended 9-1-2010 by Ord. No. 64-R. See
now the definition of "HARB."
84.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “cell site,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 152.
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:365
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is registered by the state
for commercial use or ostensibly displays a commercial related identity
by virtue of lettering, signs, ladder racks, tool racks, and the like.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — As required in a planned residential
development, that area of land and water to be maintained for the use
and enjoyment of the residents of the planned residential development.
It shall consist of landscaped or natural terrain, including lakes and
streams, and may include such buildings as are necessary to fulfill
its permitted functions, but the area of common open space shall not
include street rights-of-way, off-street parking areas required for
residential or other uses permitted by this chapter, and areas set aside
for public facilities.
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any antenna and related equipment
attached to a wireless support structure. A communications antenna
shall not include support structures or any related equipment that is
mounted to the ground or at ground level.[Added 8-2-2017 by Ord.
No. 152]
COMMUNICATIONS APPLICANT (APPLICANT) — Any entity or person
that applies for a wireless communications facility building permit,
zoning approval and/or permission to use the public right-of-way,
Township-owned land, or other property.[Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No.
152]
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure that is constructed for
the primary purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including,
but not limited to, self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and
monopoles. A "tower" as defined herein shall not include towers and
supportive structures for amateur purposes, including but not limited
to ham and citizens band radios maintained and/or utilized by federally
licensed amateur radio operators.[Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 152]
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building which houses various community
activities through meeting rooms, assembly rooms, and areas for
dining, recreation, fitness and the like.
COMMUNITY FACILITIES — Facilities which serve to support the
needs of the residents of the planned residential development, such
as community centers, outdoor recreation areas, and maintenance
buildings.
COMMUNITY SEWER — A community sewage disposal system
consisting of approved sanitary sewage disposal structures which serve
more than one lot or one building, which along with its appurtenant
facilities is administered and maintained by an organization or other
entity having the right and obligation to administer and maintain such
system in accordance with federal, state, county and Township
regulations.
COMMUNITY WATER — A community water supply system consisting
of a well or series thereof with facilities serving more than one lot or
one building, which along with its appurtenant facilities is administered
§ 135-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-4
1:366
and maintained by an organization or other entity having the right and
obligation to administer and maintain such system in accordance with
federal, state, county and Township regulations.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent
the passage of water and water vapor.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan for Chadds Ford
Township.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is not appropriate to a particular
zoning district as a whole, but which may be suitable in certain
locations within the district only when specific standards, criteria, and
conditions are met in accordance with § 135-164 herein. Conditional
uses, and applications for permits therefor, are allowed or denied by
the Board of Supervisors after recommendations are provided by the
Planning Commission.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of manufactured homes.
CONTIGUOUS LOTS — Contiguous lots shall have a common property
line of 100% of one side of the smaller tract, which common property
line shall not be less than 50 feet. Contiguous lots shall not be
separated by a public street or way.[Added 6-7-2017 by Ord. No.
151]
CONTINUOUS VISUAL BUFFER — A visually impenetrable screen
created through the effective use of plant materials, fencing, walls and/
or earthen berms.
CONTRIBUTING RESOURCE(S) — A resource in a registered historic
district which is filed with the National Register as supporting the
district's historical significance through location, design, setting,
workmanship, feeling and association.
CRT — Cathode ray tube.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, equitable owner, or authorized agent of
such landowner who makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land
or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
the placement of manufactured homes, streets, and other paving,
utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging, or drilling
operations and the subdivision of land.
DWELLING or DWELLING UNIT — A building or entirely self-contained
portion thereof containing complete housekeeping facilities for
occupancy by only one family (including any domestic employees living
or employed on the premises), with no enclosed space (other than
vestibules, entrance or other hallways or porches) in common with any
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:367
other dwelling unit. Dwellings or dwelling units may be classified, but
not limited to the following:[Added 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 151]
DYNAMIC MESSAGE DISPLAY — A sign incorporating LCD, LED,
plasma, CRT, pixelized lights, other video-like displays which are used
to change sign messaging on a regular basis.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 64-S]
ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST — A term defined by the FCC in
its October 2014 Report and Order, as amended. More specifically,
any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that
does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower
or base station, involving: i) collocation of new transmission or related
equipment; ii) removal of transmission or related equipment; or iii)
replacement of transmission or related equipment.[Added 8-2-2017
by Ord. No. 152]
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of any existing
building, an increase in size of another existing structure, or an
increase in that portion of the tract of land occupied by an existing use.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building having only one
dwelling unit from ground to roof, independent outside access and
open spaces on all sides.
(1)
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED (TWIN) — A building containing
two dwelling units, separated by a party wall, each having
independent outside access and open space on three sides.
(2)
TWO-FAMILY DETACHED — A building containing two dwelling
units from ground to roof, each of which has independent outside
access and open space on all sides.
(3)
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED (TOWNHOUSE) — A building
containing at least three but not more than six dwelling units, each
of which is separated by a party wall on opposite sides, and each of
which has only one dwelling unit from ground to roof, independent
outside access, not more than two walls in common with adjoining
units and open areas to the front and rear (internal units) or front,
rear and one side (end units). Each unit can be referred to as a
single-family attached unit, particularly when separately owned.
(4)
MULTIFAMILY — A building containing three or more dwelling
units, including townhouses (single-family attached) and
apartments.
(5)
APARTMENT — A building containing three or more dwelling units
separated by party walls, and which may have more than one
dwelling unit from ground to roof, common outside accesses and
hallways.
(6)
§ 135-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-4
1:368
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS — The performance standards set forth
in § 135-162 pertaining to environmental quality and environmental
degradation.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage;
the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FAMILY[Added 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 151] —
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.[Added 8-2-2017 by
Ord. No. 152]
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.[Added 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles,
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.[Added 8-26-2015
by Ord. No. 140]
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river, or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT VIOLATION — The failure of a structure
or other development to be fully compliant with the community's
floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development
without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence
of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3),
One or more individuals living together in a dwelling unit as a
single housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises
when said individuals are related by blood, marriage, foster
relationship, or adoption; or
(1)
Not more than three unrelated individuals living together in a
dwelling unit as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and doing
their cooking on the premises; or
(2)
A group of individuals with disabilities (as defined by applicable
law) living together as the functional equivalent of a family and
entitled to a reasonable accommodation to allow the equal
opportunity to use or occupy a dwelling under applicable law.
(3)
This definition does not include or apply to the residents or
employees of a club, fraternity house, lodge, or lodging house,
boardinghouse or rooming house or other facility in which lodging
is provided for compensation.
(4)
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:369
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.[Added 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.[Amended 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
FORMAL FILING — The filing of an application for tentative or final
plan approval, along with the required number of copies and amount of
fees, at least 10 days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly public
meeting of the Board of Supervisors.
FRONT STREET — The public street or road or private street or road
over which two or more dominant estates have the right-of-way, upon
which a lot abuts. If a plot abuts on more than one street, it means the
one upon which the main building fronts or it is wished to have it front.
GARAGE —
GREEN AREA — The area of a lot which is not covered by impervious
surfaces, and which is preserved in its natural vegetated state and/or is
landscaped with plant materials and other natural materials.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
the several floors of a building, as the case may be, measured from
the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the center line of a wall
separating two buildings, but not including interior parking spaces,
loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-to-ceiling
height is less than six feet.
HARB — Historical and Architectural Review Board; The board,
referred to as the "HARB," which conducts reviews of proposed
building construction and/or alteration work within the historic
districts, and performs other duties as set forth in this
chapter.[Amended 9-1-2010 by Ord. No. 64-R]
PRIVATE GARAGE — A building used for storage of one or more
automobiles owned and used by the owner or tenant of the lot on
which it is erected for a purpose accessory to the use of the lot.
(1)
MINOR GARAGE — A building not a private garage, one story in
height, used for the storage of automobiles and not used for making
repairs thereto.
(2)
PUBLIC GARAGE — A building other than a private or minor
garage, one or more stories in height, used for the storage,
maintenance and repair of automobiles.
(3)
§ 135-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-4
1:370
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The Chadds Ford Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
HEIGHT OF A TOWER — The vertical distance measured from the
ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on a tower,
including antennas mounted on the tower and any other
appurtenances.[Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 152]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — A vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the finished grade along the exterior walls of the
structure to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof, or
to the mean height between the eaves and the ridge in the case of a
pitched roof.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.[Added 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
HISTORIC RESOURCE(S) — All certified buildings, sites and structures
within the boundaries of the historic overlay districts.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE(S) — Any structure that is:
HOTEL or MOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing 10 or
more guest rooms, or a group of such buildings especially designed for
the temporary lodging of transient guests, provided that no room shall
have cooking facilities of any kind. Such establishment shall furnish to
the occupants customary hotel services such as maid service, and the
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:371
furnishing and laundering of linen. Eating and drinking facilities may
be accessory to the hotel or motel.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to
enforce floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified
as the special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and
Flood Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by
the community. See § 135-95A and B for the specifics on what areas
the community has included in the identified floodplain area.[Amended
8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which has materials that do not
normally absorb rainfall, such as buildings, streets, parking areas and
walks, and similar surfaces and structures.
INTERNAL STREET — As applied in the mobile home park provisions,
a street privately owned, constructed and maintained, which functions
only to provide direct access to individual mobile home lots.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The record holder of legal title to land; the rightful
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition); a lessee if he is authorized
expressly under the lease to exercise the rights of the owner, of the
land which is the subject of an application for subdivision and/or land
development.
LANDSCAPED AREA — That portion of a tract or lot in which plantings
have been installed in accordance with the special provisions for
landscaping in § 135-161. The landscaped area includes the buffer
planting strip, as well as plantings which serve a functional and/or
aesthetic purpose when located around and between buildings, roads,
parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, sitting areas, service or
maintenance structures, courtyards, and the like.
LCD — Liquid crystal display.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots or tracts
of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure;
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
§ 135-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-4
1:372
LED — Light emitting diode.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
LOT — An area of land established by plat or otherwise as permitted
by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit and which
conforms to the provisions of this chapter and all other Township
ordinances, codes and regulations.[Amended 6-7-2017 by Ord. No.
151]
LOT AREA — The area of land contained within the property lines of a
parcel of land, excluding the following features (NOTE: This definition
shall apply equally to all districts.):[Amended 10-8-2015 by Ord. No.
141]
Feature
Percent of Feature to be
Excluded
Area within any utility easements
and utility rights-of-way
100%
Area within road rights-of-way or
easements for public or private
access
100%
Area within one-hundred-year
floodplains
85%
Area of watercourses and surface
water bodies
85%
Area within wetlands 85%
Area of very steep slopes 70%
Area within wetland/watercourse
margins
50%
LOT LINE — A property boundary line of any lot held in single and
separate ownership. In the case of any lot abutting a street, including
shared driveways, the lot line for such portion of the lot as abuts such
street, including shared driveways, shall be deemed to be the same as
the street line, and shall not be the center line of the street, or any other
line within the street line.[Added 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 151]
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including the basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest
floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of applicable nonelevation design requirements of
this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy, office, or place or assembly,
contained in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which
arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor
and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed
so that it may be used with or without a permanent foundation. The
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:373
term includes park trailers, travel trailers, and recreational and other
similar vehicles which are placed on site for more than 180 consecutive
days.[Amended 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of
two or more manufactured homes for nontransient use.
MESSAGE DISPLAY CYCLE — That unit of time in which one complete
message is displayed upon a sign incorporating a dynamic message
display.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any required means of egress, or
rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration
of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer,
drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric
wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general
safety.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family detached dwelling
intended for permanent occupancy contained in one unit, or in two
units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home, which is leased by the mobile home park owner to the occupants
of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land which
has been so designated and improved that it contains two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual lot which has been
reserved for the placement of the mobile home, appurtenant structures
or additions.
MODULAR SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling
which is detached and intended for occupancy by one family and is
constructed using prefabricated parts or modules that are assembled to
form the dwelling unit.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — A building or place of business
where gasoline and automobile accessories are dispensed directly to
the motor vehicle trade, and/or where automotive repair service may be
rendered.
§ 135-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-4
1:374
NATIONAL REGISTER — The National Register of Historic Places, a
list maintained by the Secretary of the Interior composed of buildings,
sites, structures, objects and districts of national, state or local
significance in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering
and culture.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of the Floodplain
Management Ordinance85 and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures. Any construction started after September 5, 1979,
and before the effective start date of the Floodplain Management
Ordinance is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit
was issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days of
permit issuance.[Amended 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or animals
or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or
physiological effect on humans or animals.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent
of use provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or
hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited
to, nonconforming signs and buildings.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning
ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance
or amendment, or prior to the application of such ordinance or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
OFFICE BUILDING — A building designated or used primarily for
office purposes, no part of which is used for manufacturing or dwelling
purposes.
ONE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A house accommodating but
a single domestic or social body and having no party wall or walls in
common with an adjacent house or houses, provided that in a business
district a single-family dwelling may be attached to a store or other
permitted business use.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely
to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of
occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
85.Editor's Note: See Art. XV, Floodplain Conservation District.
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:375
OUTDOOR DINING — Any outdoor eating area with waitressed food
service to more than 12 seats accessory to a restaurant that has indoor
seating.[Added 11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 147]
PARCEL — See "lot" definition.[Added 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 151]
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space, available for the parking
of one motor vehicle, exclusive of passageways, driveways or other
means of circulation or access. A parking space shall be considered an
impervious surface, and may include either covered garage space(s) or
uncovered space located off the street right-of-way. The size of parking
spaces shall be as required in this chapter.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
PLAN — The proposal for development of a planned residential
development, including a plan of subdivision, all covenants, grants
of easement and other conditions relating to use, location and bulk
of buildings, density of development, common open space and public
facilities and such other information as required hereunder.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a
number of dwelling units, or combination of residential and
nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not
correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling, or use, density, or
intensity, lot coverage and required open space to the regulations
established in any one district created, from time to time, under the
provisions of this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Chadds Ford Township Planning
Commission.
PLASMA — A video display technology that relies upon the electric
excitation of phosphors to emit light.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No.
64-S]
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or
after the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated
September 5, 1979, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required
to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program.[Added 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974,
or before the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM),
dated September 5, 1979, whichever is later, and, as such, would not
be required to be compliant with the regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program.[Added 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
§ 135-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-4
1:376
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Board of Supervisors or Planning Commission, intended to
inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance
with this chapter.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
PUBLIC SEWER (PUBLIC SEWERAGE SYSTEM) — An off-site system in
which sewerage is collected, conveyed, treated and disposed by means
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection;
in accordance with a sewage facilities plan approved by the Township;
and administered, operated and maintained by a governmental agency,
authority or commission.
PUBLIC STREET OR WAY — A paved accessway which is manifest in
one or more of the following: all state roads and highways; all dedicated
roads maintained by the Township; all roads for which the offer of a
deed of dedication has been made; and all private roads over which the
general public has the right of access.
PUBLIC WATER (PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM) — An off-site system in
which water is distributed and supplied by means approved by the state
and the Township, and administered, operated and maintained by an
organization which is regulated by a governmental agency, authority or
commission.
RECREATION[Added 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 151] —
ACTIVE RECREATION — Recreational activities that involve
athletic and/or rigorous physical exertion. Such activities involve
individual or team sports, running, biking, boating/canoeing,
swimming and horseback riding.
(1)
ACTIVE RECREATION FACILITY — A recreational area and
supporting infrastructure designed specifically for active
recreation that can have a significant impact on the surrounding
environment. Such facilities generally require development and
alteration of an area, including the construction of supporting
infrastructure. Active recreation facilities include, but are not
limited to, football fields, baseball fields, basketball courts, soccer
fields, swimming pools, golf courses, playgrounds, tennis courts,
skating and roller rinks. Active recreation facilities do not include
community centers or commercial recreation facilities.
(2)
PASSIVE RECREATION — Recreational activities that are low
impact, usually quiet and not rigorously athletic. Such activities
(3)
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:377
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis; not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest
horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light-duty truck; not designed for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use.
REGISTERED HISTORIC DISTRICT — A historic district listed in the
National Register of Historic Places, or a state or local historic district
whose status has been certified by the Secretary of the Interior and
which is certified as meeting substantially all the requirements for
National Register listing.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE)
or estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus
a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.[Amended 8-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 140]
REHABILITATION — The process of returning a property to a state of
utility through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient
contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the
property which are significant to its historical, architectural and
cultural values.
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incidental
to, or necessary for, the operation of a tower or antenna. By way of
illustration, not limitation, related equipment includes generators and
base stations.[Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 152]
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.[Added 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food and drink are prepared,
offered for sale to customers, and/or served by waiters and/or
waitresses primarily for consumption on the premises and within the
building.[Added 11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 147]
RETIREMENT RESIDENCE — A dwelling unit in a retirement residence
community which may be in the form of a single-family detached
conventional dwelling, a modular detached or attached dwelling, or
may include, but are not limited to, walking, picnicking, bird
watching and wildlife observation, and fishing.
PASSIVE RECREATION FACILITY — An open space site supporting
passive recreation activities that generally requires little or no
development or alteration of the site. Passive recreation facilities
include, but are not limited to, trails for walking/jogging, nature
trails, wildlife observation areas, public gardens, memorial parks
and picnic areas.
(4)
§ 135-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-4
1:378
other type of dwelling which meets the Township building code
requirements.86
RETIREMENT RESIDENCE COMMUNITY — A planned community that
is composed of dwelling units which are occupied by adult individuals
or families of a particular age group and family size that includes
facilities to meet various recreational and personal service needs of the
residents. Such communities are typically inhabited by adult individuals
or families without children, and must have at least one householder
of the age of 55 years or older in a minimum of 80% of the dwelling
units.[Amended 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 151]
SERVICE OR RECREATION BUILDING — A structure housing
operational, office, recreational, maintenance, and other facilities in a
mobile home park built to conform to local standards.
SEWER CONNECTION — The sewer connection of a mobile home
consists of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the drain outlet
of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE — The sewer riser pipe of a mobile home is that
portion of the sewer lateral which extends vertically to the ground
elevation and terminates at each mobile home space.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure or part thereof, or
any device attached, painted or represented directly or indirectly on a
structure or other surface, that shall display or include any letter, work,
insignia, flag, or representation, used as, or which is in the nature of,
an advertisement, announcement, visual communication, direction, or
is designed to attract the eye, or bring the subject to the attention of
the public. Flags of the United States of America, the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, the County of Delaware or Chadds Ford Township, no
larger than those flying at the county seat, signs inside a building which
are not visible from a public right-of-way or adjoining property, and
cornerstones built into or attached to a wall of a building are excluded.
In addition to the above, internally lighted building decoration, e.g.,
lighted building wrap, shall be considered to be an illuminated sign (see
"sign, illuminated").
SIGN, ACCESSORY — Any sign which specifically relates to the
permitted use of the premises on which said sign is erected and which
serves as a further description of products available to, or services
provided for, the general public.
SIGN AREA —
For signs not involving illuminated facades, translucent awnings
or translucent weather covers: The area of such a sign shall be
construed to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying
designs and symbols, but not including any supporting framework
and bracing which are incidental to the display itself. Where the
(1)
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 59, Construction Codes.
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:379
SIGN, CANOPY OR AWNING — Any sign that is part of, hangs from,
is attached to, painted on or affixed to a structure made of cloth,
canvas, metal, wood, plastic, or similar material, over a door, entrance,
window or outdoor service area. Such signs may or may not be fixed
or equipped with a mechanism for raising and holding an awning in a
retracted position against the building.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No.
64-S]
SIGN, FLASHING — A sign, the illumination of which is not kept
constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits sudden
or marked changes in lighting effects. Illuminated signs which indicate
the time, temperature, or date information shall not be considered
flashing signs.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign not attached to a building. This
category includes signs with any support structure independent of a
building, including but not limited to columns, poles, posts or masonry
structures.
SIGN, GROUND — Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or
supported by the ground independent of any structure.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign designed to give forth artificial light
directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a source
of light within such sign or a sign with illumination derived from an
external artificial source so arranged that no direct rays of light are
projected from such artificial source to areas other than the sign being
illuminated. Internally lighted building decoration, e.g., lighted building
wrap, shall be considered an illuminated sign.
SIGN, INCIDENTAL — A sign providing information about specific
hours of operation, ownership, etc., as defined fully in the section
covering such signs and distinguishing them from accessory signs.
sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to a surface,
building, wall or window, the area shall be considered to be that
of the smallest rectangle, including the sign background, which
encompasses all of the letters and symbols, including all enclosed
and open areas of the background.
For signs involving illuminated facades, translucent awnings, or
translucent weather covers: When lettering, wording, logos, or
accompanying designs or symbols are attached to or displayed
from or with illuminated facades, translucent awnings, or
translucent weather covers, in addition to the area described in
Subsection (1) above, the entire illuminated structure shall also be
considered to be sign area.
(2)
For internally lighted building decoration, e.g., lighted building
wrap: In the case of internally lighted building decoration, e.g.,
lighted building wrap, the sign area shall be deemed to be the
greater of the actual square footage of said decoration or one
square foot per linear foot of said decoration.
(3)
§ 135-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-4
1:380
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, ON-PREMISES — A sign relating in its subject matter to the
premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations,
services, or activities on the premises. On-premises signs do not include
signs erected by outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the
outdoor advertising business.
SIGN, PARALLEL — A sign which is mounted parallel to a wall or other
vertical building surface, not extending beyond the edge of any wall or
other surface to which it is mounted and not projecting more than 15
inches from the wall surface.
SIGN, POLE — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other
support.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign which is attached directly to the structure
wall and which extends more than 15 inches from the face of such wall.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the
premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign designed and designated for use during
a specific time period. Such sign may require a permit under the
circumstances set forth in Article XVIII.
SIGN, WINDOW — A temporary or permanent accessory sign which is
oriented to the public right-of-way, is legible to persons in vehicles, and
is located on the outside or inside of a window to direct attention to an
activity conducted on the same lot.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of property by
any person, which ownership is separate and distinct from that of any
adjoining property.
SITE — A tract of land, or a combination of contiguous lots on a tract
which form an area for a development project.
SLOPE, STEEP — Those areas of land which are characterized by a
change in elevation of 15% up to 25% based on three consecutive
two-foot contours, which is six cumulative vertical feet of grade
change.[Added 10-8-2015 by Ord. No. 141]
SLOPE, VERY STEEP — Those areas of land which are characterized
by a change in elevation in excess of 25% based on three consecutive
two-foot contours, which is six cumulative vertical feet of grade
change.[Amended 10-8-2015 by Ord. No. 141]
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:381
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.[Added
8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit, unless a time extension
is granted, in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The "actual
start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start
of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.[Added 8-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 140]
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications facilities which render them more visually appealing
or blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or visual
backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally visible to the
casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited to,
architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities
constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, flagpoles, and light
poles.[Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 152]
STORY — That part of a structure included between any floor and the
floor or roof next above. When applied to the permissible height of
buildings, the term "story" shall not include a basement if the basement
is not designated for living quarters and if the floor thereof is more than
five feet below the average ground level.
STREET — A public (dedicated) or private (undedicated) right-of-way,
serving as a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation to furnish
access to abutting lots and used to provide space for installation of
improvements such as sewers, other utilities, street trees and
sidewalks.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the right-of-way
line of a public street, road, or highway legally open, or between a lot
and a privately owned street or road over which the owners or tenants
§ 135-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-4
1:382
of two or more lots, each held in single and separate ownership, have
the right of access.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including but not limited to buildings, sheds,
manufactured homes, and other similar items.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, conveyance or other transfer of
ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
of any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — This term is
defined by the FCC in its October 2014 Report and Order, as amended,
and the Township hereby adopts that definition.[Added 8-2-2017 by
Ord. No. 152]
TELEPHONE CENTRAL OFFICE — A building and its equipment
erected and used for the purpose of facilitating transmission and
exchange of telephone messages between subscribers, and other
business of the telephone company.
Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either:
(a) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored,
before the damage occurred.
(b)
(1)
The term does not, however include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the Code
Enforcement and Zoning Officer and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(a)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure.
(b)
(2)
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:383
TOP OF BANK — That point along either side of a stream at which
the slope change in the natural topography defines a channel capable
of containing the flow in a natural watercourse during normal flow
conditions.
TOURIST CAMP — One or more buildings or structures intended for
the accommodation of transient guests, not including automobile courts
and motels.
TOURIST HOUSE — A single-family dwelling in which overnight
accommodations are offered for transient guests for compensation.
TOWER — Any other pole, telescoping mast, monopole, tower, tripod,
or any other structure to be erected within the Township.87
TOWNSHIP SECRETARY — The Secretary of Chadds Ford Township,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
TRACT — A parcel of land intended for development as a planned
residential development under terms of this chapter. A tract may
consist of one or more lots held in single and separate ownership
at the time of application and developed pursuant to a common plan
by agreement of the owners. The holder of an option or contract to
purchase, a lessee who is authorized by the terms of the lease to
develop the tract with a lease for a remaining term of not less than 40
years, or other persons having an enforceable proprietary interest in
such land shall be deemed owners for the purposes of this chapter.
TRAILER CAMP — A premises designed for and offered to the use
of one or more trailers or other vehicles used for living or sleeping
purposes.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building
code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 through 405, as amended
from time to time, and incorporated herein by reference as the
municipal building code of this municipality, adopted by Chadds Ford
Township to administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101 through
7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
UNIFORMITY RATIO — A measurement that compares the brightest
single location with the darkest single location, upon the face of a sign
or some other designated surface.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
USABLE SITE AREA — The usable site area of a mobile home park is
that portion which is free of water surfaces, wetlands (as defined by
the appropriate federal and state authorities or agencies), floodplains,
severe high water table areas, quarries and slopes over 20%, utility
and other rights-of-way and easements and structures or obstructions
unrelated to the mobile home park usage.
87.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "towers, cellular and wireless towers, facilities and
equipment," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 8-2-2017 by Ord.
No. 152.
§ 135-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-4
1:384
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
WATER CONNECTION — The water connection of a mobile home
consists of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the water riser
pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the mobile
home.
WATERCOURSE — A stream with year-round or substantially yearround
flow, such as a creek, run, river, or like moving water channel.
WATER RISER PIPE — The water riser pipe of a mobile home is that
portion of the water service pipe which extends vertically to the ground
elevation and terminates at the designated point on each mobile home
lot.
WATER SERVICE PIPE — The water service piping of a mobile home
consists of all pipes, fittings, valves, and appurtenances from the water
main of the park distributing system to the water outlet of the
distributing system within the mobile home.
WETLAND — An area with hydric soils that are inundated or saturated
by surface water and/or groundwater which supports hydrophytic
vegetation such as swamps, bogs, marshes and the like, such areas
being regulated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and/or the PA DEP.
WETLAND/WATERCOURSE MARGIN — Any area located within 25
feet of any wetland or any watercourse, measured horizontally on a
line perpendicular to the edge of the wetland or, in the case of a
watercourse, to the edge of the water at bank-full flow.
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves, including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, microwave, satellite, or radio
signals.[Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 152]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — The antennas, nodes,
control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics
and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications
services. This is a general term to refer to a communications tower
and/or communications antenna and/or related equipment.[Added
8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 152]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such
as a communications tower or any other support structure that could
support the placement or installation of a wireless communications
facility, if approved by the Township.[Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No.
152]
YARD —
FRONT YARD — The required open space between the nearest
point of any structure on the lot and the front street.
(1)
§ 135-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-4
1:385
ZHB — Zoning Hearing Board.[Added 9-1-2010 by Ord. No. 64-R]
SIDE YARD — The required open space from the nearest point of
any structure on the lot extending along that portion of the side lot
line along the depth of the lot parallel to the side building line.
(2)
REAR YARD — The required open space from the nearest point of
any structure on the lot extending along that portion of the rear lot
line the width of the lot parallel to the rear building line.
(3)
B. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and vice versa,
and the word "building" includes the word "structure," the word
"street" includes the word "road," etc.
C. Words not defined above shall have the meaning given in the
Municipalities Planning Code;88 Chapter 110, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Code of Chadds Ford Township; or other Township
codes and ordinances; and, if not defined in the aforementioned
documents, the most recent editions of Webster's Unabridged
Dictionary.
88.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 135-4 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-4
1:386
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 135-5. Enumeration of districts. [Amended 10-8-2015 by Ord. No.
141]
For the purposes of this chapter, Chadds Ford Township is hereby divided
into 17 kinds or classes of districts which shall be designated as follows:
R-1 District (Residence)
R-2 District (Residence)
R-A District (Residence-Apartment)
R-M District (Residence-Multifamily)
PRD-1 District (Planned Residential Development-1 Overlay)
PRD-2 District (Planned Residential Development-2 Overlay)
B District (Business)
B-1 District (Business-1)
PBC District (Planned Business Center)
PBC-1 District (Planned Business Center-1)
POC District (Planned Office Center)
LI District (Light Industrial)
Floodplain
Conservation District
T District (Towers and Cellular & Wireless Towers Overlay)
Historic District (Overlay)
BPO District (Baltimore Pike Overlay)
Steep Slope
Conservation District
§ 135-6. District boundaries.
A. The boundary of said districts shall be shown upon the maps which shall
be designated the "Zoning Maps." The said maps and all notations,
references and other things shown thereon shall be part of this
chapter.89
B. The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
either the center lines of streets or railroad rights-of-way, or such lines
extended, or lines parallel thereto. Where figures are shown on the
Zoning Map between a street and a district boundary line, they indicate
that the district boundary line runs parallel to the center line of the
street at a distance therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so
indicated.
89.Editor's Note: The Zoning Maps are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 135-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-6
1:387
C. When a district boundary line divides a lot held in a single and separate
ownership at the time of the adoption of this chapter, the regulation as
to the use in the less restricted district shall extend over the portion of
the lot in the more restricted district a distance of not more than 50 feet
beyond the district boundary line; provided that, in case of a lot other
than a corner lot, the regulation as to use in a less restricted district
may extend a distance more than 50 feet beyond the district boundary
line when authorized as a special exception.
§ 135-6 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-6
1:388
ARTICLE IV
R-1 District (Residence)
§ 135-7. Applicability.
In an R-1 District the following regulations shall apply.
§ 135-8. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
A. One-family detached dwelling.
B. Telephone central office.
C. Educational and religious, but in each case only when authorized as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board and excluding
correctional and penal institutions, schools for mental defectives and
cemeteries.
D. Agricultural uses, barns, chicken houses, corn cribs and other similar
farm outbuildings, provided that no farm building other than a dwelling
or a private garage shall hereafter be erected within 75 feet of any
building used for human occupation, nor within 50 feet of any boundary
line of the property unless located at least 200 feet from the road, in
which case it shall be located at least 25 feet from the nearest boundary
line of the property.
E. The sale of farm products and the erection of a roadside stand for such
purposes, provided that such stand is set back at least 20 feet from the
official road side line of any public road, and nothing may be there
exposed for sale except articles of agriculture raised upon the said
premises.
F. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the above permitted uses, including a private garage. This shall be
understood to include the professional office or studio of a doctor,
dentist, teacher, artist, architect, musician, lawyer, magistrate or
practitioner of a similar character, or rooms used for home occupations,
including dressmaking, millinery, laundry or similar handicrafts; and
provided further that no goods are publicly displayed on the premises
and no sign or advertisement is shown other than a sign not larger than
12 square feet in area, bearing only the name and occupation (words
only) of the practitioner.
G. Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to:
(a) Encourage the preservation of historic buildings by permitting
an alternate use for such historic structures that now exist in
Chadds Ford Township.
§ 135-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-8
1:389
(b) Provide for bed-and-breakfast establishments as an accessory
residential use for single-family detached residences when
permitted by the Chadds Ford Township Board of Supervisors
as a conditional use, permitted as such only when all the
provisions of this subsection are met.
(2) Use regulations. No building or other structure may be used or
occupied as a bed-and-breakfast establishment or similar type of
lodging within Chadds Ford Township unless allowed by the Board
of Supervisors as a conditional use.
(3) Design standards.
(a) A bed-and-breakfast establishment may be located in the R-1
Zoning District restricted to those single-family home
properties meeting all other requirements of this subsection.
(b) The minimum lot size shall be not less than four contiguous
acres owned in fee simple by the owner and operator of the
bed-and-breakfast, who shall be a natural person or persons.
(c) Driveways, parking and loading areas.
[1] A minimum of four improved pervious or impervious offstreet
parking spaces are required. One additional parking
space shall be required for each guest room and one for
each employee, if any.
[2] The access driveway shall be paved.
[3] The minimum parking setback from adjacent property
lines shall be 40 feet. A loading zone shall be provided, and
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
[4] Parking areas shall be provided in the side or rear yard. All
parking areas shall be screened from view of any adjacent
residential use by a completely planted visual barrier
consisting of a double row of evergreen plantings with a
minimum height of six feet after planting and placed no
more than 15 feet apart. The required plantings shall be
staggered so as to provide as complete a visual buffer as
possible.
(d) Swimming pools, tennis courts and trash areas shall be
screened from adjoining properties in the same manner as
parking areas.
(e) Lighting for parking areas, swimming pools, and tennis courts
shall be shielded and will not project more than 1/2 footcandle
of light at property lines.
(f) The maximum number of guest rooms shall be eight.
§ 135-8 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-8
1:390
(g) The outside of the structure shall not be added to, altered or
changed to accommodate the facility, except as might be
required by state or local authorities for fire and safety
purposes.
(h) The kitchen, eating area and facilities to be used in providing
food and beverage to guests shall meet all applicable health,
safety and sanitary requirements. There shall be no separate
kitchen or cooking facility in any guest room. The food service
shall be limited to breakfast and afternoon tea.
(i) One sign shall be permitted identifying the property. The sign
shall not exceed 12 square feet in area. If a freestanding sign is
to be used it shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the
right-of-way, and shall contain no other information other than
identification of the premises. Sign design and lighting are
subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors.
(4) Standards for review of conditional use. Factors to be considered
by the Board of Supervisors on passing upon each application for a
conditional use bed-and-breakfast are as follows:
(a) Prior to the approval of conditional use, the applicant shall
apply to the Board of Historical and Architectural Review
(HARB) for approval of historic and/or architectural
significance of the property.
(b) The existing building, inn or structure itself is determined by
the Board of Supervisors to be of historical significance or
unique value due to age, architectural significance or
association with a prominent historical person or family; for
purposes of this determination, consideration shall be given to
the structures that have been identified as historic in the
Historic Site Survey prepared for Chadds Ford Township by the
Delaware County Planning Commission dated June 1984, and
as may be updated in the future and approved by the Board of
Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township.
(c) The bed-and-breakfast may have a limited number of
employees; their number and hours shall be a factor in
determining whether to grant the conditional use. Members of
the owner's immediate family who reside therein are not
considered employees.
(d) All applicable requirements of the Township's building,
electrical, fire and panic, sewage, plumbing codes,90 and
Chapter 110, Subdivision and Land Development, and Chapter
105, Stormwater Management, of the Code of the Township of
Chadds Ford shall be reviewed and considered, together with
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 59, Construction Codes.
§ 135-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-8
1:391
all applicable state codes and health regulations, by the Board
of Supervisors in ruling on the application.
(e) Guests are required to be transient and may be registered for a
maximum of 14 consecutive nights. Guest registration records
must be maintained and open to inspection by the Township
Code Enforcement Officer.
(f) Any meals provided and any amenities connected with the bedand-
breakfast, such as swimming pools or tennis courts, shall
be solely for the use of the owner, the owner's family and the
owner's registered guests.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
foreseeable nearby land uses.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan, as amended.
(i) The safety of access to the property for service and emergency
vehicles.
(j) Such other factors which may be considered relevant to the
purposes of this subsection.
(k) Sufficient bathroom facilities will be provided to accommodate
the maximum number of guests.
(l) An owner, or owners, must reside in the bed-and-breakfast
residence as their principal residence. An individual who owns
a minimum of 25% interest in the residence, whether as a joint
tenant, tenant in common, copartner or shareholder, is, by this
definition, an owner.
(m) The use shall be accessory to the main use of a private, owneroccupied
residence that is permitted in the residential district
where the structure is located.
(n) The structure, except that portion used for the bed-andbreakfast
use, shall be occupied and used solely by the
residential occupant and members of his/her family.
(5) Procedure. Upon receiving an application for a conditional use
under this subsection, the Board of Supervisors shall, prior to the
hearing, require the applicant to furnish each of the following
materials and any other such items as deemed necessary by the
Board:
(a) Twelve copies of site plans drawn to scale showing the nature,
location and dimensions of the proposed bed-and-breakfast,
prepared by a registered surveyor;
§ 135-8 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-8
1:392
§ 135-9. Lot requirements.
(b) Photographs showing existing uses and surrounding areas and
other pertinent data;
(c) Specifications for building or structural changes as well as for
the fire escapes or other such modifications by an architect or
registered engineer for the proposed building and adjacent
parking or recreational areas;
(d) Installation or maintenance plan for on-site or other type of
sewage disposal systems; and
(e) Evidence of an available location suitable for an additional onsite
sewage location.
(6) Permit and inspections. Any person or persons owning or operating
a bed-and-breakfast within Chadds Ford Township shall be
required to obtain a yearly permit issued by the Code Enforcement
Department or the Township upon satisfactory yearly inspection of
the premises by the Code Enforcement Officer indicating the
premises are in compliance with all applicable state and local
codes. The fee for said permit shall be set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
A. The lot for each dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a width
at the front yard building line of not less than 200 feet, which minimum
width must extend toward the front street for the required depth of the
front yard.
B. Principal and accessory buildings shall occupy no more than 15% of the
lot area.
C. The lot shall have an area of at least two acres, and if it has no frontage
on a street or road the lot shall be connected thereto by a driveway at
least 20 feet wide, which shall be in addition to the lot area of two acres.
D. There shall be a front yard the depth of which shall be at least 100 feet
from the front line to the nearest point of the main or accessory
building.
E. In case of a corner lot, the yards fronting on each street shall be at least
100 feet deep.
F. There shall be two side yards, neither of which shall be less than 50 feet
in width from the nearest property line; when a corner lot, there shall
be at least one side yard of said width.
G. There shall be a rear yard of a depth of at least 50 feet from the main or
accessory building to the nearest point on the rear line.
H. No driveway, private street or fire lane shall be located within 10 feet of
any side or rear lot line.
§ 135-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-9
1:393

ARTICLE V
R-2 District (Residence)
§ 135-10. Applicability.
In an R-2 District the following regulations shall apply.
§ 135-11. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other: any of the uses
permitted in an R-1 District.
§ 135-12. Lot requirements.
A. The lot for each dwelling hereafter erected or altered shall have a width
at the front yard building line of not less than 150 feet, which minimum
width must extend toward the front street for the required depth of the
front yard.
B. Principal and accessory buildings shall occupy no more than 15% of the
lot area.
C. There shall be a front yard the depth of which shall be at least 75 feet
from the front line to the nearest point of the main or accessory
building; if a corner lot, the same depth on each street.
D. There shall be two side yards, neither of which shall be less than 40 feet
in width from the nearest property line; when a corner lot, there shall
be at least one side yard of said width.
E. There shall be a rear yard of a depth of at least 50 feet from the main
building to the nearest point of the rear line.
F. No driveway, private street or fire lane shall be located within 10 feet of
any side or rear lot line.
G. The lot shall have an area of at least one acre.
§ 135-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-12
1:395

ARTICLE VI
R-A District (Residence-Apartment)
§ 135-13. Applicability.
In an R-A District (Residence-Apartment), the following regulations shall
apply.
§ 135-14. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be
used, for any of the following purposes, and no other:
A. One-family detached dwelling. If a lot or premises is used for the
construction or erection of a one-family detached dwelling, the
requirements for lot area, width, front yard, side yards, rear yard and
percentage of lot area occupied by buildings shall be the same as those
in an R-2 District (Residence).
B. Professional offices in a building not used for human occupancy when
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board. If a lot
or premises is used for the construction or erection of professional
offices, the requirements for lot area, width, depth, front yard, side
yards, rear yard and percentage of lot area occupied by buildings shall
be the same as those in a B District (Business), except where the
subject lot abuts an R-1 District (Residence) or R-2 District (Residence)
the side yards shall be a minimum of 40 feet in width each.
C. Apartment house or houses.
D. Accessory use regulations. The following uses for apartment houses are
permitted under the conditions specified. Unless indicated otherwise,
no accessory use is permitted within a rear, side or front yard as
required herein.
(1) Parking areas and private garages.
(2) Storage garages. All storage for other than private automobiles
shall be structurally enclosed, including boats, trailers, etc.
(3) Living accommodations for watchmen and caretakers employed
upon the premises, provided that any such accessory living
accommodation shall be located within an apartment house and
shall meet the minimum requirements of an apartment unit.
(4) Laundry, provided that it is for the exclusive use of residents of the
site.
(5) Laundry drying areas, provided that they are screened from
adjoining property and public view by a wall, fence or hedge.
(6) Recreation building, eating or medical care facility, provided that it
is for the exclusive use of residents of the site and their guests.
§ 135-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-14
1:397
§ 135-15. Lot requirements.
Each apartment house shall be provided with not less than the following
space standards:
(7) Swimming pools and patios or terraces, provided that safety and
sanitary standards as specified by the Board of Supervisors are
maintained.
(8) Refuse collection centers accessible to the street system, provided
that they are screened from adjoining property and public view by a
wall, fence or hedge. No on-site incineration shall be permitted.
(9) Any other uses that are similar to those set forth in this subsection
and that are customarily incidental to an apartment house, subject
to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Height and area requirements.
(1) Maximum height. The maximum height of all buildings and
structures shall conform to § 135-167A of this chapter.
(2) Minimum apartment size. No apartment shall be less than 700
square feet in net usable floor area including partitions and walls
and excluding areas of joint use with other occupants. Apartments
with two or three bedrooms shall be no less than 1,000 square feet
in net usable floor area including partitions and walls and
excluding areas of joint use with other occupants.
(3) Minimum lot area and width. An apartment site shall be a lot not
less than two acres in size, and shall have a width at the building
line of not less than 280 feet.
(4) Determination of number of units. Not more than an average of 12
family dwelling units shall be permitted per acre of lot area of the
entire lot area of an apartment house site. The lot areas to be used
for one-family dwelling or professional offices shall not be included
in the lot area used for calculating the allowable number of units
for the apartment house site.
(5) Floor use restriction. Apartments shall be permitted only on any
floor where the apartment floor is completely above grade at one
exterior wall.
(6) Bedroom restriction. Not more than three bedrooms shall be
permitted in any one apartment and not more than 25% of the
apartments in an apartment development may be three-bedroom
apartments. A den shall not be used as a bedroom.
(7) Maximum lot coverage. Not more than 20% of the lot area may be
covered by buildings.
(8) Yards.
§ 135-14 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-15
1:398
§ 135-16. Street and parking requirements.
Each apartment house site shall provide the following street and parking
requirements:
(a) Front yard. There shall be a front yard the depth of which shall
be at least 100 feet from the front or street line to the nearest
point of any main or accessory building.
(b) Side yard. There shall be two side yards neither of which shall
be less than 50 feet in width from the nearest property line nor
less than twice the height of the subject apartment house,
whichever is greater.
(c) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of a depth of not less than
50 feet from the main or accessory building to the nearest
point on the rear line of the apartment house site or twice the
height of the subject apartment house, whichever is greater.
B. Other requirements.
(1) Use of the space. No more than 50% of the lot area may be
occupied by a combination of buildings, streets, driveways, or
parking areas. Of the space a minimum of 50% must be suitable for
recreation purposes such as tot lot, sitting area, walking area, and
suitable games and similar activity.
(2) Landscaping. All of the property shall be suitably landscaped as
approved by the Board of Supervisors and shall be suitably
maintained. Insofar as possible, existing trees and grades are to be
preserved. If the subject property is not suitably maintained, such
maintenance may be performed by the Township and the cost
thereof charged against the owner of said property and a lien
entered against the property as a municipal lien if such charge is
not paid.
(3) Buffer. Where an R-A District (Residence-Apartment) abuts an R-1
or R-2 District, a buffer zone shall be provided which shall be not
less than 30 feet wide running the full depth of the lot line, to be in
addition to other setback, side or rear yard requirements. No
driveway, parking area, recreation area, etc., shall encroach into
this buffer strip. Such additional buffer zone shall not be required
where the abutting district is separated by an existing street or
railroad right-of-way.
A. When the apartment house site is in an approved fire-protected district
(which shall have an adequate water supply and storage facility to
assure sufficient volume and pressure of water to combat possible
fires), the submitted plan shall show existing mains and water supplies
in the immediate area, together with proposed mains and fireplugs to
provide adequate fire protection to the proposed apartment houses.
§ 135-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-16
1:399
B. When the apartments are not in a fire-protected district, the following
conditions shall apply:
(1) Fire lanes.
(a) No apartment shall be located more than 150 feet from a duly
improved and accessible fire lane. A "fire lane" shall mean and
include any driveway, roadway, area, parcel, or strip of land
which provides vehicular access to any building or buildings.
(b) Fire lanes shall have a minimum unobstructed right-of-way
width of 40 feet, and there shall be constructed within this
right-of-way an all-weather and well-drained surface cartway
with a minimum width of 20 feet. The extension of fire lanes
shall begin from one or more existing and improved public
streets.
(c) Fire lanes which curve, turn or change directions shall have a
minimum radius of 55 feet at the edge of pavement. Fire lanes
containing reverse curves shall have a minimum center line
tangent length of 50 feet between curves.
(d) Dead-end fire lanes shall be terminated with an unobstructed
vehicular turnaround or cul-de-sac with a minimum right-ofway
radius of 45 feet and shall have a minimum surfaced
radius of 35 feet. Dead-end fire lanes shall have a maximum
length of 400 feet.
(e) The location of fire lanes shall conform to plans for the
extension of streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm
sewers and other drainage facilities and public utilities as
contained in this and other ordinances of the Township of
Chadds Ford and shall provide adequate access to buildings by
firemen and other emergency services.
C. Private streets. Private streets or lanes where not required for use as
fire lanes as specified herein may have a minimum right-of-way width of
25 feet and a minimum cartway width of 18 feet and shall have a
durable and well-drained, all-weather surface. The location and use of
private streets or lanes is subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
D. Driveways and off-street parking.
(1) All driveways and parking areas shall conform to standards
specified above for private streets.
(2) Parking spaces shall be provided according to the number of
bedrooms per apartment as indicated below:
§ 135-16 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-16
1:400
§ 135-17. Utilities and drainage facilities.
The following utilities and drainage facilities are required for each
apartment house or group of apartment houses:
Bedrooms per Apartment
Required Parking Spaces per
Apartment
1 1 1/2
2 2
3 2 1/2
(3) Each such parking space shall provide a minimum of 200 square
feet of off-street parking surface exclusive of the space needed for
access and maneuvering. Such off-street parking space may be
provided as an individual garage or carport or a parking compound
adjacent to or near the apartment it serves but not closer than 20
feet to an apartment wall containing windows, or 10 feet to a blank
wall, except when located within the apartment house. A maximum
of 40 individual parking spaces may be placed together in a parking
area or compound. All such compounds of parking spaces must be
separated by a planting strip not less than 10 feet in width.
(4) No parking space shall be located within 10 feet of any lot line. This
provision is subject to additional requirements when the apartment
house site abuts an R-1 or R-2 district.
(5) The minimum required parking spaces shall not be met by
permitting on-street parking on any street whether public or
private.
(6) All streets, driveways and parking areas are to be properly lighted
to assure safe driving conditions at night and security for the
residents. Such lighting is to be so planned as to not create a
nuisance for residents of adjacent lots.
(7) No driveway, private street or fire lane shall be located within 10
feet of any lot line except where required to provide access to and
from a public street. No driveway, private street or fire lane shall
encroach into the buffer strip.
A. Utilities. All utility connections, cable television lines and serving lines
are to be installed underground unless special conditions require
otherwise, subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(1) Where required, easements across lots centered on rear or side lot
lines shall be provided for such utilities and shall be at least 20 feet
wide.
(2) Water supply and sewage disposal must be furnished in accordance
with the requirements specified by the appropriate state, county
§ 135-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-17
1:401
§ 135-18. Administrative requirements.
Each application submitted pursuant to this article for an apartment house
or houses shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 110, Subdivision and
Land Development, as amended, and the procedures as set forth therein
shall be complied with and approval required thereunder. In addition, each
such application shall be accompanied by the following information:
and Township officials. Off-site water and sewage facilities may be
required where deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Drainage.
(1) All areas on the site should be properly graded to provide adequate
drainage.
(2) Where the site is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement
conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, but
not less than 10 feet wide, and of ample width to carry anticipated
flows. Those areas occupied by required easements that are now
within a stream channel and are suitable for recreational purposes
may qualify as usable open space subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors. No storm sewers, drainage facilities or
surface water shall be connected to or be permitted to flow into a
sanitary sewer system.
A. A site plan or plans which shall describe the integrated or overall
development of the tract of land or district for which an application is
made, which site plan or plans shall be drawn at appropriate scales, and
which shall show:
(1) The location, orientation, boundaries, dimensions, and ownerships
of the land to be included in the district or area for which the
application is made.
(2) The location, use dimensions, and arrangement of all buildings and
structures, streets, sidewalks, and open spaces, including the
height of all buildings; the number of bedrooms contained in each
apartment; the location, area in square feet and capacity of all
areas to be used for off-street parking; the location and dimensions
of all driveways, fire lanes, and private and public streets; the
location of all areas devoted to planting, landscaping or similar
purposes; and the location and height of all walls, fences or hedges
required as visual screens.
(3) The floor plans and areas in square feet of all dwelling units and
accessory buildings and the location of all windows and external
doors.
(4) The physical features of the tract, including contours at two-foot
intervals; regrading plan or proposed final contours and elevations.
§ 135-17 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-18
1:402
§ 135-19. Fees.
(5) The provisions and proposed facilities made for, and the location of,
all sewage, water supply, surface and stormwater drainage,
exterior lighting, and similar facilities and the dimensions of all
existing or proposed utility easements.
B. In all instances, sufficient data shall be provided to enable the Board of
Supervisors to determine that the requirement of this and other
ordinances of the Township relevant to the proposed plan have been
fulfilled.
A. The owner shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable engineering
and legal expenses incurred by the Township for services rendered by
the Township Engineer and the Township Solicitor pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
B. The owner shall deposit with the Township Secretary, prior to filing his
preliminary plan (or, if no preliminary plan is filed, prior to filing his
final plan), a sum as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors to secure payment of the fees and expenses required by
this article. As the fund is expended, the owner shall make further
deposits upon notice from the Township Secretary.
C. The owner shall pay to the Township of Chadds Ford a plan review fee
as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. This
fee shall accompany the submission of the final plan for review.
D. After payment of the plan review fee and other expenses under this
article and after approval of the final plan, the Township Secretary shall
refund to the owner any deposit remaining with an accounting of
disbursements.
E. The amount of all fees and security may be changed from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 135-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-19
1:403

ARTICLE VII
R-M District (Residence-Multifamily)
§ 135-20. Applicability.
In an R-M District (Residence-Multifamily), the following regulations shall
apply.
§ 135-21. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may
be used, for any of the following purposes or combination thereof, and no
other:
A. One-family detached dwellings. If a lot or premises is used for the
construction or erection of a one-family detached dwelling, the
requirements for lot area, width, front yard, side yards, rear yard, and
percentage of lot area occupied by buildings shall be the same as those
in an R-2 District (Residence).
B. Apartments.
(1) A room or group of rooms suited for human occupancy, usually for
rent by a landlord to the occupants; such rooms clustered as two or
more apartments within a single building structure and sharing in
common portions of a building and property. Apartments may share
a common entrance and hallway or may have individual entrances.
However, in contrast to townhouses, row houses, or duplexes, the
structural features of the building do not clearly delineate the
separate apartments as separate dwelling units.
(2) Townhouses, duplexes, etc., have individual ownership and clearly
delineated structural features such as separate yards, separating
walls, roof line delineation, entrance areas, etc., even though they
are connected to one or more similar dwelling units.
(3) The Planning Commission shall review plans and determine the
nature of the proposed development.
C. One-family semidetached or attached dwellings.
D. Accessory use regulations. The following uses for apartment houses
and dwelling units are permitted under the conditions specified. Unless
indicated otherwise, no accessory use is permitted within a rear, side or
front yard as required herein.
(1) Parking areas and private garages.
(2) Storage garages. All storage areas for items other than private
automobiles, e.g., boats, trailers, all types of campers, etc., shall be
structurally enclosed.
§ 135-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-21
1:405
§ 135-22. Lot requirements.
Each apartment house, semidetached or attached unit shall be provided
with not less than the following space standards:
(3) Living accommodations for a watchman and caretakers employed
upon the premises, provided that any such accessory living
accommodation shall be located within a multifamily unit and shall
meet the minimum requirements of a multifamily unit.
(4) Laundry, provided that it is for the exclusive use of residents of the
site.
(5) Laundry drying areas, provided that they are screened from
adjoining property and public view by a wall, fence or hedge.
(6) Recreation building, eating or medical care facility, provided that it
is for the exclusive use of residents of the site and their guests.
(7) Swimming pools and patios or terraces are permitted, provided
that safety and sanitary standards as specified by the Board of
Supervisors are maintained.
(8) Refuse collection centers accessible to the street system, provided
that they are screened from adjoining property and public view by a
wall, fence or hedge. No on-site incineration shall be permitted.
(9) Any other uses that are similar to those set forth in this subsection
and that are customarily incidental to a multifamily unit, subject to
the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
A. Height and area requirements.
(1) Maximum height. The maximum height of all buildings and
structures shall conform to § 135-167A of this chapter.
(2) Minimum unit size. No unit shall be less than 700 square feet in net
usable floor area, including partitions and walls and excluding
areas of joint use with other occupants. Dwelling units with two
bedrooms shall be no less than 850 square feet and dwelling units
of three bedrooms shall be no less than 1,000 square feet in net
usable area, including partitions and walls and excluding areas of
joint use with other occupants.
(3) Minimum lot area and width. A building site for each type of
dwelling unit shall be a lot not less than two acres in size, and shall
have a width at the building line of not less than 280 feet.
(4) Determination of lot area. In calculating the minimum acres which
can be used for multifamily dwellings, 70% of any land in a
floodplain or with a slope of 25% or greater must be excluded from
the total available acres in a given parcel of land.
§ 135-21 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-22
1:406
(5) Determination of number of units. Not more than an average of six
family dwelling units shall be permitted per acre of one lot area of
the entire lot area of an apartment house site, or six dwelling units
per acre for semidetached or attached dwelling sites. The lot areas
to be used for detached one-family dwelling units shall not be
included in the lot area used for calculating the allowable number
of units. Maximum density may not be attainable on all land
depending upon terrain and contours.
(6) Floor used restriction. Apartments shall be permitted only on any
floor where the apartment floor is completely above grade at one
exterior wall.
(7) Bedroom restriction. Not more than three bedrooms shall be
permitted in any one apartment unit. Not more than 25% of the
apartments in an apartment development may be three-bedroom
apartments. A den shall not be used as a bedroom in an apartment
development.
(8) Maximum lot coverage. Not more than 20% of the lot area may be
covered by buildings.
(9) Yards.
(a) Front yard. There shall be a front yard the depth of which shall
be at least 75 feet from the front or street line to the nearest
point of any main or accessory building.
(b) Side yard. There shall be two side yards, neither of which shall
be less than 50 feet in width from the nearest property line nor
less than twice the height of the subject dwelling unit,
whichever is greater. There shall be no less than 50 feet
between buildings.
(c) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of a depth of not less than
50 feet from the main or accessory building to the nearest
point on the rear line of the building site or twice the height of
the subject building, whichever is greater.
(10)No more than seven dwelling units intended for single-family
ownership may be attached in any structure.
B. Other requirements.
(1) Use of the space.
(a) No more than 50% of the lot area may be occupied by a
combination of buildings, streets, driveways, parking areas or
other impervious areas.
(b) Of the open space, a minimum of 50% must be suitable for
recreation purposes such as tot lot, sitting area, walking area,
§ 135-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-22
1:407
§ 135-23. Street and parking requirements.
Each dwelling unit site, semidetached or attached housing site shall provide
the following street and parking requirements:
and suitable games and similar activity. Activity and such
facilities shall be shown on the plan.
(2) Landscaping. All of the property shall be suitably landscaped as
approved by the Board of Supervisors and shall be suitably
maintained. Insofar as possible, existing trees and grades are to be
preserved. If the subject property is not suitably maintained, such
maintenance may be performed by the Township and the cost
thereof charged against the owner of said property and a lien
entered against the property as a municipal lien if such charge is
not paid. Any existing deciduous or evergreen trees 12 inches or
more in diameter measured one foot from ground level must
require approval by a designated Township authority prior to
removal.
(3) Buffer. Where an R-M District (Residence-Multifamily) abuts an R-1
or R-2 district, a buffer zone shall be provided which shall be not
less than 100 feet wide running the full depth of the lot line, to be in
addition to other setback, side or rear yard requirements. No
driveway, parking area, recreation area, etc., shall encroach into
this buffer strip. Such additional buffer zone shall not be required
where the abutting district is separated by a railroad right-of-way.
A. When the site is in an approved fire-protected district (which shall have
an adequate water supply and storage facility to assure sufficient
volume and pressure of water to combat possible fires), the submitted
plan shall show existing mains and water supplies in the immediate
area, together with proposed mains and fireplugs to provide adequate
fire protection to the proposed units.
B. When the sites are not in a fire-protected district, the following
conditions shall apply:
(1) Fire lane.
(a) No unit shall be located more than 150 feet from a duly
improved and accessible fire lane. A "fire lane" shall mean and
include any driveway, roadway, area, parcel, or strip of land
which provides vehicular access to any building or buildings.
(b) Fire lanes shall have a minimum unobstructed right-of-way
width of 40 feet, and there shall be constructed within this
right-of-way an all-weather and well-drained surface cartway
with a minimum width of 20 feet. The extension of fire lanes
shall begin from one or more existing and improved public
streets.
§ 135-22 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-23
1:408
(c) Fire lanes which curve, turn or change directions shall have a
minimum radius of 55 feet at the edge of pavement. Fire lanes
containing reverse curves shall have a minimum center line
tangent length of 50 feet between curves.
(d) Dead-end fire lanes shall be terminated with an unobstructed
vehicular turnaround or cul-de-sac with a minimum right-ofway
radius of 45 feet and shall have a minimum surfaced
radius of 35 feet. Dead-end fire lanes shall have a maximum
length of 400 feet.
(e) The location of fire lanes shall conform to plans for the
extension of streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm
sewers and other drainage facilities and public utilities as
contained in this and other ordinances of the Township of
Chadds Ford and shall provide adequate access to buildings by
firemen and other emergency services.
C. Private streets. Private streets or lanes where not required for use as
fire lanes as specified herein may have a minimum right-of-way width of
30 feet and minimum cartway width of 20 feet and shall have a durable,
paved and well-drained, all-weather surface. The location and use of
private streets or lanes is subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
D. Driveways and off-street parking.
(1) All driveways and parking areas shall conform to standards
specified above for private streets.
(2) Parking spaces shall be provided according to the number of
bedrooms per unit as indicated below:
Bedrooms Per Unit
Required Parking Space Per
Unit
1 2
2 2 1/2
3 3
(3) Each such parking space shall provide a minimum of 200 square
feet of off-street parking surface exclusive of the space needed for
access and maneuvering. Such off-street parking space may be
provided as an individual garage or carport or a parking compound
adjacent to or near the unit it serves but not closer than 20 feet to a
unit wall containing windows, or 10 feet to a blank wall, except
when located within the unit. A maximum of 35 individual parking
spaces may be placed together in a parking area or compound. All
such compounds of parking spaces must be separated by a planting
strip not less than 10 feet in width.
§ 135-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-23
1:409
§ 135-24. Utilities and drainage facilities.
The following utilities and drainage facilities are required for each unit:
(4) No parking space shall be located within 10 feet of any lot line. This
provision is subject to additional requirements when the site abuts
an R-1 or R-2 district.
(5) The minimum required parking spaces shall not be met by
permitting on-street parking on any street, whether public or
private.
(6) All streets, driveways and parking areas are to be properly lighted
to assure safe driving conditions at night and security for the
residents. Such lighting is to be so planned as to not create a
nuisance for residents of adjacent lots. The location and height of
all lighting shall be shown on the plans for review and approval by
the Board of Supervisors.
E. No driveway, private street or fire lane shall be located within 10 feet of
any exterior property line except where required to provide access to
and from a public street. No driveway, private street or fire lane shall
encroach into the buffer strip.
A. Utilities.
(1) All utility connections, cable television lines and servicing lines are
to be installed underground unless special conditions require
otherwise, subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Where required, easements across lots centered on rear or side lot
lines shall be provided for such utilities and shall be at least 20 feet
wide.
(3) Water supply and sewage disposal must be furnished in accordance
with the requirements specified by the appropriate state, county
and Township officials. Off-site water and sewage facilities may be
required where deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors. A
sewage treatment plant may be installed on a site when approved
by the Board of Supervisors and the appropriate state and county
officials. Such a plan must meet the setback, side and rear yard
requirements provided herein, including buffer zone where
required.
B. Drainage.
(1) All areas on the site should be properly graded to provide adequate
drainage.
(2) Where the site is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel, or stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement
conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, but
not less than 10 feet wide, and of ample width to carry anticipated
§ 135-23 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-24
1:410
§ 135-25. Administrative requirements.
Each application submitted pursuant to this article shall be subject to the
provisions of Chapter 110, Subdivision and Land Development, as amended,
and the procedures as set forth therein shall be complied with and approval
required thereunder. In addition, each such application shall be
accompanied by the following information:
flows. Those areas occupied by required easements that are now
within a stream channel and are suitable for recreational purposes
may qualify as usable open space subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors. No storm sewers, drainage facilities or
surface water shall be connected to or be permitted to flow into a
sanitary sewer system. Surface flow from a site shall be controlled
by retention basins and systems to prevent runoff from exceeding
that which would be normal for the site prior to development or
disturbance of virgin soil.
A. A site plan or plans which shall describe the integrated or overall
development of the tract of land or district for which an application is
made, which site plan or plans shall be drawn at appropriate scales, and
which shall show:
(1) The location, orientation, boundaries, dimensions, and ownerships
of the land to be included in the district or area for which the
application is made.
(2) The location, use dimensions, and arrangement of all buildings and
structures, streets, sidewalks, and open spaces, including the
height of all buildings; the number of bedrooms contained in each
unit; the location, area in square feet and capacity of all areas to be
used for off-street parking; the location and dimensions of all
driveways, fire lanes, and private and public streets; the location of
all areas devoted to planting, landscaping or similar purposes; and
the location and height of all walls, fences or hedges required as
visual screens.
(3) The floor plans and areas in square feet of all dwelling units and
accessory buildings and the location of all windows and external
doors.
(4) The physical features of the tract, including contours at two-foot
intervals; regrading plan or proposed final contours and elevations.
(5) The provisions and proposed facilities made for, and the location of,
all sewage, water supply, surface and stormwater drainage,
exterior lighting, and similar facilities and the dimensions of all
existing or proposed utility easements.
B. In all instances, sufficient data shall be provided to enable the Board of
Supervisors to determine that the requirement of this and other
§ 135-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-25
1:411
§ 135-26. Fees.
ordinances of the Township relevant to the proposed plan have been
fulfilled.
A. The owner shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable engineering
and legal expenses incurred by the Township for services rendered by
the Township Engineer and the Township Solicitor pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
B. The owner shall deposit with the Township Secretary, prior to filing his
preliminary plan (or, if no preliminary plan is filed, prior to filing his
final plan), a sum as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors to secure payment of the fees and expenses required by
this article. As the fund is expended, the owner shall make further
deposits upon notice from the Township Secretary.
C. The owner shall pay to Chadds Ford Township a plan review fee as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. This fee
shall accompany the submission of the final plan for review.
D. After payment of the plan review fee and other expenses under this
article and after approval of the final plan, the Township Secretary shall
refund to the owner any deposit remaining with an accounting of
disbursements.
E. The amount of all fees and security may be changed from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 135-25 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-26
1:412
ARTICLE VIII
PRD Districts (Planned Residential Development)
[Amended 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 151]
§ 135-27. Purpose.
The provisions of this article are enacted in order that the purposes of this
chapter are furthered in an era of increasing urbanization, development
pressures and growing demand for housing of all types and design. These
provisions are also intended:
§ 135-28. Referral of plans for review.
A. To create opportunities for the development of a variety of housing
types, and styles, including single-family detached dwellings; singlefamily
semidetached dwellings, two-family detached dwellings; singlefamily
attached dwellings; multifamily dwellings in the form of a
retirement residence; and mobile home park developments, so that the
demand for such housing may be met by greater variety in type, design
and layout of dwellings.
B. To encourage more efficient allocation, use and maintenance of open
space for conservation and active and passive recreation.
C. To encourage a more efficient use of land and public services and to
reflect changes in the practice and technology of land development so
that economies of scale may be so secured.
D. To encourage sensitive land development which will respect and
conserve such natural features and resources of the land as flood
hazard and flood-prone areas, steep and very steep slopes,
watercourses and water bodies, groundwater recharge areas, forested
areas, historic and cultural sites, visual resources, and other features of
importance to the vitality of natural and cultural resources.
E. To provide a procedure which can relate the type, design and layout of
residential development to the particular site and to the particular
demand for housing existing at the time of development in a manner
consistent with the preservation of the property values, and to assure
that the increased flexibility of regulations over land development
established hereby is carried out pursuant to sound, expeditious and
fair administrative standards and procedures.
F. To implement the recommendations of the Chadds Ford Township
Comprehensive Plan.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall administer planned residential
development (PRD) as set forth in this article. The Board shall, however,
refer all tentative plans for such development to the Chadds Ford
Township Planning Commission for its review and comment. All
applications for tentative and final approval of PRD shall also be
§ 135-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-28
1:413
§ 135-29. Required conditions.
The following conditions are required for PRD:
referred by the Board to the Delaware County Planning Commission for
study and recommendation.
B. Landowners are invited to submit sketch plans for informal review,
subject to application procedures, including a reimbursement
agreement, to the Chadds Ford Township Planning Commission, and
any such submission of plans shall not constitute a formal filing as
hereinafter described.
A. The tract of land so developed shall be in single ownership or, in the
case of multiple ownership of the tract, the application filed jointly by
all of the owners of the tract and, in any case, it shall be agreed that the
tract will be developed as specified in § 135-41 under a single direction
and in the manner approved.
B. The holder or holders of any outstanding mortgage shall agree in
writing that said mortgage or mortgages shall be subject to all of the
terms and conditions imposed upon the tract by reason of the PRD.
C. The tract shall consist of contiguous lots of a minimum of 100 acres;
except that the minimum tract size for a mobile home park or a
retirement residence community shall be a minimum of 50 acres.
D. The tract shall be located only in an R-1 or R-2 District, and no portion
of the PRD shall be located in the Historic Zoning District Overlay.
E. The development shall be served by public or community sanitary
sewer and public or community water systems having the assured
capacity to serve the development at the time occupancy of the
structures in the development begins; and the feasibility for such
construction and operation shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors at the time of the application for tentative plan
approval. However, where public off-site or community sewer and/or
public off-site or community water is not available or reasonably
accessible, the development may be served by alternative sewer and
water systems, subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection and the Board of Supervisors, provided
that:
(1) In the case of a mobile home park, the gross density shall not
exceed 2.0 dwelling units per acre of net tract area as further
described in § 135-32B(1)(a).
(2) In the case of a retirement residence community, the gross density
shall not exceed 2.5 dwelling units per gross acre as further
described in § 135-32.
§ 135-28 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-29
1:414
§ 135-30. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used, and land may be used or
occupied, for any of the following uses and no other:
F. The tract of land shall be developed so that existing site conditions and
possible physical or natural constraints shall be taken into
consideration.
G. The development shall preserve and incorporate into the final
landscaping so far as possible natural features such as lakes, streams,
rock outcrops, topsoil, woodlands, trees and shrubs.
H. The topography of the tract of land and its drainage shall be suitable for
the proposed development, and the plan shall be designed to prevent
soil erosion and sedimentation.
I. Soil and subsoil conditions shall be suitable for excavation and site
preparation.
A. Planned Residential Development-1 (PRD-1) Overlay District.
(1) Dwelling units in single-family detached, single-family
semidetached, two-family detached, or single-family attached
structures, or any combination thereof;
(2) Those nonresidential uses deemed by the Board of Supervisors
appropriate for incorporation in the design of the PRD, including a
community center, a day-care center for children, or other related
community facilities;
(3) Open space for active and/or passive recreation, active and/or
passive recreation facilities and conservation purposes; and
(4) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the foregoing uses and
shown on the plan.
B. Planned Residential Development-2 (PRD-2) Overlay District.
(1) Any uses permitted in the PRD-1 Overlay District;
(2) Retirement residence community, composed of any of the dwelling
types allowed in the PRD-1 Overlay District;
(3) Single-family detached dwellings in conjunction with a mobile
home park;
(4) Modular single-family detached dwellings, single-family attached
dwellings and/or multifamily dwellings in conjunction with a
retirement residence community;
(5) Open space for active and/or passive recreation, active and/or
passive recreation facilities and conservation purposes; and
§ 135-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-30
1:415
§ 135-31. Height regulations.
The maximum height of all buildings and structures erected, enlarged or
used shall conform to §§ 135-167 and 135-168 of this chapter.
§ 135-32. Density, open space and dwelling unit composition.
(6) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the foregoing uses, and
shown on the plan.
A. Planned Residential Development-1 (PRD-1) Overlay District.
(1) The maximum number of allowable dwelling units shall be based on
a sketch plan developed by the applicant in accordance with the
underlying zoning district. The plan shall be prepared in
accordance with § 110-18 of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, with each lot meeting the bulk and area
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(2) If an existing dwelling unit is located on the tract proposed for the
PRD, the said unit will be counted to determine the density of units
and be subject to all other provisions of this chapter.
(3) Not less than 50% of the total area of the property shall be
designated as and devoted to common open space.
B. Planned Residential Development-2 (PRD-2) Overlay District. All
development in the PRD-2 District shall conform to the density, open
space and dwelling unit composition regulations as set forth for the
PRD-1 District above, except for mobile home park and retirement
residence community development, which shall conform to the
regulations below:
(1) Mobile home parks.
(a) Mobile home park density. There shall be no more than two
mobile homes per acre of net tract area. The net tract area
shall include the following net outs:
[1] Eighty-five percent of the acreage located in the
floodplain.
[2] Eighty-five percent of the acreage located within wetlands.
[3] Seventy percent of the acreage located on steep or very
steep slopes.
[4] Eighty-five percent of the areas of the watercourses and
surface water bodies.
[5] Fifty percent of the areas within wetlands/watercourse
margins.
§ 135-30 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-32
1:416
§ 135-33. Area and bulk regulations.
In addition to the setback requirements and other design standards in
§ 135-34, the following shall apply:
(b) Mobile home park open space. At least 50% of the remaining
gross area of each mobile home park, after subtraction of
required buffer areas, shall be set aside as common open space
for the use and enjoyment of the residents of the mobile home
park. Accessory, service and utility buildings and areas shall
not be counted as open space.
(2) Retirement residence communities.
(a) Retirement residence community density. There shall be no
more than 2.5 dwelling units per acre of net tract area as
further described in § 135-32B(1)(a).
(b) Retirement residence community open space. At least 50% of
the tract shall be set aside as common open space.
A. PRD-1 and PRD-2 general requirements:
Standard Parameter
Tract Area PRD-1: 100 acres, minimum.
PRD-2: 100 acres, minimum,
except mobile home parks and
retirement residence
communities, which shall be 50
acres, minimum.
Density See § 135-22, Density, open space
and dwelling unit composition.
Exclusions from Density
Calculations
See § 135-32, Density, open space
and dwelling unit composition.
Tract Buffer 100 feet, minimum from the
perimeter property line for
buildings.
50 feet, minimum from the
perimeter property line for
structures, except for signs,
structures associated with ingress
and egress, light standards,
benches, and landscaping.
Minimum Setbacks 50 feet, minimum from internal
street line for buildings.
§ 135-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-33
1:417
Standard Parameter
30 feet, minimum for structures,
except signs, street trees, ingress
and egress structures, lighting
standards, sidewalks, benches and
other like structures may be set
back less than 30 feet.
25 feet, minimum from parking
areas for buildings.
15 feet, minimum from parking
areas for structures, except signs,
street trees, ingress and egress
structures, lighting standards,
sidewalks, benches and other like
structures.
60 feet, minimum from another
principal building.
Open Space Requirement PRD-1: 50% minimum.
PRD-2: 50% minimum, 50%
minimum in mobile home parks
and retirement residence
communities.
Height 40 feet, maximum, subject to
§§ 135-167 and 135-168.
Parking/Driveway See Article XIX.
B. PRD-1: single-family detached dwelling: as per the dimensional
regulations for single-family detached dwellings in the R-2 District.
C. PRD-1 and PRD-2: single-family attached dwelling: building length
maximum: 150 feet and six dwelling units.
D. PRD-2 additional requirements:
§ 135-33 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-33
1:418
§ 135-34. Design standards.
In addition to the design standards contained in Chapter 110, Subdivision
and Land Development, Article V, Design Standards, of the Code of the
Township of Chadds Ford, the standards below shall govern the design
of PRDs. Further, any mobile home park development shall comply with
supplementary design standards in § 135-43. Adequate precautions to
protect the health, safety and welfare of citizens shall be implemented at all
times.
Standard Size
Mobile Homes Lot Size: 6,500 square feet,
minimum. Double-unit mobile
homes shall be sited on a
minimum of 11,000 square feet.
Plans which make provisions for
an assortment of unit sizes must
have the express approval of the
Chadds Ford Township Planning
Commission for the layout.
Setbacks between Buildings:
No mobile home shall be located
within 60 feet of the exterior wall
of any other mobile home. No
mobile home shall be located
within 20 feet of a mobile home
service building.
Setbacks from Streets:
No mobile home, office or service
building shall be located closer to
a public street right-of-way line
than 60 feet, or closer to the edge
of an interior street than 35 feet.
Parking/Driveway:
See Article XIX.
Retirement Residence
Communities
Building Length:
150 feet and 6 dwelling units,
maximum.
A. Site considerations.
(1) The finished topography of the site shall adequately facilitate the
proposed development without excessive earthmoving, tree
clearance and destruction of natural amenities. Natural features
such as lakes, streams and wooded slopes shall be preserved and
§ 135-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-34
1:419
incorporated into the final landscaping of the development
wherever possible and desirable. The applicant shall demonstrate
the means whereby trees and other natural features shall be
protected during construction. The location of such trees and other
natural features must be considered when planning the open space,
locations of buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas
and finished grade levels.
(2) Seeding, sodding and other planting shall be applied to stabilize
topsoil on steep slopes and to enhance the appearance of open
areas.
(3) Where adequate surface drainage is not possible by grading alone,
a supplementary drainage system approved by the Township
Engineer shall be required.
B. Housing sites. Except as may be otherwise provided for mobile homes,
the following shall apply:
(1) All housing areas shall be planned, designed and constructed to be
harmonious with the topography and natural features of the tract.
The effects of prevailing winds and solar orientation on the physical
layout and form of the proposed buildings and other structures
shall be reflected in the development plan.
(2) Variations in location of buildings and other structures shall be
provided where necessary to create architectural interest and/or
preserve areas of environmental concern and to further amenities
of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
(3) All housing should be sited so as to provide privacy and to ensure
natural light in all principal rooms.
(4) Every building and other structure shall be located and situated to
promote pedestrian and visual access to common open space to the
extent possible in accordance with the provisions of § 135-36.
(5) The physical design of the development plan shall make adequate
provisions for emergency and public services, and provide safe
accommodation for pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(6) Routes for vehicular and pedestrian access and parking areas shall
be convenient without creating nuisances or detracting privacy.
(7) Development near the perimeter of the tract shall be designed to
be harmonious with neighboring areas and shall be screened from
such areas with landscaping approved by the Board of Supervisors
in accordance with Subsection D(3) of this section and § 135-43P,
unless already comprised by a natural buffer.
(8) This article is intended to encourage high-quality development by
taking into consideration the appearance of all elevations and
§ 135-34 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-34
1:420
layouts of buildings and external spaces and materials used
therein.
C. Design standards for single-family attached dwelling units and
retirement residence dwellings. Single-family attached dwellings shall
be designed and arranged in staggered groups and not in long rows
parallel to street lines. The arrangement of such units shall create a
physical and visual distinction in the lines of the facades and the roofs.
Such distinction shall be achieved through the use of varied floor plans
for adjoining units, the projections and angles of exterior walls and
roofs, exterior fencing, and other diversified space-articulating
techniques.
D. Landscaping and tree conservation. Landscaping shall be regarded as
an essential feature of every PRD. In addition to the preservation of
natural features, trees and slopes of the site, careful attention shall be
given to landscaping of parking areas and provisions for street trees as
required by § 110-36 and Chapter 135, Articles XIX and XX.
(1) Existing trees shall be preserved wherever possible. The protection
of trees 12 inches or more in caliper (measured at a height 4 1/2
feet above the original grade) shall be a factor in determining the
location of common open space, structures, underground utilities,
walks and paved areas. Areas in which trees are to be preserved
shall remain at original grade level and in an undisturbed
condition.
(2) Where extensive natural tree cover and vegetation does not exist or
cannot be preserved on the PRD site, landscaping shall be regarded
as an essential feature of the PRD. In these cases, extensive
landscaping shall be undertaken in order to enhance the
appearance of the PRD, aid in erosion control, provide protection
from wind and sun, screen streets and parking areas, and enhance
the privacy of dwelling units. Such landscaping shall be pursuant to
a landscaping plan approved by the Board of Supervisors in
accordance with Subsection D(3) of this section and § 135-43P.
(3) A landscaped buffer planting strip of 25 feet in width shall be
provided along all perimeter tract lines, except at points of
vehicular ingress and egress and for pedestrian accessways, as
follows:
(a) The buffer planting strip shall consist of a visual screen,
containing two alternating rows of evergreen material (such as
spruce, pine or hemlock) spaced on ten-foot centers. At the
time of planting, the evergreen material shall be at least seven
feet in height (after planting) to visually screen the property.
(b) All existing deciduous and evergreen trees above two inches in
caliper and/or six feet in height shall be preserved in the buffer
areas, except where clearance is required to ensure sight
distance.
§ 135-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-34
1:421
(4) All plantings shown on the approved PRD landscape plan as
common open space shall be maintained in accordance with this
chapter or as otherwise set forth in the association's declarations
or bylaws. Replacement plantings shall be replaced with new
plantings of the same type within six months. Plantings shall be
placed a minimum of three feet from the property and/or tract line.
(5) Tree protection and tree replacement shall be in accordance with
Township ordinances.
E. Streets and pathways.
(1) The street system of the PRD shall be designed so as to relate
harmoniously with land uses within and adjacent to the
development through the establishment of a hierarchy of roadway
functions, which includes internal collector and local streets, to
create a separation of automobile and pedestrian traffic through
the coordinated design of streets, dwelling units, common open
space areas and pedestrian walkways, to create efficient and safe
connections with the existing road system of the Township in order
to ensure proper ingress and egress to and from the PRD,
emergency access, and internal traffic separation.
(2) In order to separate automobile and pedestrian circulation and to
increase accessibility to common open space areas, pedestrian
walkways shall be provided.
(3) Curbs and sidewalks shall be required along streets in PRDs and
designed in accordance with the provisions set forth in § 110-30 of
the Code of Chadds Ford Township.
(4) The design and construction of streets must conform to the
standards set forth in §§ 110-26 and 110-27 of the Code of Chadds
Ford Township.
F. Community facilities and amenities.
(1) Swimming pools, skating rinks and other recreational areas shall
be located so as not to interfere with the residential character of
adjacent dwelling units and, where necessary, shall be screened
and/or fenced.
(2) Refuse stations shall be designed with suitable screening and in
locations convenient for collection and removal, and not offensive
to the occupants of adjacent dwelling units.
(3) Adequate lighting shall be provided to the outdoor areas used by
residents after dark. Appropriate lighting fixtures must be provided
for walkways and to identify streets, steps, ramps, directional
changes and signs. Lighting shall be located to avoid shining
directly into habitable room windows, or into private yard areas
associated with dwelling units. The requirements for lighting may
§ 135-34 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-34
1:422
be waived by the Board where density of development may not
justify its use. Box-style fixtures which direct light only downward
may be required by the Board of Supervisors. No lighting shall be
located as to illuminate areas beyond the property line on which
such lighting is located. All lighting shall be in accordance with
the standards of the Illumination Engineering Society (IES). No
lighting standard shall exceed 15 feet in height unless approved
otherwise by the Board of Supervisors.
(4) All utilities and cable television lines shall be underground within a
PRD.
(5) An on-site sewage treatment plant may be required, where deemed
necessary by the Board of Supervisors.
(6) Adequate off-street parking facilities shall be provided in every
such development plan. There shall be at least two off-street
parking spaces per dwelling unit.
(7) All storage for other than private automobiles shall be structurally
enclosed or otherwise permanently screened from view, including
boats, trailers, etc.
G. Stormwater control.
(1) The storm drainage system for a PRD shall be designed and
constructed so as to minimize runoff, erosion and flooding using
measures such as drainage easements, swales, catchment basins,
silt traps, and the like.
(2) All stormwater management design standards shall be in
accordance with the design standards for same as set forth in
Chapter 105 of the Code of Chadds Ford Township and shall be
subject to the approval of the Township Engineer.
(3) Storm sewer systems for the development shall be designed,
constructed and shall operate and be readily capable of being
maintained to prevent concentration of stormwater runoff on
adjacent developed or undeveloped properties and streets and
other areas of impervious surface.
(4) The design and construction of all storm drainage facilities and
storm sewer systems shall be subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer.
H. Soil erosion and sedimentation control. Plans submitted for any PRD
shall conform to the guidelines for minimizing erosion and
sedimentation as set forth in the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Manual of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection prepared by the State Conservation Commission and Bureau
of Water Quality Management and the USDA Soil Conservation Service,
as amended. In developing a plan for the control of erosion and
§ 135-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-34
1:423
§ 135-35. Development in phases.
An applicant may propose to develop the PRD District project in phases, and
the Board of Supervisors may approve same, if the following criteria are
met:
§ 135-36. Open space.
sedimentation, the developer shall meet, as a minimum, the standards
and specifications outlined in the aforementioned manual, as well as
the standards set forth in Appendix C of the Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook of the Delaware County Soil and Water Conservation
District, and those in Chapter 105 of the Code of Chadds Ford
Township. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be
submitted to the Delaware County Conservation District for review and
comment during both the tentative and final plan approval process.
A. The application for tentative approval must encompass the entire PRD
and show the location and time of construction for each phase, in
addition to other information required by this chapter.
B. At least 35% of the dwelling units in the plan given tentative approval
are included in the first phase.
C. The second and subsequent phases are completed consistent with the
tentatively approved plan and are of such size and location that they
constitute economically sound units of development. In no event shall
such phases contain less than 25% of the dwelling units receiving
tentative approval.
D. In no case shall work on the current phase area include stripping or
disturbance of woodland and forest or soils of any area set aside for
later phases.
E. All improvements within the particular phase shall be completed. All
active and passive recreation areas and/or facilities and other
community amenities and facilities shall be shown on the phased plans,
and shall be completed contemporaneously with the completion of
construction of the dwellings of the phase.
F. Any plans and other documents required by the Board of Supervisors to
depict all of the foregoing and the limits thereof are submitted to, and
approved by, the Board of Supervisors.
G. The application must contain a schedule showing the proposed times
within which applications for final approval of all sections of the PRD
are intended to be filed. The schedule shall be updated annually on the
anniversary of its tentative approval until the development is completed
and accepted.
A. Careful consideration shall be given to the conservation, arrangement
and location of open spaces to take advantage of physical
§ 135-34 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-36
1:424
characteristics of the site and to place open spaces within easy access
and view of dwelling units.
B. The following performance standards shall apply to all common open
space for PRD-1 and PRD-2:
(1) Minimum area. Any land parcel designated as open space shall
have an area of not less than 1/2 acre.
(2) Minimum parcel width.
(a) The configuration of any parcel of open space shall provide for
a minimum width of 150 feet.
(b) The configuration of any trail right-of-way shall provide for a
minimum width of 10 feet.
(3) Maximum impervious surface coverage. Not more than 3% of the
total area of designated open space shall be covered by impervious
surfaces; and not more than 1/2 of any individual parcel of open
space shall be covered by impervious surfaces, including buildings.
(4) Minimum setback. Any buildings within the designated open space
shall be located no less than 100 feet from the perimeter tract
lines; and no less than 50 feet from any new lot line created within
a tract.
(5) Any structure within the designated open space shall be located no
less than 50 feet from the perimeter tract lines, and no less than 25
feet from any new lot line created within a tract, except for signs,
boundary fences, walls, benches, light standards and landscaping.
(6) Area configuration. The open space designated within a
development area shall not be merely leftover or unusable land. It
shall be laid out to the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors
according to sound site design principles providing a maximum of
accessibility to the residents of a development.
(7) At least 35% of the required open space shall be designed,
constructed and maintained for active and/or passive recreation
areas and facilities.
(8) Whenever possible and practical, the open space designated within
a development shall be arranged so as to encompass a single land
parcel or minimum number of parcels, linked by a common means
of circulation and access, and it shall be contiguous to the
developed area and not separated from it by existing roads unless
safe pedestrian access can be demonstrated.
(9) Whenever possible and practical, the designated open space shall
be arranged to maintain contiguity with other designated open
space areas or similar areas on adjacent lands, either by direct
§ 135-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-36
1:425
contact such as a trail or walkway, or some common means of
circulation and access.
C. None of the following shall constitute open space area: roads; parking
areas; proposed utility easements and rights-of-way; permanent erosion
and sedimentation control facilities and areas; stormwater
management facilities and areas; areas or facilities for sewage disposal
or water supply; and any on-ground or aboveground utilities.
D. Ownership and maintenance of open space. There shall be provisions
which ensure that the open space shall continue as such and be
properly maintained. Any of the following methods and no other may be
used, either individually or together, to preserve, own and maintain
open space:
(1) Dedication in fee simple.
(2) Homeowners' association.
(3) Condominium agreement.
(4) Dedication of easement.
(5) Transfer of fee simple title or development rights and easements to
a private conservation organization.
E. The following specific requirements are associated with each of the
above-mentioned various methods:
(1) Fee simple dedication. The Township may, but shall not be required
to, accept an offer of a deed of dedication, provided that:
(a) Such land is accessible to the residents of the Township.
(b) There is no cost of acquisition, other than any costs incidental
to the transfer of ownership, such as title insurance.
(c) The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such lands.
(2) Homeowners' association: the establishment of a nonprofit
homeowners' association, pursuant to the Uniform Planned
Community Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq., which may dedicate an
easement for public use of the open space land. The Board of
Supervisors may, but shall not be required to, accept such
easement, unless a satisfactory agreement is reached concerning
the scope of public use and the future maintenance of the
easement.
(3) Condominium agreement. The open space may be controlled
through the use of condominium agreements. Such agreements
shall be in conformance with the Uniform Condominium Act, 68
Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq. All open space land shall be held as
"common element."
§ 135-36 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-36
1:426
(4) Dedication of easements. The Township may, but shall not be
required to, accept easements for public use of any portion of open
space land, the title of which is to remain in the ownership of the
condominium or homeowners' association, provided that:
(a) Such land is accessible to the residents of the Township.
(b) There is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental
to the transfer of ownership, such as title insurance.
(c) A satisfactory maintenance agreement is reached between the
developer and the Township.
(5) Transfer to a private conservation organization. With permission of
the Board of Supervisors, the landowner or developer may transfer
either the fee simple title with appropriate deed restrictions
running in favor of the Township, or the development rights or
easements, to a private, nonprofit organization among whose
purposes is to conserve open space land, provided that:
(a) The organization is acceptable to the Board of Supervisors and
is a bona fide conservation organization with perpetual
existence.
(b) The organization is chartered under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to administer deed restrictions
limiting eventual disposition of such property for the purposes
stated in their Articles of Incorporation.
(c) The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper
reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization
becomes unwilling or unable to continue to function.
(d) A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors is entered into by the landowner or developer and
the organization.
(6) In the event of any proposed transfer of open space within the
methods permitted in this section, or of the assumption of
maintenance of open space land by the Township as hereinafter
provided, notice of such action shall be given to all affected
property owners.
F. If a homeowners' association is formed, it shall be governed according
to the following regulations:
(1) The landowner or developer shall provide the Board of Supervisors
with a description of the organization, including its bylaws and
methods for maintaining open space, which shall be acceptable to
the Township Solicitor.
(2) The organization is to be organized by the landowner or developer
and operating with financial subsidization by the landowner or
§ 135-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-36
1:427
developer, if necessary, before the sale of any lots within the
development.
(3) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers of
dwelling units therein and their successors.
(4) The members of the organization shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining and developing open space, in accordance with
procedures established by them. If a member fails to pay his prorata
share, then a lien against an individual property may be made
in accordance with the provisions for same in the bylaws of the
organization.
(5) The organization shall be responsible for maintenance of and
insurance and taxes on open space.
(6) The organization shall have or hire adequate staff to administer
common facilities and maintain the open space to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors.
G. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain open
space, or any successor organization, shall at any time after designation
fail to maintain the open space in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with any and all approved plans, the Township may serve
written notice upon such organization, or upon the residents and
owners, setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to
maintain the open space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall
include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within
30 days thereof.
(1) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modifications thereof shall not be cured within said 30 days or any
extension thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the taxable
values of the properties and to prevent the open space from
becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said open space and
maintain the same for a period of one year, at the expense of the
organization. The cost of any such maintenance shall be borne by
the owners of lots within the development from which the open
space was derived. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the
public any rights to use the open space except when the same is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the residents and owners.
(2) Before the expiration of said year, the Board of Supervisors shall,
upon its initiative or upon the request of the organization
theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the open space, call
a public hearing upon notice to such organization, or to the
residents and owners of the project, to show cause why such
maintenance by the Township shall not, at the election of the
Township, continue for a succeeding year. If the Township shall
determine such organization is not ready and able to maintain said
open space in a reasonable condition, the Township may, in its
discretion, continue to maintain said open space during the next
§ 135-36 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-36
1:428
§ 135-37. Application for tentative approval.
succeeding year and subject to a similar hearing and determination
in each year thereafter. The decision of the Township in any such
case shall constitute a full administrative decision subject to
judicial review at the expense of the homeowners' association.
(3) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed
ratably against the properties within the project that have a right of
enjoyment of the open space and shall become a municipal lien on
said properties. The Township, at the time of entering upon said
open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of
such lien in the Office of Judicial Support of Delaware County upon
the properties affected.
H. The developer and landowner of every PRD shall prepare and present at
the time of submission of the final development plan for the approval of
the Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township documents
regarding the proposed ownership and maintenance of open space
containing the declarations of covenants, restrictions, easements,
charges and liens deemed necessary to own and maintain the common
open space and recreation areas within the PRD.
I. Documentation shall contain the following minimum essential
provisions with respect to any proposed organization:
(1) Powers and duties in maintaining and administering open space
and recreation facilities, administering and enforcing all covenants
and restrictions, and in the levying, collecting and disbursing of
assessments and charges.
(2) Membership and voting rights.
(3) Rights and duties of Chadds Ford Township, members of the
organization and residents of the PRD in the event of a breach of
the covenants and restrictions.
A. An application for tentative approval of a development plan of a PRD
shall be filed by or on behalf of the owner or owners of the tract. If an
application form is made available by the Board, any such application
shall be made upon such form. An application for tentative approval
shall be accompanied by the requisite number of copies of all plans and
fees as set forth by resolution by the Township from time to time. An
application shall be filed with a Township official.
B. The following fees shall be payable by the landowners:
(1) The owner shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable
expenses incurred by the Township for services rendered by the
Township consultants, including but not limited to the Township
Engineer, Traffic Engineer, Planning Consultant, Fire Marshal,
§ 135-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-37
1:429
SEO, Township Solicitors or other consultants as the Township
deems necessary pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(2) The owner shall deposit with the Township Secretary, at the time of
filing the application for tentative approval, a reimbursement
agreement and all applicable fees as set from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors. As the fund is expended, the
owner shall make further deposits upon notice from the Township
Secretary.
(3) The fee to the Township for review of tentative and/or final plans
shall be as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
(4) After payment of the plan review fee and other expenses under this
article and after action upon the final plan, the Township Secretary
shall refund to the owner any deposit remaining with an accounting
of disbursements.
(5) The amount of all fees and security may be changed from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
C. Application for tentative approval shall include, but not be limited to,
the following documents:
(1) A statement indicating the nature of the applicant's and the
landowner's interest in the project.
(2) A written statement by the applicant setting forth the reasons why
the project would be in the public interest and would be specifically
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan's goals and objectives, and
its recommendations for land use, community facilities and
utilities, circulation and other matters therein recommended.
(3) A map indicating the location and size of the property and its
relationship to surrounding properties, such map to be drawn at a
scale of one inch equals 800 feet and showing all streets, roads,
municipal boundaries, subdivisions, adjoining properties and
designated open space within 500 feet of any part of the tract. In
the case of development of a section of the entire tract, the key map
shall show the relationship of the section to the entire tract.
(4) A plan delineating the topography of the tract. Such plan shall
contain contours with at least two-foot intervals, and shall
accurately and conspicuously depict slopes from 0% to 20%, 20% to
25%, and greater than 25%.
(5) A plan accurately and conspicuously delineating, depicting and
otherwise noting in graphic fashion the vegetation of the tract.
Such plan shall depict the location of all trees 12 inches in caliper
and greater.
§ 135-37 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-37
1:430
(6) A plan delineating the drainage characteristics of the tract. Such
plan shall accurately and conspicuously depict, delineate and
otherwise note in graphic fashion all perennial and intermittent
streams and watercourses and their watersheds, as well as floodprone
and flood hazard areas.
(7) A plan accurately and conspicuously delineating, depicting and
otherwise noting in graphic fashion the proposed use areas by type,
size, location, and gross density.
(8) A site plan accurately and conspicuously delineating, depicting and
otherwise noting in graphic fashion the location, use, height, bulk
and location of buildings and other structures; and the location of
streets, rights-of-way, cartways, parking areas and other
improvements.
(9) A plan accurately and conspicuously delineating, depicting and
otherwise noting in graphic fashion common open space. Such plan
shall depict the location, function and size of common open space
areas, and any existing natural and cultural features comprised
within the common open space. In addition, the plan shall include
any facilities or structures indicating the proposed means for
ownership and maintenance of the common open space.
(10) A detailed report indicating the feasibility and capability for
operation and maintenance of water supply systems, sanitary
sewage systems, stormwater systems and other utility systems.
Such a report shall indicate the following:
(a) With regard to water supply, there shall be an objective
description of the ability of achieving a safe and efficient water
supply system. The description shall indicate the demand by
type of use for water from the proposed development and its
related uses and users.
(b) With regard to sanitary sewage disposal, there shall be an
objective description of the ability of achieving a safe and
efficient system for sewage disposal. The description shall
indicate all proposed measures and methods for conveying and
treating the sewage and the sizes of all pipes, and direction
and quantities of flow anticipated from the development, as
well as all connections which will be required to tie into
existing sanitary sewers.
(c) Assurance of the availability of safe and efficient public or
community water and public or community sewer facilities
shall also be reported. Such assurance shall include letters
signed by an officer of the company or authority concerned,
indicating its ability and willingness to provide such service
within the timetable proposed for the development, including a
statement of maintenance responsibilities and rates and
charges for service. If water is to be provided by means other
§ 135-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-37
1:431
than by private wells owned and maintained by the individual
owners of lots within the PRD, applicants shall present
evidence to the Board of Supervisors that the planned
residential development is to be supplied by a certificated
public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners,
or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a
certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement, or a commitment or agreement to
serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be
acceptable evidence.
(d) In the event that on-site systems are utilized for water supply
and sewage disposal, a full report of how such systems will
operate shall be submitted.
(e) With regard to stormwater systems, there shall be an objective
description of the ability of achieving a safe and efficient
stormwater management system.
(11) A detailed plan illustrating all connections to existing public
utilities, streets and rights-of-way, accompanied by documentation
as to the impact of the proposed development on said public
utilities, streets and rights-of-way.
(12) A site plan illustrating phasing, including a time schedule for all onsite
and off-site improvements to be offered for dedication for
public use, which may be modified from time to time with approval
of the Board of Supervisors.
(13) A fully detailed soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
(14) A fully detailed grading plan accurately and conspicuously
delineating proposed contours at intervals of at least two feet.
(15) A fully detailed landscaping plan wherein existing and proposed
plant materials are accurately and conspicuously differentiated,
delineated, depicted or otherwise noted in a graphic fashion and a
plant list with botanical and common names as well as notations for
the quantities and sizes of all proposed plant materials.
(16) A written report indicating the proposed methods and measures to
be undertaken for energy conservation and the effective utilization
of renewable energy resources.
(17) The documents containing covenants, grants of easements, or
other restrictions to be imposed upon the use of land, buildings and
structures, including proposed grants and/or easements for utilities
and the like.
§ 135-37 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-37
1:432
§ 135-38. Public hearings.
(18) A report accompanying the application shall, insofar as possible,
indicate compliance with the provisions set forth for documentation
herein.
(19) All other requirements for a preliminary plan as set forth in
§§ 110-10 and 110-19 of the Code of Chadds Ford Township.
D. Copies of every application for tentative approval received by the
Township Secretary shall be promptly forwarded to the Township
Planning Commission and to the Delaware County Planning
Commission for review and recommendation. The Township Planning
Commission and the Delaware County Planning Commission shall
review and report upon the application to the Board of Supervisors. A
copy of the reports of the respective planning commissions shall be
furnished to the applicant upon receipt by the Board of Supervisors. In
addition, a copy of the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall
be submitted to the Delaware County Conservation District for review
and comment.
E. The applicant, the Board of Supervisors, the Township Planning
Commission, and the Delaware County Planning Commission may
consult informally concerning the project prior to the filing of an
application for tentative approval, provided that no statement or
representation by a member of the official review agency or of the
planning agencies be binding upon the Township.
A. Within 60 days after the formal filing of an application for tentative
approval of a PRD pursuant to this article, a public hearing pursuant to
public notice on said application shall be held by the Board, in the
manner prescribed in Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code for zoning ordinance hearings. The Chairman or, in his
absence, the Acting Chairman of the Board may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses. All testimony by witnesses at any
hearing shall be given under oath, and every party of record at a
hearing shall have the right to cross-examine adverse witnesses.
B. A verbatim record of the hearing shall be caused to be made by the
Board whenever such records are requested by any party to the
proceedings, but the cost of making and transcribing such a record
shall be borne by the party requesting it, and the expense of copies of
such record shall be borne by those who wish to obtain such copies. All
exhibits accepted in evidence shall be identified and duly preserved or,
if not accepted in evidence, shall be properly identified, and the reason
for the exclusion clearly noted, in the record.
C. The Board may continue the hearing from time to time, and may refer
the matter back to the Planning Commission for a further report;
provided, however, that, in any event, the public hearing or hearings
§ 135-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-38
1:433
§ 135-39. Findings after public hearing.
shall be concluded within 60 days after the date of the first public
hearing.
A. Grant or denial of approval.
(1) The Board, within 60 days following the conclusion of the public
hearing provided for in this article or within 180 days after the date
of filing of the application, whichever occurs first, shall, by official
written communication to the landowner, either:
(a) Grant tentative approval of the development plan as submitted;
(b) Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not
included in the development plan as submitted; or
(c) Deny tentative approval to the development plan.
(2) Failure to so act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of
tentative approval of the development plan as submitted. In the
event, however, that tentative approval is granted subject to
conditions, the landowner may, within 30 days after receiving a
copy of the official written communication of the Board, notify the
Board of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in which case the
Board shall be deemed to have denied tentative approval of the
development plan. In the event the landowner does not, within said
period, notify the Board of his refusal to accept all said conditions,
tentative approval of the development plan, with all said
conditions, shall stand as granted.
B. The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings of
fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for
the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial, and said
communication shall set forth with particularity in what respects the
development plan would or would not be in the public interest,
including but not limited to findings of fact and conclusions on the
following:
(1) In those respects the development plan is or is not consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the Township;
(2) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including but not limited to density, bulk and use, and the
reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the
public interest;
(3) The purposes, location and amount of the common open space in
the PRD, the reliability of the proposals for maintenance and
conservation of the common open space, and the adequacy or
§ 135-38 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-39
1:434
§ 135-40. Status of plan after tentative approval.
inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the open space as related
to the proposed density and type of residential development;
(4) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which said design does or does not make adequate provision for
public services, provide adequate control over vehicular traffic, and
further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment;
(5) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed PRD to the
neighborhood in which it is proposed to be established; and
(6) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents
of the PRD in the integrity of the development plan.
C. In the event a development plan is granted tentative approval, with or
without conditions, the Board may set forth in the official written
communication the time within which an application for final approval
of the development plan shall be filed or, in the case of a development
plan which provides for development over a period of years, the periods
of time within which applications for final approval of each part thereof
shall be filed. Except upon the consent of the landowner, the time so
established between grant of tentative approval and an application for
final approval shall not be less than three months and, in the case of
developments over a period of years, the time between applications for
final approval of each part of a plan shall be not less than 12 months.
A. The official written communication provided for in this article shall be
certified by the Secretary of the Township and shall be filed in his office,
and a certified copy shall be mailed to the landowner. Where tentative
approval has been granted, it shall be deemed an amendment to the
Zoning Map, effective upon final approval, and the same shall be noted
on the Zoning Map.
B. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plan of the
PRD for recording nor authorize development or the issuance of any
building permits. A development plan which has been given tentative
approval as submitted, or which has been given tentative approval with
conditions which have been accepted by the landowner (and provided
that the landowner has not defaulted or violated any of the conditions of
the tentative approval), shall not be modified or revoked nor otherwise
impaired by action of the Township pending an application or
applications for final approval, without the consent of the landowner,
provided that an application for final approval is filed or, in the case of
development over a period of years, provided that applications are filed,
within the periods of time specified in the official written
communication granting tentative approval.
§ 135-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-40
1:435
§ 135-41. Application for final approval.
C. In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and
thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to
abandon said development plan and shall so notify the Township in
writing, or in the event the landowner shall fail to file application or
applications for final approval within the required period of time or
times, as the case may be, the tentative approval shall be deemed to be
revoked and all that portion of the area included in the development
plan for which final approval has not been given shall be subject to
those ordinances otherwise applicable thereto as they may be amended
from time to time, and the same shall be noted on the Zoning Map and
in the records of the Secretary of the Township.
A. An application for final approval may be for all the land included in a
development plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative approval,
for a section thereof. Said application shall be made to the Board and
within the time or times specified by the official written communication
granting tentative approval. The application shall include any drawings,
specifications, covenants, easements, performance bond and such other
requirements as may be specified by this chapter or by §§ 110-11 and
110-22 of the Code of Chadds Ford Township, as amended, as well as
any conditions set forth in the official written communication at the
time of tentative approval. A public hearing on an application for final
approval of the development plan, or part thereof, shall not be required,
provided that the development plan submitted for final approval is in
compliance with the development plan theretofore given tentative
approval and with any specified conditions attached thereto.
B. Plans submitted for final approval of all or a portion of a PRD shall be
prepared in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Each application for approval of any final plan shall be
accompanied by a requisite number of copies of such plan as set
forth annually via resolution by the Township Board of Supervisors,
which shall be clear and legible prints.
(2) All plans shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than one inch equals
50 feet and shall be submitted on paper prints no smaller than 17
inches by 22 inches and no larger than 24 inches by 36 inches. If
two or more sheets are required, a key shall be shown on each
sheet, and an overall index sheet shall be submitted. The final plan
shall reflect the following:
(a) Development name or identifying title.
(b) Municipality in which the development is located.
(c) North arrow, scale and date.
(d) Name of record owner of the tract and developer.
§ 135-40 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-41
1:436
(e) Name and seal of the registered professional engineer,
landscape architect, land planner, architect or surveyor
responsible for the plan.
(f) Boundaries of the tract determined by accurate survey in the
field which shall be balanced and closed with an error of
closure not to exceed one foot in 10,000.
(g) Property lines within the development.
(h) Lot areas to 1/1,000 of an acre.
(i) Street lines, lot lines, rights-of-way, easements and areas
dedicated to or proposed to be dedicated to public use; profiles
for all streets and for proposed sanitary and storm sewer
mains, inlets and manholes, and the location of all utilities.
(j) The length of all straight lines, radii, lengths of curves and
tangent bearings for each street.
(k) All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot
and of each area proposed to be dedicated to public use.
(l) The designation of common open space, including the area
contained therein.
(m) Location, grades, length and width of all private driveways and
all parking facilities and type of paving and other surface to be
used therefor.
(n) Names of all streets as designated by the Board of Supervisors.
(o) Location of all structures.
(p) Number of lots.
(q) Number of dwelling units by type and, where applicable, the
number, location, and square footage of areas to be devoted to
nonresidential use.
(r) Architectural drawings, floor plans and elevations to scale of
all buildings, said drawings to bear the seal of the architect
who has prepared same.
(s) Total property area of the entire development tract and, in the
case of development in sections, the size of the sections for
which plans are submitted.
(t) All permanent monuments.
(u) A final grading plan, including existing and proposed contours
at vertical intervals of at least two feet, the lines thereof to be
conspicuously distinguishable.
§ 135-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-41
1:437
(v) All existing watercourses, tree masses and other significant
natural features, including all trees 12 inches in caliper or
greater to be retained and/or to be removed.
(w) A final soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
(x) A final landscaping plan, wherein existing and proposed plant
materials are differentiated, a final plant list indicating the
types, quantities and sizes of the proposed plant materials, and
typical planting details for tree planting and staking, shrub
planting, and the like.
C. Documentation. The application for final approval shall also be
accompanied with copies of the following:
(1) Copies of deed restrictions and/or easements, if any, and other
documents relating to title, use or occupancy.
(2) Copies of permits obtained under authority of statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or the County of Delaware
regarding the provision for construction, operation and
maintenance of the proposed sanitary sewer system, water supply
system, soil erosion and sedimentation control system and highway
occupancy system.
(3) An affidavit that the applicant is the owner of the land proposed to
be developed, or has been authorized by the landowner to be the
applicant, supported by a copy of the written authority therefor.
(4) Offers of dedication and covenants and other documents governing
the reservation and maintenance of undedicated open space,
provided that all such offers of dedication and covenants shall bear
the certificate of approval of the Township Solicitor as to their legal
sufficiency and compliance herewith.
(5) Copies of the agreements for common open space not to be offered
for dedication to the Township.
(6) A statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the owner or owners of
the property to the effect that the development as shown on the
application for final approval is made with his or their free consent
and that it is desired to record the application and accompanying
documents upon their approval.
(7) Whenever a developer proposes to establish a street which is not
offered for dedication and not required to be offered for dedication,
he shall submit a copy of statements cosigned by the Township
Solicitor that he has made an agreement on behalf of his heirs and
assigns with the Township. Said agreement shall be subject to the
Township Solicitor's approval and shall be recorded with the plan.
Said agreement shall establish the condition under which the
§ 135-41 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-41
1:438
streets may later be offered for dedication and stipulate among
other things:
(a) That the street shall be in a good state of repair as certified by
the Township Engineer, or that the owner or owners of the lots
along it agree to include with the offer of dedication sufficient
money, as estimated by the Township Engineer, to restore the
street to conform with Chadds Ford Township design
standards.
(b) That an offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the
street as a whole.
(c) That the method of assessing repair costs shall be as
stipulated.
(d) That, where applicable, agreement to offer the street for
dedication by the owners of 60% of the lots shall be binding on
owners of the remaining lots.
(8) The specifications governing the construction of streets, storm
drainage, sidewalks, and all public improvements shall be in strict
accordance with the specifications and general standards of
Chadds Ford Township and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
covering similar types of construction.
(9) Where any public improvements are to be constructed within a
planned residential development, Article VI of Chapter 110 of the
Code of Chadds Ford Township, as amended, shall govern the
construction and acceptance of such public improvements,
including the provisions for requirement of performance and
maintenance bonds.
D. In the event the application for final approval has been filed, together
with all drawings, specifications and other documents in support
thereof, and as required by this chapter and the official written
communication of tentative approval, the Board shall, within 45 days
from the date of the regular meeting of the Board next following the
date the application is filed, grant such development plan final
approval; provided, however, that should the next regular meeting
occur more than 30 days following the filing of the application, the
forty-five-day period shall be measured from the 30th day following the
day the application has been filed.
E. In the event the development plan as submitted contains variations
from the development plan given tentative approval, the Board may
refuse to grant final approval and shall, within 45 days from the date of
the regular meeting of the Board next following the date the application
is filed, so advise the landowner in writing of said refusal, setting forth
in said notice the reasons why one or more of said variations are not in
the public interest; provided, however, that should the next regular
meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of the application,
§ 135-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-41
1:439
the forty-five-day period shall be measured from the 30th day following
the day the application has been filed.
(1) In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
(a) Refile his application for final approval without the variations
objected; or
(b) File a written request with the governing body or its
designated agency that it holds a public hearing on his
application for final approval.
(2) If the landowner wishes to take either such alternate action he may
do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for final
approval, or within 30 additional days if the time for applying for
final approval shall have already passed at the time when the
landowner was advised that the development plan was not in
substantial compliance. In the event the landowner shall fail to take
either of these alternate actions within said time, he shall be
deemed to have abandoned the development plan. Any such public
hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice within 30 days after
request for the hearing is made by the landowner, and the hearing
shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in this article for
public hearings on applications for tentative approval. Within 30
days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall by official
written communication either grant final approval to the
development plan or deny final approval. The grant or denial of
final approval of the development plan shall, in cases arising under
this section, be in the form and contain the findings required for an
application for tentative approval set forth in this article. Failure of
the Board to render a decision on an application for final approval
and communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the
manner required by this section shall be deemed an approval of the
application for final approval, as presented, unless the applicant
has agreed in writing to an extension of time or change in the
prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the
decision, in which case, failure to meet the extended time or
change in manner of presentation of communication shall have like
effect.
F. A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final
approval shall be so certified without delay by the Board and shall be
filed of record forthwith in the office of the Recorder of Deeds before
any development shall take place in accordance therewith. Upon the
filing of record of the development plan, the zoning and subdivision
regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in such plan shall
cease to apply thereto except as herein noted. Pending completion in
accordance with the time provisions stated in Section 508 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10508, of said PRD
or of that part thereof, as the case may be, that has been finally
approved, no modification of the provisions of said development plan, or
§ 135-41 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-41
1:440
§ 135-42. Enforcement and modification of plan provisions.
To further the mutual interest of the residents of the PRD and of the public
in the preservation of the integrity of the development plan, as finally
approved, and to ensure that modifications, if any, in the development
plan shall not impair the reasonable reliance of the said residents upon
the provisions of the development plan, nor result in changes that would
adversely affect the public interest, the enforcement and modifications of
the provisions of the development plan as finally approved, whether those
are recorded by plan, covenant, easement or otherwise, shall be subject to
the following provisions:
part thereof, as finally approved, shall be made except with the consent
of the landowner. Upon approval of the final plan, the applicant shall
record the plan in accordance with Subsection H herein, and post
financial security in accordance with § 110-40 of the Township Code.
G. In the event that a development plan, or a section thereof, is given final
approval and thereafter the applicant shall abandon such plan or the
section thereof that has been finally approved, and shall so notify the
Board in writing; or, in the event the landowner shall fail to commence
and carry out the PRD in accordance with the time provisions stated in
Section 508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC),
after final approval has been granted, no development or further
development shall take place on the property included in the
development plan until after the said property is reclassified by
enactment of an amendment to this chapter in the manner prescribed
for such amendments in Article VI of the Municipalities Planning Code.
H. The final plot plan will be recorded by the landowner in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds in and for Delaware County, Pennsylvania, within 90
days of the granting of final approval by the Board of Supervisors. The
Recorder of Deeds of the county shall not accept any plan for recording
unless such plan officially notes the approval of the Board of
Supervisors and review by the Delaware County Planning Commission.
A. The provisions of the development plan relating to:
(1) The use, bulk and location of buildings and structures;
(2) The quantity and location of common open space, except as
otherwise provided in this article; and
(3) The intensity of use or the density of residential units shall run in
favor of the Township and shall be enforceable in law or in equity
by the Township without limitation on any powers of regulations
otherwise granted the Township by law.
B. All provisions of the development plan shall run in favor of the residents
of the PRD but only to the extent expressly provided in the development
plan and in accordance with the terms of the development plan, and to
that extent said provisions, whether recorded by plan, covenant,
§ 135-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-42
1:441
§ 135-43. Supplementary mobile home park regulations.
easement or otherwise, may be enforced at law or equity by said
residents acting individually, jointly, or through an organization
designated in the development plan to act on their behalf; provided,
however, that no provisions of the development plan shall be implied
to exist in favor of residents of the PRD except as to those portions of
the development plan which have been finally approved and have been
recorded.
C. All those provisions of the development plan authorized to be enforced
by the Township under this section may be modified, removed, or
released by the Township except grants or easements relating to the
service or equipment of a public utility, subject to the following
conditions:
(1) No such modification, removal or release of the provisions of the
development plan by the municipality shall affect the rights of the
residents of the planned residential development to maintain and
enforce those provisions, at law or equity, as provided in this
section.
(2) No modification, removal or release of the provisions of the
development plan by the municipality shall be permitted except
upon a finding by the Board, following a public hearing thereon
pursuant to public notice called and held in accordance with the
provisions of this article, that the same is consistent with the
efficient development and preservation of the entire PRD, does not
adversely affect either the enjoyment of land abutting upon or
across the street from the planned residential development or the
public interest, and is not granted solely to confer a special benefit
upon any person.
D. Residents of the PRD may, to the extent and in the manner expressly
authorized by the provisions of the development plan, modify, remove
or release their rights to enforce the provisions of the development
plan, but no such action shall affect the right of the Township to enforce
the provisions of the development plan in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
A. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
maintain, operate, or alter any mobile home park, or to extend any of
the facilities thereof, within the limits of Chadds Ford Township unless a
valid license required by this chapter has been issued to the responsible
party for such purpose or purposes by Chadds Ford Township.
B. Issuance of license. Upon approval of such application, and upon
payment of all fees required, the Chadds Ford Township Board of
Supervisors shall authorize the Code Enforcement Officer to issue a
mobile home park license, which shall be valid for a period of one year
from the date of issuance.
§ 135-42 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-43
1:442
C. Renewal licenses. Application for renewal of a mobile home park
license shall be made to the Mobile Home Park Inspector at least 30
days prior to the expiration date of the license. Renewal of a mobile
home park license shall be issued by the Mobile Home Park Inspector
upon certification by the applicant that the park continues to meet the
standards and requirements hereunder for the issuance of an original
license.
D. Fees. The annual fee for renewal of mobile home park license shall be
payable on the first day of January of each year according to the
schedule of fees adopted by the Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford
Township. The fee shall be paid with the submission of the application.
E. Approval of application. All applications for approval of a mobile home
park license shall be acted upon by the Board of Supervisors, which
shall render its decision and communicate it to the applicant not later
than 90 days after the application has been duly filed and the
appropriate fees paid.
F. Nontransferability of license; change of ownership. A license issued
hereunder shall not be transferable. If ownership of the mobile home
park is transferred by sale, deed, will, transfer of the majority interest
of the stock of the corporation, or in any other way, the new owner shall,
before commencing operation of the mobile home park, apply for a
license to the Mobile Home Park Inspector and certify that the park
continues to meet the standards and the requirements hereunder for
the issuance of the original license. The fee paid shall be as established
by the Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township under its
schedule of fees.
G. Inspection of mobile home parks.
(1) Appointment of Mobile Home Park Inspector. At the regular
meeting of the Board of Supervisors in January of each year, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors to the position of Mobile Home Park Inspector.
(2) Duties of the Mobile Home Park Inspector shall be as outlined in
§ 135-43V(2).
H. On-lot storage. Each mobile home lot may have an on-lot storage
building not to exceed 120 square feet.
I. Internal streets.
(1) Construction and design. All internal streets and roadways shall be
constructed of concrete or macadam of sufficient bearing strength
and design to accommodate mobile home units and of sufficient
width to accommodate anticipated traffic and parking, if necessary.
In no case shall any internal street or roadway have less than 20
feet of paved width. Dead-end streets shall be provided, at the
§ 135-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-43
1:443
closed end, with a turnaround having an outside radius of not less
than 40 feet.
(2) Dedicated internal streets. If internal streets of the mobile home
park are to be dedicated to the Township, they shall be constructed
to conform with requirements as set forth in Chapter 110, Article V,
§ 110-26, the Code of Chadds Ford Township.
J. Off-street parking, walks and driveways.
(1) Off-street parking. Off-street parking for a least two motor vehicles
shall be provided at each mobile home site. Each parking space
shall be at least 10 feet by 20 feet and shall be of permanent
pervious paving or macadam construction, which shall be specified
in the plan. Off-site common parking areas may be provided in lieu
of parking spaces at each mobile home site, but, in such case,
parking slots shall be provided at the ratio of two spaces for each
mobile home site not equipped with on-site parking. The express
approval of the Township Board of Supervisors and Planning
Commission is required for off-site common parking designs.
(2) Nonresident parking. Additional parking spaces for vehicles of
nonresidents shall be provided at the rate of five spaces for each 10
units. Such parking may be provided either by providing sufficient
additional off-street parking spaces within an individual mobile
home lot or in overflow parking areas situated outside the cartway.
(3) Walks and driveways. All mobile home parks shall provide safe,
convenient, all-season pedestrian walkways of adequate width for
their intended use, durable and convenient to maintain, between
the park streets and all community facilities provided for park
residents.
(a) Where pedestrian traffic is concentrated, each walk shall have
a minimum width of four feet.
(b) All mobile home sites shall be connected to common walks, and
to streets or to driveways connecting to a paved street. Each
such walk shall have a minimum width of two feet.
(c) All mobile home sites shall be connected to a paved street by a
driveway, a portion of which may be covered by a carport.
K. Sewage disposal.
(1) General requirements. The sanitary sewage system for the mobile
home park shall comply with Act 537 of the Sewage Facilities Act of
January 24, 1966, as amended.91
(2) Individual sewer connections. Each mobile home shall be provided
with a sewer riser pipe.
91.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 135-43 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-43
1:444
(3) Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the site. Surface drainage shall be
diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend
at least 1/2 inch above ground elevation and shall be capped.
(4) An application for a plumbing permit for each installation is
required.
L. Water supply.
(1) Public water supply. Wherever an existing public water system is
geographically and economically accessible to the proposed mobile
home park, a distribution system connecting thereto shall be
designed to furnish an adequate supply of water to each mobile
home and all service buildings with adequate main sizes and fire
hydrant locations to meet the specifications of the Middle States
Department Association of Fire Underwriters.
(2) Community water supply. Where a satisfactory public water supply
system is not available, a mobile home park may be served by a
community water supply system which shall meet all applicable
requirements and regulations of state, county and municipal
agencies having jurisdiction.
M. Mobile home foundations. A pad or set of footings shall be provided for
each mobile home unit.
(1) Pad. A concrete pad shall be at least six inches in thickness at all
points reinforced with at least one layer of welded steel wire mesh
approved by the Building Inspector. At least six tiedown rings of 1/2
inch minimum diameter round cross-section shall be provided, to
which the mobile home may be secured. The tiedown rings shall be
anchored according to current engineering practice and shall meet
with the approval of the Township Engineer and the Building
Inspector. If a pad is located on "fill" soil, the bearing capacity of
the soil shall be determined by test. The soil shall be required to
meet a minimum load bearing capacity specified by the Township
Engineer. The mobile home shall be supported by solid concrete
block pillars on five-foot centers along the mobile home frame.
(2) Footings. Footings shall be brick, masonry or poured reinforced
concrete, or solid concrete building blocks at least eight inches
thick. The bottom of footings shall be at least two feet six inches
below final grade and not less than six inches below natural grade.
The minimum dimensions shall be eight inches by 20 inches. The
maximum spacing shall be five feet between centers in an area
equal to at least 80% of the overall area of the particular mobile
home supported by the footings. Tiedown rings and support pillars
shall be the same as specified in Subsection M(1) above.
N. Lighting requirements. In addition to all other requirements for
electrical distribution systems and lighting, each mobile home park
§ 135-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-43
1:445
shall maintain adequate lighting at all times by means of the installation
of electric eye post lights at each site. The post lights shall be
maintained in good working order at all times by the mobile home park
operator. All exterior lighting shall be controlled so that the source of
the light shall not be visible beyond the boundaries of the mobile home
park.
O. Utility distribution system. All utilities shall be installed and maintained
in accordance with utility company specifications regulating such
systems, and shall be underground.
P. Landscaping and buffering.
(1) Landscaping. No portion of tree masses or trees with caliper of six
inches or greater shall be cleared unless clearly necessary for
effectuation of the proposed mobile home park development.
Applicants shall make all reasonable efforts to harmonize their
plans with the preservation of existing trees and the natural
contours of the land.
(2) In addition to planting for buffered setbacks, a mobile home park
shall be provided with the following landscaping requirements:
(a) Disturbed topsoil shall be stockpiled and replaced after
construction.
(b) Deciduous trees of varying species commonly designated as
shade trees and 2 1/2 inch minimum caliper shall be planted
within the mobile home park at the ratio of two per mobile
home. In the event that a substantial portion of the tract is
wooded and a substantial number of trees remain after
development, the Board of Supervisors may modify this
requirement.
(c) Ornamental, deciduous and/or evergreen shrubs of varying
species shall also be planted within the mobile home park at a
ratio of at least four per mobile home, and distributed
throughout the mobile home park.
(d) Planting of landscape material shall be in accordance with a
plan and shall be completed within six months of approval of
the final plan, and failure to carry out the landscaping plan
within such time shall warrant denial of the park's annual
license.
(3) Buffers. A buffered setback shall be provided, running the full
length of the lot line between the mobile home park and all
adjoining properties, to serve as a visual screen.
(a) Such buffered setback shall consist of a visual screen, at least
25 feet in depth, containing two alternating rows of evergreen
material (such as spruce, pine or hemlock) spaced on ten-foot
§ 135-43 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-43
1:446
centers. At the time of planting, the evergreen material shall
be at least seven feet in height (after planting) to visually
screen the property.
(b) The plantings shall be maintained and replaced within six
months in the event of death of any plant materials. Plantings
shall not be placed closer than three feet from any property
line.
(c) All existing deciduous and evergreen trees above two inches in
caliper and/or six feet in height shall be preserved in the buffer
areas, except where clearance is required to ensure sight
distance.
(d) A minimum of 70% of plant material shall be evergreen unless
a greater amount is necessary as determined.
Q. Refuse handling. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse or waste
in the mobile home park shall be so conducted as to create no health
hazard, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire
hazards or air pollution. If refuse collection centers are provided, they
shall be screened from adjoining properties and public view by a wall,
fence or hedge. No on-site incineration shall be permitted.
R. Insect and rodent control. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be
maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation.
Extermination methods and other measures to control insects and
rodents shall conform with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection.
S. Fuel supply and storage.
(1) Natural gas systems.
(a) Natural gas piping systems when installed in mobile home
parks shall conform to the rules and regulations of the Natural
Fuel Gas Code, An American National Standard, Second
Edition 1980, NFPA 54, or any revised edition.
(b) Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an
approved shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet.
The outlet shall be equipped with a cap to prevent accidental
discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas systems.
(a) Liquefied petroleum gas systems provided for mobile homes,
service buildings or other structures when installed shall be
maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
National Fire Protection Association Standards No. 58, entitled
"Storage and Handling, Liquefied Petroleum Gases," latest
edition.
§ 135-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-43
1:447
(b) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve
excessive pressures and shall be arranged so that the
discharge terminates at a safe location.
(c) The system shall have at least one accessible means for
shutting off gas. Such means shall be located outside the
mobile home and shall be maintained in effective operating
condition.
(d) All liquefied gas piping outside of the mobile home shall be well
supported and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted
liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed
through piping equipment and systems in mobile homes.
(e) Vessels of more than 12 and less than 60 U.S. gallons' gross
capacity may be installed on a mobile home lot and shall be
securely but not permanently fastened to prevent accidental
overturning.
(f) No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located
inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or
other structure.
(3) Fuel oil supply systems.
(a) All fuel oil supply systems for mobile homes, service buildings
and other structures shall be installed and maintained in
conformity with the rules and regulations of the National Fire
Protection Association Standards No. 31, entitled "Installation
of Oil Burning Equipment," latest edition.
(b) All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to
mobile homes shall be securely, but not permanently, fastened
in place.
(c) All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings and other structures shall have shutoff valves located
within five inches of storage tanks.
(d) All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely placed and
shall be not less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
(e) Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be
protected against physical damage.
T. Fire protection.
(1) Litter control. Mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter
and rubbish.
(2) Fire extinguishers and smoke detectors.
§ 135-43 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-43
1:448
(a) Portable fire extinguishers meeting legal requirements shall be
kept in public service buildings under park control of the
mobile home park.
(b) Portable fire extinguishers and smoke detectors shall be kept
and maintained in each mobile home.
U. Miscellaneous requirements.
(1) Mobile home hitch and decorative skirt. After a mobile home has
been anchored to the mobile home stand, the hitch which is
employed for the usual and normal movement of the unit shall be
removed, and there shall be placed around the base of the unit a
decorative skirt. If the hitch is nonremovable, it shall be enclosed in
the decorative skirt.
(2) Township permits required. In addition to any license and/or
plumbing permit requirements, there shall be obtained permits as
follows:
(a) A mobile home installation permit for the installation of any
mobile home on any site, including the replacement of a mobile
home on any existing site, shall be obtained from the Township.
The application for the permit shall be on a form provided by
the Township.
(b) A building permit is required for any construction or addition
to a mobile home. A building permit is also required for the
construction of any new sites in existing mobile home parks
and for each new site in a proposed mobile home park. The
permits required by this section may be obtained either by the
mobile home park operator or the occupants of the site, but
failure of either to obtain a permit shall not excuse the other. If
the application for a permit is filed by the occupants of the site,
notice of the filing of the application shall be given by the
occupant or occupants to the operator of the mobile home
park.
(3) Management responsibilities.
(a) The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued
shall operate in compliance with this chapter and all other
Township ordinances pertaining thereto and shall provide
adequate supervision and maintenance of its facilities and
equipment and keep same in good repair and in a clean,
sanitary condition.
(b) The park management shall supervise the placement of each
mobile home on its mobile home stand, which includes
securing its stability and installing all utility connections.
§ 135-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-43
1:449
(c) The management shall give the Board of Supervisors and the
Mobile Home Park Inspector, as well as the Plumbing and
Building Inspectors and all other authorized agents of the
Township, free access to all mobile home lots, service buildings
and other community service facilities for the purpose of
inspection.
(d) The manager shall maintain a register containing the number
of occupied mobile home pads and the names of all park
occupants. Such register shall be available to any authorized
person inspecting the park. The manager shall notify the
appropriate offices in accordance with state and local taxation
laws of the arrival, within 10 days of such arrival, and the
departure, no less than 30 days prior to departure, of each
mobile home. The register shall be submitted to the Township
as part of the application for renewal of the mobile home park's
annual license.
(4) When manager is other than mobile home park owner. The
Township shall be notified, in writing, if the mobile home park
manager is other than the owner of the mobile home park.
(5) Removal of mobile home.
(a) No mobile home shall be removed from the Township without
first obtaining a removal permit from the Chadds Ford
Township Tax Collector as required by Act No. 54, 1969, of the
Pennsylvania General Assembly.92 Such permit shall be issued
upon payment of a fee as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors and real estate taxes assessed against
the home and unpaid at the time the permit is requested.
(b) Any person who removes a mobile home from Chadds Ford
Township without first having obtained a removal permit shall,
upon summary conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
$300 and costs of prosecution or undergo imprisonment for not
more than 30 days, or both.
V. Administration.
(1) Administration of provisions. The provisions of this section shall be
administered by the duly authorized Township Mobile Home Park
Inspector, Plumbing Inspector and Building Inspector.
(2) Duties of Mobile Home Park Inspector.
(a) To review and process applications for mobile home park
permits, licenses and renewal permits, and to collect fees for
said applications.
92.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8821.
§ 135-43 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-43
1:450
(b) To issue mobile home park permits and renewal permits and to
collect fees for said permits.
(c) To keep records of the findings, discussions, recommendations
and actions taken upon or in respect to all mobile home parks.
(d) To examine and inspect all mobile home parks every six months
to determine compliance with this chapter and other
applicable ordinances of Chadds Ford Township.
(3) Violations and penalties. In the event that the Mobile Home Park
Inspector shall find any violation of the provisions of this section, or
any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or any Township
ordinance pertaining to mobile home parks, he shall give notice to
the person to whom the permit or certificate was issued, or, if none
was issued, to the person to whom such permit or certificate should
have been issued, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(a) Be in writing.
(b) Include a statement for the reason for its issue.
(c) Allow 30 days for the performance of the act it requires.
(d) Be served upon the owner or its agent by the appropriate
enforcement officer or someone authorized to enforce the Code
as designated by the Board of Supervisors.
(e) Contain an outline of the remedial action which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of the section violated, or
any part thereof, and with the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
W. Revocation. Upon failure of the holder of a permit or certificate to
comply with the notice of violation and compliance order provided
herein, the appropriate administrative agency may revoke the permit or
certificate for the operation of the mobile home park and may give an
appropriate cease-and-desist order terminating the operation of the
mobile home park.
X. Appeal.
(1) Board of Supervisors. The holder of a permit or certificate
receiving notice of revocation as set forth in Subsection W may
appeal said revocation of license to the Township Board of
Supervisors within 30 days of said notice. The filing of a timely
appeal to the Board of Supervisors shall stay the revocation of
license until the Board of Supervisors has reviewed the revocation
and given its decision, in writing, to the holder of the permit or
certificate, which shall be made after a public hearing on the
question of revocation held after notice of at least seven days shall
have been given to the holder of the permit.
§ 135-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-43
1:451
(2) Court of competent jurisdiction. Following the decision of the
Board of Supervisors upholding or revoking the license, the holder
of a permit or certificate revoked hereunder may appeal the
revocation to a court of competent jurisdiction as in similar cases,
provided that the appeal is made within 30 days after the date of
issuance of the order of revocation.
Y. Other actions. In addition to the other enforcement procedures herein
provided, the Township may institute in the name of the municipality
any appropriate actions or proceedings in law or equity to enforce
provisions of this section and to prevent the violation thereof.
Z. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation, who or which has violated
the planned residential development provisions of any ordinance
enacted under this act or prior enabling laws shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced
by a municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by a
municipality as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the appropriate rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the District Justice determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to
have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the 5th
day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of planned
residential development provisions shall be paid over to the
municipality whose ordinance has been violated.
(2) The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant any person or entity other than the municipality the right
to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 135-43 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-43
1:452
ARTICLE IX
B District (Business)
§ 135-44. Purpose.
The B Business Districts are designed for the following purposes:
§ 135-45. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used or occupied subject to Article XV for any of the following uses and for
no other:
A. To permit areas for shopping, services and other consumer-related
needs in locations which are safely accessible from major roads in the
Township, such as U.S. Route 1 and Wilmington-West Chester Pike;
B. To meet special requirements to insure compatibility between the
district and adjoining districts, and to establish business uses and
buildings which are well designed and constructed;
C. To control the treatment of access, parking, landscaping, signage,
outdoor storage, and the like, in order to create functional, attractive
and safe businesses; and
D. To promote the sensitive development of the U.S. Route 1 and
Wilmington-West Chester Pike corridors for uses that will be visually
compatible with the character of the Brandywine Gateway area, noted
for its historic, topographic, architectural, cultural and artistic
heritage.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwelling. If a building on a lot is used in
whole or in part as a dwelling, the lot area, frontage, depth of lot,
front yard, side yard, rear yard and other related requirements
shall be the same as those in an R-2 Residence District.
(2) Shops and stores for the retail sale of such items as antiques, art,
books, bicycles, drugs and pharmaceuticals, food, office equipment
and supplies, furniture, flowers and plants, garden supplies,
hardware, household appliances, jewelry, newspaper, notions,
paint, periodicals, records, shoes, stereos, stationery, tobacco, toys,
wearing apparel and other like merchandise; provided that any
individual, detached shop or store is less than 10,000 square feet in
gross floor area.
(3) Professional, business, medical, administrative and insurance
offices.
(4) Banks, including drive-in banks, and similar financial institutions.
§ 135-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-45
1:453
(5) Personal retail service shops, including beauty parlors and
barbershops, dealing directly with customers on the premises.
(6) General retail service or limited repair shops, including watch or
clock repair, jewelry or optical repair, radio or television repair,
electrical household appliance repair, shoe repair, tailor,
dressmaker, photographer, and locksmith.
(7) Bakery, pastry, candy, confectionery or ice cream shops, making
goods for sale on the premises, but specifically excluding lunch
wagons or similar vehicles, or any other transient or moveable
structures from which food and food products are sold.
(8) Restaurants offering meals or refreshments to be served and
consumed on the premises within an enclosed building.
(9) Shops for craftsmen, including carpentry, wood-working, cabinet
making, furniture upholstery, metal working, blacksmithing,
tinsmithing and the like.
(10) Cultural facilities, such as art galleries, auditoriums, libraries,
museums open to the public, and the like.
(11) Community centers, adult education centers or similar facilities
operated by a nonprofit institution.
(12) Private, commercial, educational institutions, including schools for
dance, music, art, drama, and the like.
(13) Bed-and-breakfast inns.
(14) Municipal uses and governmental buildings.
(15)Railway passenger stations.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted principal uses.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XIX for the exclusive use of
patrons and employees.
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XVIII.
C. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted by the Board of
Supervisors, provided that all standards, criteria and conditions for
conditional uses as set forth in § 135-164 have been met:
(1) Motels or hotels.
(2) Retail shops and stores where any individual, detached shop or
store is 10,000 square feet or more in gross floor area.
(3) Clubs or lodges.
§ 135-45 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-45
1:454
§ 135-46. Height regulations.
The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall conform to
§ 135-167A of this chapter.
§ 135-47. Area and bulk regulations.
Except as provided in Subsection C below pertaining to lots which were less
than one acre at the effective date of this article, the following shall apply:
(4) Public parking garage.
(5) Funeral homes.
(6) Commercial recreation facilities for fitness, racquetball, squash,
swimming and like activities.
(7) Fast-food restaurants, with or without drive-through service
accessory thereto.
(8) Commercial greenhouses.
(9) Educational, philanthropic, or religious uses.
(10) Assisted living residence - home for the aged, provided that such
facility complies with the area and bulk regulations of § 135-47A
and the lot on which it is located has a minimum lot size of two
acres and contains not less than 750 square feet of lot area for each
living unit within the facility. [Added 8-5-2015 by Ord. No. 134]
(11) Outdoor dining shall be permitted on the same premises as a
restaurant that has indoor seating for the purpose of food and/or
beverages for immediate consumption on the premises. Refer to
Article XXI, Additional Regulations, for outdoor dining standards.93
[Added 11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 147]
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than one acre (43,560 square feet)
shall be provided for every principal permitted building erected or
used for any principal permitted use.
(2) Lot width at the building line. A lot width at the building line of not
less than 150 feet shall be provided.
(3) Lot width at the street line. A lot width at the street line of not less
than 100 feet shall be provided.
(4) Building coverage. Not more than 25% of the total area of any lot
shall be occupied by buildings.
93.Editor's Note: See § 135-170.1, Outdoor dining.
§ 135-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-47
1:455
(5) Impervious surface coverage and green area. Not more than 65%
of the total area of any lot shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
Not less than 35% of the total area of any lot shall be preserved
and/or created as green area.
(6) Front yard. No building or any part thereof shall be erected within
75 feet of the street line along U.S. Route 1 and Wilmington-West
Chester Pike, and 55 feet of any other street line.
(7) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall not be
less than 60 feet in depth.
(8) Side yards. Each lot shall have two side yards of not less than 30
feet in width each, with an aggregate width of 75 feet, provided
that stores and other permitted business uses may be constructed
in rows with party walls, so long as each store or other business
premises so constructed shall have a width at the building line of at
least 20 feet; however, if an alley is provided between such
structures, said alley shall consist of an unobstructed area not less
than 25 feet in width. On a corner lot all setbacks from streets shall
be as set forth in Subsection A(6) above for front yards.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 65,000 square feet shall be
provided for every principal building erected or used for any
conditional use.
(2) Lot width at the building line. A lot width at the building line of not
less than 175 feet shall be provided.
(3) Lot width at the street line. A lot width at the street line of not less
than 125 feet shall be provided.
(4) Building coverage. Not more than 30% of the total area of any lot
shall be occupied by buildings.
(5) Impervious surface coverage and green area. Not more than 65%
of the total area of any lot shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
Not less than 35% of the total area of any lot shall be preserved
and/or created as green area.
(6) Front yard. No building or any part thereof shall be erected within
85 feet of the street line of U.S. Route 1 and Wilmington-West
Chester Pike, and 60 feet of any other street line, except for vehicle
sales where the setback from U.S. Route 1 and Route 202 street
lines shall be at least 100 feet and the setback from other street
lines shall be at least 85 feet.
(7) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall not be
less than 65 feet in depth.
§ 135-47 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-47
1:456
§ 135-48. Special requirements for all uses.
(8) Side yards. Each lot shall have two side yards of not less than 40
feet in width each, with an aggregate width of 95 feet. On corner
lots, setbacks shall be in accordance with Subsection B(6) above for
front yards.
C. Permitted principal uses on lots which were less than one acre prior to
the effective date of this article.
(1) Lot width at the building line: 85 feet minimum.
(2) Lot width at the street line: 50 feet minimum.
(3) Building coverage: not more than 35%.
(4) Impervious surface coverage and green area: Not more than 65%
of the total area of any lot shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
Not less than 35% of the total area of any lot shall be preserved
and/or created as green area.
(5) Front yard: 50 feet minimum from the street line.
(6) Rear yard: 40 feet minimum.
(7) Side yards: 20 feet minimum each; 45 feet minimum aggregate. On
corner lots, setbacks from street lines shall be 50 feet minimum.
A. Ownership. The tract shall be held in single ownership and shall be
operated under unified control and management. In the event of
multiple ownership, a written agreement between the parties and
owners involved shall be submitted to evidence that the development
and management will be in accordance with a single plan with common
authority and responsibility.
B. Site and building design.
(1) The physical design of the site plan shall provide for control of
vehicular traffic; make adequate provisions for water supply,
sewage disposal, soil erosion and sedimentation control,
stormwater management, fire protection and other public services;
and promote the amenities of light, air and visual enjoyment.
(2) All buildings shall be designed and sited to reflect a sensitivity to
existing natural features; to be responsive to solar orientation,
wind exposure and energy efficiency; and to relate to similar
buildings on adjoining tracts in terms of size and scale.
C. Buffer area.
(1) Wherever a lot with a business use adjoins any residential use or
district, a buffer area of not less than 30 feet in width shall be
provided. The buffer area shall conform to the regulations set forth
in § 135-160, and shall be landscaped and maintained in
§ 135-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-48
1:457
accordance with the standards of Subsection D, below, and
§ 135-161.
(2) Wherever such lot adjoins any other use or district, a fifteen-foot
buffer area shall be provided and shall be landscaped in
accordance with Subsection D and §§ 135-160 and 135-161.
D. Landscaping. In addition to the requirements of § 135-161, the
following shall apply:
(1) All uses in the B Business District shall provide and maintain
attractively landscaped grounds.
(2) A landscaping plan shall be prepared and approved prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
(3) All landscaping shall be implemented and approved prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, unless approved otherwise
by the Township contingent upon a satisfactory escrow of funds in
lieu of completion, when seasonal conditions inhibit the installation
of landscaping.
(4) Landscaped areas and buffer planting strips shall be provided as
follows:
(a) A twenty-five-foot-wide landscaped area shall be provided
along the entire frontage of any business use, except in areas
where there is an access road or driveway needed for ingress
and egress.
(b) A ten-foot-wide landscaped area shall be provided along the
side and rear yard lot lines, except within a required thirty-foot
buffer area where a buffer planting strip shall be 20 feet in
width.
(c) Landscaping within parking areas shall be in accordance with
Article XIX.
(5) Wherever a business use is constructed or built on an individual lot,
where no subdivision or land development is proposed, a
landscaping plan shall be provided, implemented, and approved
prior to issuance of any permits or certificates as set forth in
Subsection D(2) and (3) above. Such plan shall conform to all
requirements for landscaping as set forth herein and in Article XIX
and § 135-161.
E. Setbacks for accessory use structures. Notwithstanding the
requirements for a buffer yard, and related landscaping, and for
outdoor storage and display, no accessory use structure shall be located
within 15 feet of any side or rear property line, except for:
(1) Fencing which defines property lines or serves as a required
continuous visual buffer.
§ 135-48 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-48
1:458
(2) Approved common driveways which may straddle property lines.
(3) Utilities. All utility lines servicing the tract shall be placed
underground.
F. Mechanical equipment. All such equipment shall be enclosed within a
building or shall be fenced.
G. Outdoor storage and display.
(1) All trash, garbage, rubbish and debris of any kind shall be stored
within the building in fireproofed rooms. If dumpster-type
containers are used, they shall be fenced and in conformance with
the Fire Code.94
(2) No used or new, retail, wholesale or leased goods or products,
which are offered for sale or other exchange, shall be stored, set
out or displayed within 50 feet of a street line, except for vehicle
sales uses where no such items shall be within 75 feet of a street
line.
H. Sewage disposal and water supply.
(1) The design of any proposed on-site or off-site sewage disposal
facilities shall meet the standards established by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, and the Township as set
forth in part in § 135-162.
(2) Individual on-site or community water supply systems shall be
subject to the approval of the state and the Township.
(3) Where public sewer and/or public water is reasonably accessible,
the use shall tie into such systems.
I. Environmental controls. No building may be erected, altered or used,
and no lot or premises may be used, for any trade, industry or business
that is noxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or
other disturbance; or that is dangerous to public health or safety; or is
in violation of any of the environmental controls of § 135-162.
J. Off-street parking and motor vehicle access. In addition to the
regulations of Article XIX, the following shall apply:
(1) There shall be provided sufficient parking spaces to accommodate
on the premises the vehicles of all persons involved in every use,
including patrons, occupants, and employees.
(2) Site accessways, driveways, parking and loading facilities shall be
paved with an approved all-weather, dust-free surface.
(3) Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections on
streets.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 59, Construction Codes.
§ 135-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-48
1:459
(4) Garage facilities or parking places for the free accommodation of
motor vehicles of the patrons or occupants of all establishments
shall be provided in connection with any building or structure
hereafter erected, constructed, or altered, and any lot or premises
hereafter prepared, opened or brought into operation, to be used in
whole or in part as a place of public entertainment and amusement
or as a hotel, restaurant, or eating place, or public market. Any
such garage facilities shall be provided and maintained either on
the same lot or an adjacent lot, located not over 100 feet from the
main or other entrance to said building or place of public
entertainment or accommodation.
(5) All garage facilities shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate
the number of automobiles likely to be used by such patrons in
attending such places of amusement, or the occupants, guests and
visitors of such hotel, restaurant or eating place, or public market,
as may be determined by the Board of Supervisors from an
inspection of the plans of such proposed establishment, and from
any other available evidence, prior to the issuance of any permit for
the erection, construction, alteration, operation or use thereof, and
prior to the commencement of certificate of occupancy.
(6) No permit shall be issued for any use until such provision for offstreet
parking has been made in accordance herewith and it shall
be unlawful therefore to continue operation and maintenance of
any such place of public entertainment, hotel, restaurant or eating
place, or public market, unless such parking facilities are in like
manner at all times maintained.
(7) No more than one point of ingress or egress shall be provided along
any one-hundred-foot increment of frontage on U.S. Route 1 or
Wilmington-West Chester Pike.
K. Curbing and edging.
(1) All parking areas, access driveways, walkways, landscaped islands,
and planting beds shall be curbed to create a neat, orderly
appearance and to aid in the separation of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
(2) Curbing shall be raised vertical curbs made of concrete, steel
edging, or other material approved by the Township.
(3) All curbs and edging shall provide for cuts to promote handicapped
access.
L. Crosswalks and sidewalks.
(1) All areas of major pedestrian circulation shall be accommodated by
sidewalks made of concrete or other approved material at a
minimum width of 3 1/2 feet.
§ 135-48 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-48
1:460
§ 135-49. Development procedure and review.
(2) All areas where pedestrian and vehicular circulation may conflict
shall be line-striped to indicate a pedestrian crosswalk.
M. All signs shall comply with Article XVIII.
N. Lighting. All lighting shall be designed, constructed and arranged to
prevent glare. No lighting shall be directed to cause a nuisance or
disturbance to adjoining properties, or to cause any difficulty with
visibility from streets.
(1) No lighting shall be located so as to illuminate areas beyond the
property line on which such lighting is located.
(2) All lighting shall be approved by the Township to determine that it
is shielded to insure that the source of the light will not be visible
beyond the boundaries of the property in order to minimize
disturbance to motorists, pedestrians, or adjoining properties and
uses.
(3) All lighting shall be in accordance with the standards of the
Illumination Engineering Society (IES).
(4) No lighting standard shall exceed 15 feet in height and no such
standard shall have more than one light fixture, unless approved
otherwise by the Township.
A. All applicable sections of Chapter 110, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall apply.
B. Whenever the development is in stages, plans for each stage shall
require preliminary and final plan approval and shall comply with an
overall conceptual plan for the tract and the developers agreement.
C. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership, or shall be
the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of the entire
tract, and shall be under unified control. If ownership of the entire tract
is held by more than one person or entity, the application shall identify
and be filed on behalf of all of the said owners. Approval of the plan
shall be conditioned upon agreement by the applicant or applicants that
the tract shall be developed under single direction in accordance with
the approved plan. No site preparation or construction shall be
permitted other than in accordance with the approved plan. If
ownership of all or any part of the approved plan changes, no site
preparation or construction by such new owner or owners shall start
before a review of the terms and obligations of the approved plan and
agreement in writing to be bound thereby with respect to development
of the tract.
D. To insure that the development will continue in a unified and
harmonious manner, the applicant shall submit to the Township for
§ 135-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-49
1:461
§ 135-50. Completion and maintenance of improvements.
approval plans at all stages and phases to insure the compatibility of
the character of buildings, landscaping, signs, lighting and other site
structures and improvements.
E. Before a building permit can be issued, the building and development
plans for any proposed building shall be reviewed by the Township
Planning Commission and reviewed and approved by the Board of
Supervisors for any subdivision and/or land development. In the case of
one lot or one building or leasehold, such proposal shall be reviewed
and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
F. Compliance with the approved plan and conditions added by the
Supervisors at time of approval shall be confirmed by the Building
Inspector and/or the Township Engineer before an occupancy permit is
issued.
G. Any change in ownership of a B Business use or change in type of
business shall require a review by the Building Inspector and issuance
of a new occupancy permit, the new occupancy permit to be issued only
if the new business complies with all ordinances and any prior
conditions of approval.
A. All improvements within a particular stage shall be completed
contemporaneously with the completion of the construction of the
buildings in such stage, together with all site improvements essential to
the function of the improvements in the said stage.
B. Provisions for the completion and maintenance of all private streets,
parking lots, sidewalks, curbs, street trees, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers and all other improvements pursuant to the approved plan in
forms satisfactory to the Township shall be a condition precedent to
approval by the Township.
§ 135-49 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-50
1:462
ARTICLE X
B-1 District (Business-1)
§ 135-51. Purpose.
The B-1 Business-1 Districts are designed for the following purposes:
§ 135-52. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used or occupied subject to Article XV for any of the following uses and for
no other:
§ 135-53. Height regulations.
The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall conform to
§ 135-167A of this chapter.
A. The purposes set forth in § 135-44; and
B. To provide for motor vehicle service station and motor vehicle sales
and/or service uses.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Any uses which are permitted principal uses in B Business
Districts.
B. Permitted accessory uses
(1) Any accessory uses which are permitted accessory uses in B
Business Districts.
C. Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted by the Board of
Supervisors, provided that all standards, criteria, and conditions for
conditional uses as set forth in § 135-164 have been met:
(1) Any uses permitted by conditional use in B Business Districts.
(2) Motor vehicle service stations, provided that all services are
conducted within the confines of the lot; no entrance or exit shall
be located within 150 feet of a property used for a residence,
school, church or hospital; and no gasoline pump or filling hoses
shall be installed within 75 feet from the abutting street line.
(3) Sales and/or service of motor vehicles, including automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles, farm machinery, mobile and modular homes,
boats and recreational vehicles.
§ 135-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-54
1:463
§ 135-54. Area and bulk regulations.
All area and bulk regulations of B Business Districts (§ 135-47) shall be
applicable in B-1 Business-1 Districts, except that the required rear yard for
a conditional use shall be 30 feet in depth.
§ 135-55. Special requirements for all uses.
The special requirements for all uses in B Business Districts (§ 135-48) shall
be applicable to all uses in the B-1 Business-1 Districts.
§ 135-56. Development procedure and review.
The development procedure and review required for B Business Districts
(§ 135-49) shall be applicable in the B-1 Business-1 Districts.
§ 135-57. Completion and maintenance of improvements.
The completion and maintenance of improvements requirements in B
Business Districts (§ 135-50) shall be applicable in B-1 Business-1 Districts.
§ 135-58. Miscellaneous regulations.
Except as otherwise indicated herein, all zoning and other regulations
applicable to B Business Districts shall be applicable in B-1 Business-1
Districts.
§ 135-54 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-58
1:464
ARTICLE XI
PBC District (Planned Business Center)
§ 135-59. Purpose.
The PBC Planned Business Center Districts are designed for the following
purposes:
§ 135-60. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used or occupied subject to Article XV for any of the following uses and for
no other:
A. To provide opportunities for well designed business uses in the form of
a shopping, service or convenience center; a planned office or
professional office center; or a clustering of otherwise conventional,
detached, individual business uses;
B. To create a safe, efficient, convenient, functional and attractive
business center wherein buildings, structures and open areas are well
integrated to the site and well related to one another;
C. To provide for large site, low lot coverage development to project a
campus-like setting where buildings and landscaping are unified;
D. To promote the sensitive development of the U.S. Route 1 and
Wilmington-West Chester Pike corridors for uses that will be visually
compatible with the character of the Brandywine Gateway area, noted
for its historic, topographic, architectural, cultural and artistic
heritage;
E. To meet special requirements for the design, development and
maintenance of the district, and to insure compatibility with adjoining
districts; and
F. To promote excellence in the design, development and maintenance of
site details pertaining to layout, circulation, grading, landscaping,
signage, drainage and related improvements.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) A planned shopping, service or convenience center of less than
50,000 square feet of gross leasable area, which integrates such
uses as retail shops and stores, banks, personal service shops,
general service or repair shops, restaurants, fast-food restaurants,
and offices, within a building or group of buildings.
(2) Professional, business, medical and administrative offices.
(3) Business, trade, public or private schools.
§ 135-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-60
1:465
§ 135-61. Height regulations.
The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall conform to
§ 135-167A of this chapter.
§ 135-62. Area and bulk regulations.
(4) Indoor and outdoor commercial recreation facilities for fitness,
racquetball, squash, swimming and like activities.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted principal uses.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XIX.
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XVIII.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Hotel or motel.
(2) Public parking garage.
(3) Movie theater; drive-in movie theater.
(4) A planned shopping, service or convenience center of 50,000
square feet or greater of gross leasable area, which integrates such
uses as retail shops and stores, banks, personal service shops,
general service or repair shops, restaurants, fast-food restaurants,
and offices, within a building or group of buildings, subject to
§ 135-63P.
(5) Educational, philanthropic or religious use.
(6) Outdoor dining shall be permitted on the same premises as a
restaurant that has indoor seating for the purpose of food and/or
beverages for immediate consumption on the premises. Refer to
Article XXI, Additional Regulations, for outdoor dining standards.95
[Added 11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 147]
A. Permitted principal uses and conditional uses.
(1) Tract area. A tract area of not less than four acres shall be
provided.
(2) Highway frontage. All tracts shall have a minimum frontage of 300
feet.
(3) Building coverage. Not more than 25% of the total area of any tract
shall be occupied by buildings.
95.Editor's Note: See § 135-170.1, Outdoor dining.
§ 135-60 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-62
1:466
§ 135-63. Special requirements for permitted and conditional uses.
(4) Impervious surface coverage and green areas. Not more than 65%
of the total area of any lot shall be covered by impervious surfaces.
Not less than 35% of the total area of any lot shall be preserved
and/or created as green area.
(5) Setbacks from street lines. No building shall be located within 85
feet of the street line of U.S. Route 1 and Wilmington-West Chester
Pike and 65 feet of any other street line, except for vehicle sales
where the setback from the U.S. Route 1 and Wilmington-West
Chester Pike street lines shall be at least 100 feet and the setback
from other street lines shall be at least 85 feet. However, the Board
of Supervisors may allow the reduction of the above setbacks as
follows:
(a) The sixty-five-foot setback may be reduced to 50 feet where a
corner lot is particularly shallow, angular or otherwise
irregularly shaped, provided that such reduction does not
adversely affect sight distance to or from the tract.
(b) The eighty-five-foot setback may be reduced to 50 feet,
provided that:
[1] The landscaped area is increased from 25 feet to 40 feet.
[2] No off-street parking is placed in the fifty-foot setback.
[3] The height of buildings shall not exceed the maximum
height as set forth in § 135-167A of this chapter between
the fifty- and eighty-five-foot setback area.
[4] A berm is installed to conceal visibility to any driveway
between the landscaped area and the building.
(6) Setbacks from perimeter side and rear property lines. No building
shall be located within 75 feet from any perimeter side or rear
property line of a tract which adjoins a residential zoning district,
or within 50 feet of any perimeter side or rear property line
abutting a nonresidential zoning district.
A. Ownership. The tract shall be held in single ownership and shall be
operated under unified control and management. In the event of
multiple ownership, a written agreement between the parties and
owners involved shall be submitted to evidence that the development
and management will be in accordance with a single plan with common
authority and responsibility, and an approved association of owners.
B. Site and building design.
(1) The physical design of the site plan shall provide for control of
vehicular traffic; make adequate provisions for water supply,
sewage disposal, soil erosion and sedimentation control,
§ 135-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-63
1:467
stormwater management, fire protection and other public services;
promote the amenities of light, air and visual enjoyment; and
comply with Subsection P.
(2) All buildings shall be designed and sited to reflect a sensitivity to
existing natural features; to be responsive to solar orientation,
wind exposure and energy efficiency; and to relate to similar
buildings on adjoining tracts in terms of size and scale.
(3) Buildings and other structures shall be planned, designed,
constructed and maintained in response to the natural features of a
site such as topographic features, surface and groundwater
resources, and vegetation.
C. Buffer area. Whenever any use in the PBC District adjoins any
residential use or district, a thirty-five-foot buffer area shall be
provided. A twenty-foot buffer area shall be provided whenever any use
in the PBC District adjoins any nonresidential uses. The buffer area
shall conform to § 135-160 and be landscaped and maintained in
accordance with Subsection D below and § 135-161.
D. Landscaping. In addition to the requirements of § 135-161, the
following shall apply:
(1) All uses in the PBC District shall provide and maintain attractively
landscaped grounds.
(2) A landscaping plan shall be prepared and approved prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
(3) All landscaping shall be implemented and approved prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, unless approved otherwise
by the Township contingent upon a satisfactory escrow of funds in
lieu of completion, when seasonal conditions inhibit the installation
of landscaping.
(4) Landscaped areas and buffer planting strips shall be provided as
follows:
(a) A twenty-five-foot-wide landscaped area shall be provided
along the entire frontage of any use in the PBC District, except
in areas where there is an access road or driveway needed for
ingress and egress.
(b) A twenty-foot-wide landscaped area shall be provided along the
side and rear yard lot lines, except within a required thirty-fivefoot
buffer area where a buffer planting strip shall be 25 feet in
width.
(c) Landscaping within parking areas shall be in accordance with
Article XIX.
§ 135-63 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-63
1:468
(d) Landscaping between buildings shall be in accordance with
Subsection P.
(5) Landscaping will be considered a critical element in the PBC
District. As such, all street trees, screening, specimens, accent
plantings, shrub masses, ground covers and other plantings shall
be approved by the Township with a view toward creating a highly
attractive setting for the project.
(6) Whenever a PBC use is constructed on an individual lot, where no
subdivision or land development is proposed, a landscaping plan
shall be provided, implemented and approved prior to issuance of
any permits or certificates as set forth above. Such plan shall
conform to all requirements for landscaping in Article XIX and
§ 135-161.
E. Setbacks for accessory use structures. Notwithstanding the
requirements for a buffer yard and related landscaping, and for outdoor
storage and display, no accessory use structure shall be located within
20 feet of any side or rear property line, except for:
(1) Fencing, which defines property lines or serves as a required
continuous visual buffer.
(2) Approved common driveways which may straddle property lines,
provided that such driveways are landscaped as approved by the
Township.
F. Utilities. All utility lines servicing the tract shall be placed
underground.
G. Mechanical equipment. All such equipment shall be enclosed within a
building or shall be fenced.
H. Outdoor storage and display.
(1) All trash, garbage, rubbish and debris of any kind shall be stored
within the building in fireproofed rooms. If dumpster-type
containers are used, they shall be fenced and in conformance with
the Fire Code.96
(2) No used or new, retail, wholesale or leased, goods or products,
which are offered for sale or other exchange, shall be stored, set
out or displayed within 55 feet of a street line, except for vehicle
sales uses where no such items shall be within 80 feet of a street
line.
I. Sewage disposal and water supply.
(1) Individual on-site or community sewage disposal systems may be
used subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 59, Construction Codes.
§ 135-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-63
1:469
Environmental Protection and the Township, as set forth in part in
§ 135-162.
(2) Individual on-site or community water supply systems may be used
subject to the approval of the state and the Township.
(3) Where public sewer and/or public water is reasonably accessible,
the project shall tie into such systems.
J. Environmental controls. No building may be erected, altered or used,
and no lot or premises may be used for any trade, industry or business
that is noxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or
other disturbance; or that is dangerous to public health or safety; or is
in violation of any of the environmental controls of § 135-162.
K. Parking, highway access and traffic.
(1) All off-street parking and loading regulations of Article XIX shall
apply.
(2) All parking areas shall be separated from the street by a curb,
landscaped area, berm, or other approved treatment in accordance
with Article XIX and § 135-161.
(3) Each separate use or grouping of attached uses shall no have more
than two accessways along the required highway frontage.
(4) Traffic control lanes, devices and signals, and acceleration and
deceleration lanes, shall be approved by the Township, or the state
for roads under the jurisdiction of PennDOT.
(5) All parking, loading, access, service and other areas shall be
adequately illuminated at night. All lighting shall be arranged to
protect the highway and adjoining property from direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind.
L. Crosswalks and sidewalks.
(1) All areas of major pedestrian circulation shall be accommodated by
sidewalks made of concrete or other approved material at a
minimum width of four feet.
(2) All areas where pedestrian and vehicular circulation may conflict
shall be line-striped to indicate a pedestrian crosswalk.
M. Curbing and edging.
(1) All parking areas, access driveways, walkways, landscaped islands,
and planting beds shall be curbed to create a neat, orderly
appearance and to aid in the separation of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation.
(2) Curbing shall be raised vertical curbs made of concrete, steel
edging, or other material approved by the Township.
§ 135-63 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-63
1:470
(3) All curbs and edging shall provide for cuts to promote handicapped
access.
N. Lighting. All lighting shall be designed, constructed and arranged to
prevent glare. No lighting shall be directed to cause a nuisance or
disturbance to adjoining properties, or to cause any difficulty with
visibility from streets.
(1) No lighting shall be located so as to illuminate areas beyond the
property line on which such lighting is located.
(2) All lighting shall be approved by the Township to determine that it
is shielded to insure that the source of the light will not be visible
beyond the boundaries of the property in order to minimize
disturbance to motorists, pedestrians, or adjoining properties and
uses.
(3) All lighting shall be in accordance with the standards of the
Illumination Engineering Society (IES).
(4) No lighting standard shall exceed 15 feet in height and no such
standard shall have more than one light fixture, unless approved
otherwise by the Township.
O. Signs. All signs shall comply with Article XVIII.
P. Special requirements for buildings of 50,000 square feet or greater of
gross leasable area.
(1) No individual building shall exceed 50,000 square feet of total
building footprint/floor area. If more than 50,000 square feet of
building is proposed, then separate buildings shall be constructed.
Each separate building shall be 60 feet from any other building.
(2) If separate buildings are constructed, the sixty-foot space between
them shall have twelve-foot sidewalks adjoining each building;
eight-foot parking/drop-off/loading/unloading space adjoining each
sidewalk; and ten-foot accessways straddling the center of the
sixty-foot space.
(3) The "Main Street" environment to be created under this Subsection
P shall be landscaped with shade trees within the required twelvefoot-
wide sidewalks.
(4) At least one centrally located pedestrian plaza area, comprising an
area of at least 10,000 square feet, shall be provided. The
pedestrian plaza shall include shade trees, planters, benches, and
plaza surfacing of brick, flagstone or like unit pavers.
(5) The building shall have vertical treatments to reduce the mass of
an otherwise horizontal, windowless big box. The vertical
treatments shall include such items as columns, archways,
§ 135-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-63
1:471
§ 135-64. Development stages and permits.
The development of a tract carried out in either a single phase or in stages
shall be executed in accordance with a development agreement. The owner,
developer, and Township shall enter into said agreement embodying all
details regarding compliance with this chapter to assure the binding nature
thereof on the overall tract and its development, which agreement shall be
recorded with the final development plan.
§ 135-65. Development procedure and review.
porticos, and a vertical bay form of gabled roof with twenty-fourfoot-
wide bays.
(6) All of the requirements of this Subsection P shall be presented in
drawings at the time of application for conditional use approval.
A. All applicable sections of Chapter 110, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall apply.
B. Whenever the development is in stages, plans for each stage shall
require preliminary and final plan approval and shall comply with an
overall conceptual plan for the tract and the developers agreement.
C. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership, or shall be
the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of the entire
tract, and shall be under unified control. If ownership of the entire tract
is held by more than one person or entity, the application shall identify
and be filed on behalf of all of the said owners. Approval of the plan
shall be conditioned upon agreement by the applicant or applicants that
the tract shall be developed under single direction in accordance with
the approved plan. No site preparation or construction shall be
permitted other than in accordance with the approved plan. If
ownership of all or any part of the approved plan changes, no site
preparation or construction by such new owner or owners shall start
before a review of the terms and obligations of the approved plan and
agreement in writing to be bound thereby with respect to development
of the tract.
D. To insure that the development will continue in a unified and
harmonious manner, the applicant shall submit to the Township for
approval plans at all stages and phases to insure the compatibility of
the character of buildings, landscaping, signs, lighting and other site
structures and improvements.
E. Before a building permit can be issued, the building and development
plans for any proposed building shall be reviewed by the Township
Planning Commission and reviewed and approved by the Board of
Supervisors for any subdivision and/or land development. In the case of
one lot or one building or leasehold, such proposal shall be reviewed
and approved by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 135-63 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-65
1:472
§ 135-66. Completion and maintenance of improvements.
F. Compliance with the approved plan and conditions added by the
Supervisors at time of approval shall be confirmed by the Building
Inspector and/or the Township Engineer before an occupancy permit is
issued.
G. Any change in ownership of a use in a PBC District or change in type of
business shall require a review by the Building Inspector and issuance
of a new occupancy permit. A new occupancy permit is to be issued only
if the new business complies with all ordinances and any prior
conditions of approval.
A. All improvements within a particular stage shall be completed
contemporaneously with the completion of the construction of the
buildings in such stage, together with all site improvements essential to
the function of the improvements in the said stage.
B. Provisions for the completion and maintenance of all private streets,
parking lots, sidewalks, curbs, street trees, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers and all other improvements pursuant to the approved plan in
forms satisfactory to the Township shall be a condition precedent to
approval by the Township.
§ 135-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-66
1:473

ARTICLE XII
PBC-1 District (Planned Business Center-1)
§ 135-67. Purpose.
The PBC-1 Planned Business Center-1 Districts are designed for the
following purposes:
§ 135-68. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used or occupied subject to Article XV for any of the following uses and for
no other:
§ 135-69. Height regulations.
The height regulations in PBC Planned Business Center Districts, as set
forth in § 135-61, shall be applicable in PBC-1 Planned Business Center-1
Districts.
§ 135-70. Area and bulk regulations.
All area and bulk regulations in PBC Planned Business Center Districts,
as set forth in § 135-62, shall be applicable in PBC-1 Planned Business
Center-1 Districts.
§ 135-71. Special requirements for permitted and conditional uses.
All special requirements for permitted and conditional uses in the PBC
Planned Business Center Districts, as set forth in § 135-63, shall be
applicable in PBC-1 Planned Business Center-1 Districts.
A. Those purposes set forth in § 135-59A through F, inclusive; and
B. To provide for motor vehicle service station and motor vehicle sales
and/or service uses.
A. Permitted principal uses. Any use which is a permitted principal use in
PBC Planned Business Center Districts.
B. Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory uses which are permitted
accessory uses in PBC Planned Business Center Districts.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Any use which is permitted by conditional use in PBC Planned
Business Center Districts;
(2) Motor vehicle service stations; and
(3) Sales and/or service of motor vehicles, including automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles, farm machinery, mobile and modular homes,
boats and recreational vehicles.
§ 135-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-72
1:475
§ 135-72. Development stages and permits.
The development stages and permits for PBC Planned Business Center
Districts, as set forth in § 135-64, shall be applicable in PBC-1 Planned
Business Center-1 Districts.
§ 135-73. Development procedure and review.
The development procedure and review for PBC Planned Business Center
Districts, as set forth in § 135-65, shall be applicable in PBC-1 Planned
Business Center-1 Districts.
§ 135-74. Completion and maintenance of improvements.
The completion and maintenance of improvements requirements for PBC
Planned Business Center Districts, as set forth in § 135-66, shall be
applicable in PBC-1 Planned Business Center-1 Districts.
§ 135-75. Miscellaneous regulations.
Except as otherwise indicated herein, all zoning and other regulations
applicable to PBC Planned Business Center Districts shall be applicable to
PBC-1 Planned Business Center-1 Districts.
§ 135-72 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-75
1:476
ARTICLE XIII
POC District (Planned Office Center)
§ 135-76. Purpose.
The POC Planned Office Center Districts are designed for the following
purposes:
§ 135-77. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used or occupied for any of the following uses and for no other:
A. To provide opportunities for well designed business uses in the form of
a planned office or professional office center;
B. To create a safe, efficient, convenient, functional and attractive
business center wherein buildings, structures and open areas are well
integrated to the site and well related to one another;
C. To provide for large site, low lot coverage development to project a
campus-like setting where buildings and landscaping are unified;
D. To promote the sensitive development of the U.S. Route 1 and
Wilmington-West Chester Pike corridors for uses that will be visually
compatible with the character of Brandywine Gateway area noted for
its historic, topographic, architectural, cultural and artistic heritage;
E. To meet special requirements for the design, development and
maintenance of the district, and to insure compatibility with adjoining
districts; and
F. To promote excellence in the design, development and maintenance of
site details pertaining to layout, circulation, grading, landscaping,
signage, drainage and related improvements.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Professional, business, medical and administrative offices.
(2) Business, trade, public or private schools.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted principal uses.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XIX.
(3) Signs in accordance with Article XVIII.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) Public parking garages.
§ 135-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-77
1:477
§ 135-78. Height regulations.
The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall conform to
§ 135-167A of this chapter.
§ 135-79. Area and bulk regulations.
§ 135-80. Special requirements for permitted and conditional uses.
Refer to § 135-63 for special requirements related to ownership; site and
building design; buffer areas; landscaping; setbacks for accessory use
structures; utilities; mechanical equipment; outdoor storage and display;
sewage disposal and water supply; environmental controls; parking,
highway access and traffic; crosswalks and sidewalks; curbing and edging;
lighting; and signs. All references to "PBC" shall be construed to apply to
"POC."
§ 135-81. Development stages and permits.
Refer to § 135-64.
§ 135-82. Development procedure and review.
Refer to § 135-65. Any reference to "PBC" shall be construed to apply to
"POC."
(2) Educational, philanthropic or religious uses.
(3) Outdoor dining shall be permitted on the same premises as a
restaurant that has indoor seating for the purpose of food and/or
beverages for immediate consumption on the premises. Refer to
Article XXI, Additional Regulations, for outdoor dining standards.97
[Added 11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 147]
A. Tract area: four-acre minimum.
B. Highway frontage: three-hundred-foot minimum for the tract, and onehundred-
fifty-foot minimum for any individual lots therein.
C. Building coverage: twenty-five-percent maximum.
D. Impervious surface coverage and green area: Not more than 65% of the
total area of any lot shall be covered by impervious surfaces. Not less
than 35% of the total area of any lot shall be preserved and/or created
as green area.
E. Setbacks: Refer to § 135-62A(5) and (6) for applicable setbacks for
buildings from street lines and from perimeter property lines.
97.Editor's Note: See § 135-170.1, Outdoor dining.
§ 135-77 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-83
1:478
§ 135-83. Completion and maintenance of improvements.
Refer to § 135-66.
§ 135-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-83
1:479

ARTICLE XIV
LI District (Light Industrial)
§ 135-84. Purpose.
It is the purpose of the Light Industrial District to permit and encourage
industrial development that will be so located as to constitute a harmonious
and appropriate part of the physical development of the Township; to
provide minimum standards for the development and operation of
industries; to prohibit housing, retail selling and other uses which would
be incompatible to the uses permitted in the district; and to provide for
the public convenience and avoid undue congestion of the roads and to
otherwise create conditions conducive to carrying out these and other
broad purposes of this chapter.
§ 135-85. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied, for
any of the following purposes and no other:
A. Professional, business, administrative, finance, insurance, and
government offices.
B. Experimental, research or testing laboratories.
C. The packaging or treatment of the following previously processed
materials: cellophane, felt, fur, glass, horn, paper, pharmaceuticals,
plastics, shells, aluminum, leather, plaster, metals, precious and/or
semiprecious stones, wood, yarns, containers, or novelties from paper
or cardboard, natural or synthetic rubber, tobacco, textiles or textile
products, and perfumes.
D. The manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, electrical or
electronic devices; home, commercial and industrial appliances and
instruments, including the manufacture of accessory parts or
assemblies; dental and medical equipment; watches and clocks; optical
goods; drafting equipment; and canvas products.
E. Light metal processing as follows: cleaning, finishing, grinding, heat
treating, plating, polishing, rust-proofing, and sharpening; metal
stamping and extrusion of small products; and similar metal-working
processes.
F. Manufacture and assembly of electrical or electronic devices.
G. Carpet or rug cleaning; laundry, dry-cleaning and dyeing plants.
H. Job printing, newspaper or book publishing.
I. Baking and food processing for human consumption only.
J. Wholesaling and distributing activities when associated with permitted
uses. Retailing activities are hereby prohibited.
§ 135-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-85
1:481
§ 135-86. Prohibited uses.
Prohibited are the following uses: blast or reverberatory furnaces, smelters,
foundries, drop hammers, rolling mills; tanning, curing of leathers,
rawhides or skins; wool pulling or scouring; fat rendering; coke ovens;
distillation of bones, coal or wood; fertilizer manufacture; fish smoking and
curing; gas manufacture; oil cloth or linoleum manufacture; ore reduction;
paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, or varnish manufacture; petroleum refining;
soap manufacture; tallow, grease or lard manufacture or refining; tar
distillation or manufacture or refining; and all similar uses.
§ 135-87. Area regulations.
K. Any use of the same general nature as any of the above permitted uses
and which meets all rules and regulations applicable thereof when
authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board.
L. Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the above permitted uses, including cafeteria located within the main
building and operated by the employer for the exclusive use of its
employees.
M. Any other use required by law to be permitted and not specifically
permitted in any other zoning district, and the exclusion of which would
be unlawful, shall be permitted by conditional use.
A. Lot area and width. Each lot shall have an area of not less than three
acres, and a width of not less than 250 feet at the building line.
B. Building area ratio. Principal and accessory buildings shall occupy no
more than 30% of the lot area. All buildings and parking areas and
storage areas shall occupy no more than 60% of the lot area.
C. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yard. Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than 100 feet
in depth, measured from the street line.
(2) Side and rear yards. Each lot shall have two side yards of not less
than 75 feet in width each, and a rear yard of not less than 75 feet
in depth, except that no industrial building or structure shall be
located closer than 150 feet from any dwelling units existing at the
time of the adoption of this chapter or from any residential district
boundary line. Seventy-five feet of the required minimum yard
width along lot lines adjoining residential districts shall be
landscaped and maintained as a buffer strip, and shall include an
improved permanent evergreen planting to the full length of the lot
lines to serve as a visual screen.
§ 135-85 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-88
1:482
§ 135-88. Height regulations.
The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall conform to
§ 135-167A of this chapter.
§ 135-89. Off-street parking and motor vehicle access.
§ 135-90. General district regulations.
A. Private accessways shall enter a public road at a distance of not less
than 100 feet from any public road intersection.
B. Parking and loading areas shall be located not less than 75 feet from lot
lines adjoining any residential district, and shall have not more than
two accessways to any one public street.
C. Site accessways, driveways, parking and loading facilities shall be
paved with an approved all-weather, dust-free surface.
D. Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections on public
streets.
A. Internal combustion engines shall be muffled and secured so as to
eliminate offensive noises and vibration.
B. Smoke control and control of dust and dirt, fumes, vapors, and gases.
(1) No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source
visible gray greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as
published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a
shade not darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart may be
emitted for not more than four minutes in any thirty-minute period.
(2) These provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also apply
to visible smoke of any other color, with an equivalent apparent
opacity.
(3) The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, smoke, vapors or gases
which can cause any damage to human health, to animals or
vegetation or to other forms of property, or which can cause any
soiling or staining of persons or property at any point beyond the
lot line of the use creating the emission is herewith prohibited.
(4) No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or
otherwise shall exceed 0.3 grains per cubic foot of the covering gas
at any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission.
For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500° F. and 50% of excess air in stack at full load.
C. Noise control. The sound pressure level of any operation shall not
exceed, at any point on the boundary of a nonindustrial district, the
decibel levels in the designated octave band shown below, except for
§ 135-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-90
1:483
emergency fire alarm signals, and subject to the following corrections:
subtract five decibels for pulsating or periodic noises; add five decibels
for noise sources operating less than 20% of any one-hour period.
Sound Levels
Maximum Permitted Sound Level
(decibels)
Octave Band in
Cycles Per Second
Along Residential
District Boundaries
Along Any Other
District Boundaries
0 to 600 50 55
600 to 2,400 38 40
2,400 to 4,800 35 38
Above 4,800 32 38
D. Control of odors. There shall be no emissions of odorous gases or other
odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at any point on or
beyond the lot boundary line within which the industrial operation is
situated. Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any
odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system, in order
that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should
fail. There is hereby established as a guide in determining such
quantities of offensive odors Table III (Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5,
"Air Pollution Abatement Manual," copyright 1951 by Manufacturing
Chemists' Association, Incorporated, Washington, D.C. Where more
than one authority is cited, the numerical average value for all
authorities listed may be used.
E. Glare and heat control. No industrial use shall carry on an operation
that would produce heat or glare beyond the boundary line of the lot
within which the industrial operation is situated.
F. Vibration control. Machines or operations which cause vibrations shall
be permitted, but in no case shall any such vibrations be perceptible
along the lot boundary line within which the industrial operation is
situated.
G. Storage and waste disposal.
(1) No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be
stored in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel directly
connecting with energy devices, heating devices, or appliances
located and operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel.
(2) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products,
and all fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors, shall be
enclosed by an approved safety fence.
(3) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
§ 135-90 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-90
1:484
§ 135-91. Administrative requirements.
or forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream
or watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or which will
destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
(4) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if
enclosed in containers which are adequate to eliminate such
hazards.
A. There shall be submitted to the Zoning Inspector, together with each
application for a permit under this article, plans and specifications
which shall include the following:
(1) The location, use, design, dimensions and height of each proposed
building, buildings or other structures.
(2) Evidence of approval of plans by the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry where required by law.
(3) The location, dimensions and arrangements of all open spaces,
yards, accessways, entrances, exits, off-street parking facilities,
loading and unloading facilities, pedestrian ways, and buffer strips.
(4) The profiles of all streets and roads, the width of rights-of-way,
cartways and sidewalks, a cross section of proposed street paving
indicating depth and type of each course, the position and type of
curbs and sidewalks, and the course, structure and capacity of any
drainage facilities and the method of drainage of adjacent and
contiguous territory.
(5) The capacity of all areas to be used for automobile access, parking,
loading and unloading.
(6) The character of the buffer area and screening devices to be
maintained, including the dimensions and arrangements of all area
devoted to planting, lawns, trees or similar purposes, and the
varieties, sizes and quantities of plants.
(7) The provisions made for sewage disposal, water supply and storm
drainage, including a suitable contour map of the area.
(8) A description of the proposed industrial operations in sufficient
detail to indicate the effects of those operations in producing noise,
glare, air pollution, water pollution, fire hazards, traffic congestion
or other safety hazards.
(9) Engineering and architectural plans together with a description of
the methods to be employed in controlling any excess noise, air
pollution, water pollution, fire hazard or safety hazard.
§ 135-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-91
1:485
(10) Engineering and architectural plans together with a description of
methods to be used for the treatment and disposal of sewage and
industrial wastes.
(11) Designation of the fuel proposed to be used and any necessary
architectural and engineering plans together with a description of
the methods to be used for controlling smoke and fumes and other
air pollutants.
(12) The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum
number of employees on each shift.
(13) The proposed groundwater requirements stated in terms of
maximum usage per minute, per day, and per week; seasonal
variations shall be stated.
B. Said plans and specifications and applications shall be reviewed by the
Board of Supervisors to determine whether the proposed use will be in
compliance with this article and all other applicable rules and
regulations, and the signatures of two members of the Board of
Supervisors in addition to that of the Zoning Inspector shall be required
on any permit issued under this article.
§ 135-91 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-91
1:486
ARTICLE XV
Floodplain Conservation District
[Amended 8-26-2015 by Ord. No. 140]
§ 135-92. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,98 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of
its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township
does hereby order as follows.
§ 135-93. General provisions.
A. Intent. The intent of this article is to:
(1) Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
(2) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
(3) Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
(4) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents, by preventing excessive
development in areas subject to flooding.
(5) Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
B. Applicability.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any
construction or development anywhere within Chadds Ford
Township unless a permit has been obtained from the floodplain
administrator.
(2) A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures.
C. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article supersedes any other
conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified floodplain
areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full
force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive.
If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this article, the
more restrictive shall apply.
98.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 135-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-93
1:487
§ 135-94. Administration.
D. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this article shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
the article, which shall remain in full force and effect; and for this
purpose, the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be
severable.
E. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by
debris. This article does not imply that areas outside any identified
floodplain areas, or that land uses permitted within such areas, will
be free from flooding or flood damages.
(2) This article shall not create liability on the part of Chadds Ford
Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. Designation of the floodplain administrator.
(1) The Township Manager is hereby appointed to administer and
enforce this article and is referred to herein as the "floodplain
administrator." The floodplain administrator may:
(a) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these
regulations;
(b) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these
regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners,
inspectors, and other employees; or
(c) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with
another agency or private sector entity to administer specific
provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of
these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the
community of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set
forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
(2) In the absence of a designated floodplain administrator, the
floodplain administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Township
Secretary.
B. Permit required. A permit shall be required before any construction or
development is undertaken within any area of Chadds Ford Township.
§ 135-93 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-94
1:488
C. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
(1) The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be
in conformance with the requirements of this article and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);99 the
Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended);100 the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394,
as amended);101 and the United States Clean Water Act, Section
404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this
determination has been made.
(3) In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the floodplain administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
(4) During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine
that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable
municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall make as many
inspections during and upon completion of the work as are
necessary.
(5) In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the
provisions of this article.
(6) In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work
does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws
and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the floodplain administrator
shall revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of
Supervisors for whatever action it considers necessary.
(7) The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all
records associated with the requirements of this article, including,
but not limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting,
inspection and enforcement.
99.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
100. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
101. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 135-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-94
1:489
(8) The floodplain administrator is the official responsible for
submitting a biennial report to FEMA concerning community
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(9) The responsibility, authority and means to implement the
commitments of the floodplain administrator can be delegated from
the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with
the person identified in this article as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
(10) The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
D. Application procedures and requirements.
(1) Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
floodplain administrator on forms supplied by Chadds Ford
Township. Such application shall contain the following:
(a) Name and address of applicant.
(b) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(c) Name and address of contractor.
(d) Site location, including address.
(e) Listing of other permits required.
(f) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value
of the building before the flood damage occurred, where
appropriate.
(g) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
(2) If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient
detail and clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to
determine that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage and conform with the requirements of this article
and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;
§ 135-94 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-94
1:490
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards;
(d) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(e) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(f) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been
used; and
(g) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
(3) Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any
other pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination:
(a) A completed permit application form.
(b) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following;
[1] North arrow, scale, and date;
[2] Topographic contour lines, if available;
[3] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
[4] The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
[5] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, identified floodplain areas, and, if available,
information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of
water, including direction and velocities.
(c) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
[1] The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon North American Vertical Datum of
1988;
[2] The elevation of the base flood;
[3] Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34
Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC, or latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
(d) The following data and documentation:
§ 135-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-94
1:491
[1] Detailed information concerning any proposed
floodproofing measures and corresponding elevations.
[2] If available, information concerning flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
factors associated with a base flood.
[3] Documentation, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of
any proposed development within any identified floodplain
area (see § 135-95A), when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not cause any
increase in the base flood elevation. AE Areas adjacent to
floodways are exempt.
[4] A document, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed
construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces associated with the base flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
[5] Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 135-96C(6), Storage, and § 195-96D, Development which
may endanger human life, including:
[a] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 195-96C(6) and D which
are intended to be used, produced, stored or
otherwise maintained on site.
[b] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or
spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed
in § 135-96D during a base flood.
[6] The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
[7] Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan,
meeting the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
(4) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the floodplain administrator.
§ 135-94 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-94
1:492
E. Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications for
any proposed construction or development in any identified floodplain
area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the floodplain
administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals
(e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.) for review and
comment.
F. Changes. After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator,
no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any
of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the
application without the written consent or approval of the floodplain
administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in writing and
shall be submitted by the applicant to the floodplain administrator for
consideration.
G. Placards. In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator shall
issue a placard, or similar document, which shall be displayed on the
premises during the time construction is in progress. This placard shall
show the number of the permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed
by the floodplain administrator.
H. Start of construction.
(1) Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin
within 180 days after the date of issuance of the development
permit. Work shall also be completed within 12 months after the
date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire, unless a
time extension is granted, in writing, by the floodplain
administrator. The issuance of a development permit does not refer
to the zoning approval.
(2) The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement
of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land
preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages
or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of
construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
(3) Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the floodplain administrator to approve such a
§ 135-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-94
1:493
request, and the original permit is compliant with the ordinance
and FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the extension is granted.
I. Enforcement.
(1) Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions
of this article, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the
floodplain administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation
as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(c) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for
the performance of any act it requires;
(d) Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall
be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by
any other method authorized or required by the laws of this
state;
(e) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will
effect compliance with the provisions of this article.
(2) Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the floodplain
administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to
Chadds Ford Township of not less than $25 nor more than $600,
plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all
other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for
the proper enforcement of this article. The imposition of a fine or
penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this article
shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to
continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy
such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any
development initiated or any structure or building constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in noncompliance
with this article may be declared by the Board of Supervisors to be
a public nuisance and abatable as such.
J. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain
administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of
this article may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal
§ 135-94 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-94
1:494
§ 135-95. Identification of floodplain areas.
must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the floodplain administrator.
(2) Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
consider the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning
Code102 and any other local ordinance.
(3) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board
may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the
laws of this state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.
A. Identification.
(1) The identified floodplain area shall be:
(a) Any areas of Chadds Ford Township classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and
the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated
November 18, 2009, and issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), or the most-recent revision
thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the
Flood Insurance Study; and
(b) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
(2) The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent
revisions and amendments, are hereby adopted by Chadds Ford
Township and declared to be a part of this article.
B. Description and special requirements of identified floodplain areas. The
identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
(1) The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and
the FIRM as floodway and which represent the channel of a
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water
surface elevation by more than one foot at any point. This term
shall also include floodway areas which have been identified in
other available studies or sources of information for those special
flood hazard areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS
and FIRM.
(a) Within any Floodway Area, no encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development, shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
102. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 135-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-95
1:495
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) Within any Floodway Area, no new construction or
development shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is
obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection's
regional office.
(2) The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base
flood elevations have been provided.
(a) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
(3) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the base flood
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require
the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or
others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review
by the municipality.
(4) Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas
where Chadds Ford Township has identified local flood hazard or
ponding areas, as delineated and adopted on a local flood hazard
map using best available topographic data and locally derived
information such as flood of record, historic high-water marks, soils
or approximate study methodologies.
C. Changes in identification of area. The identified floodplain area may be
revised or modified by the Board of Supervisors where studies or
information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the
need for such revision. However, prior to any such change to the special
flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally,
as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such
information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA of the
changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical or
§ 135-95 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-95
1:496
§ 135-96. Technical provisions.
scientific data. See § 135-96A(2) for situations where FEMA notification
is required.
D. Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any identified
floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the
floodplain administrator, and any party aggrieved by this decision or
determination may appeal to the Board of Supervisors. The burden of
proof shall be on the appellant.
E. Jurisdictional boundary changes. Prior to development occurring in
areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard
data affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The community
shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those
in 44 CFR 60.3.
A. General.
(1) Alteration or relocation of watercourses.
(a) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities
which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have
first been obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection's regional office.
(b) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the
activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
(c) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development shall be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
(2) When Chadds Ford Township proposes to permit the following
encroachments: any development that causes a rise in the base
flood elevations within the floodway; or any development occurring
in Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which
will cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation;
or alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges):
(a) The applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12), apply to FEMA
for conditional approval of such action prior to permitting the
encroachments to occur.
§ 135-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-96
1:497
(b) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of
map change and prior to approving the proposed
encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to FEMA
of the adoption of floodplain management ordinances
incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or
revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition.
(c) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final
map revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance
with 44 CFR Part 67.
(3) Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed
within any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the provisions contained in this article and any
other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
(4) Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
B. Elevation and floodproofing requirements. Within any identified
floodplain area, any new walled and roofed building, including a gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for
new construction or substantial improvements in the identified
floodplain area in accordance with the criteria in § 135-99, then the
following provisions apply:
(1) Residential structures.
(a) In AE, A1-30, and AH Zones, any new construction or
substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation.
(b) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to,
or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with § 135-95B(3) of this article.
(c) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the latest
edition thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania, and
ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended)
shall be utilized where they are more restrictive.
(2) Nonresidential structures.
§ 135-96 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-96
1:498
(a) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or
substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or
above, the regulatory flood elevation or be designed and
constructed so that the space enclosed below the regulatory
flood elevation:
[1] Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
and
[2] Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.
(b) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with § 135-95B(3) of this
article.
(c) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations," published by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992), or with some
other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect which states
that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above-referenced standards.
(d) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the latest
edition thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania, and
ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405, as amended)
shall be utilized where they are more restrictive.
(3) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Basements are prohibited.
(b) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other
than a basement shall be designed and constructed to allow for
the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "fully
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
§ 135-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-96
1:499
(c) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space shall be provided.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
defined in this article, must comply with all ordinance
requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure. Documentation that a specific
ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of
Historic Places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior
or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from
ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
(5) Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building
need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall
comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
(a) The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to
the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the
principal use or activity.
(b) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(c) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(d) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(e) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the
regulatory flood elevation.
(f) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(g) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(h) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed
§ 135-96 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-96
1:500
to automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater
for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space shall be provided.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Design and construction standards. The following minimum standards
shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
(1) Fill. Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria
in § 135-99, then the following provisions apply:
(a) If fill is used, it shall:
[1] Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line
from all points;
[2] Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary
landfills shall not be permitted;
[3] Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
[4] Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet,
unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are
submitted to and approved by the floodplain
administrator; and
[5] Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
(2) Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
(3) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
§ 135-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-96
1:501
(a) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of floodwaters.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(c) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located
within any identified floodplain area except in strict
compliance with all state and local regulations for such
systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so
as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a
flood.
(d) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
No. 348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages,"
and "the International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be
utilized.
(4) Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
(5) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
(6) Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life,
and not listed in § 135-96D, Development which may endanger
human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood
elevation or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
(7) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
(8) Anchoring.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(b) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(9) Floors, walls and ceilings.
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
§ 135-96 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-96
1:502
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing
structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are waterresistant
and will withstand inundation.
(d) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
(10) Paints and adhesives.
(a) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(b) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a
marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
(11) Electrical components.
(a) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(12) Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory
flood elevation.
(13) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
(14) Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to
the above and other sections and subsections of this article, to the
extent that they are more restrictive and supplement the
requirements of this article:
§ 135-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-96
1:503
(a) International Building Code (IBC) 2009, or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania: Sections 801,
1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
(b) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009, or the
latest edition thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania;
Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix
J.
D. Development which may endanger human life. Within any identified
floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in Subsection D(1)
below shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with
the criteria in § 135-99, then the following provisions apply
[§ 135-96D(2), (3) and (4)]:
(1) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which: will be used for the
production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances; or will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other
comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or will involve the production, storage,
or use of any amount of radioactive substances, shall be subject to
the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
§ 135-96 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-96
1:504
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(2) Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection D(1) above
shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from
the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
(3) Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection D(1) above shall be prohibited. Where permitted within
any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
residential structure of the kind described in § 135-96D(1) above
shall be elevated to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet
above base flood elevation and built in accordance with § 135-96A,
B and C.
(4) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind
described in § 135-96D(1) above shall be built in accordance with
§ 135-96A, B and C, including:
(a) Elevated, or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed
in accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" (United States Army Corps of Engineers, June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other
equivalent watertight standard.
E. Special requirements for subdivisions and development. All subdivision
proposals and development proposals in identified floodplain areas
where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base
flood elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be
prepared by a licensed professional engineer in a format required by
FEMA for a conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision.
Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility
of the applicant.
§ 135-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-96
1:505
F. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(1) Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria
in § 135-99, then the following provisions apply:
(2) Within any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria
in § 135-99, then the following provisions apply:
(3) Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the topof-
bank of any watercourse.
(4) Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all
manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(a) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(b) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(c) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(d) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
(5) Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009
International Residential Building Code or the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent
Foundations for Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or
latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401-405 shall
apply.
(6) Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the latest edition thereof adopted by
the State of Pennsylvania, and 34 Pa. Code, as amended, where
appropriate and/or applicable to units where the manufacturers'
standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were not
established for the proposed unit's(s') installation.
G. Special requirements for recreational vehicles. Within any identified
floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be prohibited. If a variance
is obtained in accordance with the criteria in § 135-99, then the
following provisions apply:
(1) Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(b) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
§ 135-96 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-97
1:506
§ 135-97. Prohibited activities.
§ 135-98. Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
A. General. In accordance with the administrative regulations
promulgated by the Department of Community and Economic
Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act, the following activities shall be prohibited within any identified
floodplain area:
(1) The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(a) Hospitals.
(b) Nursing homes.
(c) Jails or prisons.
(2) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
A. Existing structures. The provisions of this article do not require any
changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures.
However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the
provisions of Subsection B shall apply.
B. Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within any
identified floodplain area:
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any identified floodplain area that would cause any
increase in BFE. In A Area/District(s), BFEs are determined using
the methodology in § 135-95B(3).
(2) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more
of its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and
shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of
this article.
(3) The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or mostrecent
revision thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
(4) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
§ 135-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-98
1:507
§ 135-99. Variances.
(5) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
article.
A. General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this article
would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder,
developer or landowner, Chadds Ford Township may, upon request,
grant relief from the strict application of the requirements.
B. Variance procedures and conditions.
(1) Requests for variances shall be considered by Chadds Ford
Township in accordance with the procedures contained in § 135-94J
and the following:
(a) No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain
area that would cause any increase in BFE. In an A Area/
District, BFEs are determined using the methodology in
§ 135-95B(3).
(b) Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood
elevation requirement involved, no variance shall be granted
for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to
development regulated by § 135-96D, Development which may
endanger human life.
(c) No variance shall be granted for: prohibited activities
(§ 135-97).
(d) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(e) In granting any variance, Chadds Ford Township shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare and to achieve the objectives of this article.
(f) Whenever a variance is granted, Chadds Ford Township shall
notify the applicant, in writing, that:
[1] The granting of the variance may result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance.
[2] Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(g) In reviewing any request for a variance, Chadds Ford Township
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
[1] That there is good and sufficient cause.
§ 135-98 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-99
1:508
§ 135-100. through § 135-122. (Reserved)
[2] That failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
[3] That the granting of the variance will:
[a] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited
increase in flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, or extraordinary public expense;
[b] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or
local ordinances and regulations.
(h) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions
shall be maintained by Chadds Ford Township. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be
included in the annual report to FEMA.
(2) Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting
the one-percent annual chance flood.
§ 135-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-100
1:509

ARTICLE XVI
Historic District
§ 135-123. District boundaries.
The boundaries of the historic overlay districts shall be as shown on the
Chadds Ford Township Zoning Map, which is attached to and shall be
a part of this chapter.103 The district overlays the R-1 Residential and B
Business districts north and south of Baltimore Pike (U.S. Route 1) from the
Brandywine Creek to Harvey and Heyburn Roads; the floodplain districts
in this area; and the R-1 Residential and PBC Planned Business Center
districts in the Dilworthtown area along the northern part of Chadds Ford
Township.
§ 135-124. Legislative intent.
The historic districts are intended to implement a program for historic site
and historic resource protection which relates directly to:
§ 135-125. Applicability.
This article applies to all exterior architectural features (buildings and
structures) which can be seen from a public street or way within the
boundaries of the historic overlay districts to the extent set forth herein.
§ 135-126. Purpose.
The Chadds Ford Township historic districts are created for the following
purposes:
A. The Brandywine Battlefield Park certified and included in the National
Register on January 20, 1964, and the Brandywine Battlefield Park
National Historic Landmark certified and included in the National
Register on November 24, 1978, by the U.S. Department of the Interior,
National Park Service.
B. The Chadds Ford Village Historic District certified and included in the
National Register on November 23, 1971, by the U.S. Department of the
Interior, National Park Service.
C. The Dilworthtown Historic District certified and included in the
National Register on January 18, 1973, by the U.S. Department of the
Interior, National Park Service.
D. Those buildings which are individually listed, or to be listed, in the
National Register, which lie within the historic overlay district.
A. To protect those certified historic structures and other historic
resources in those portions of Chadds Ford Township which have a
distinctive character which attest to its rich cultural, historical and
103. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 135-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-126
1:511
§ 135-127. General provisions.
architectural heritage, in particular in the Chadds Ford National
Register District, the Brandywine Battlefield Park National Historic
Landmark, the Dilworthtown National Register District and in adjoining
areas.
B. To awaken, or reinforce, in our people an interest in our historic past.
C. To promote the general welfare, education and culture of the Township.
D. To advocate an interest in civic beauty through the encouragement of
appropriate settings and continued construction of buildings in the
historic styles and in general harmony with respect to style, form, color,
proportion, texture and material between buildings of historic design
and those of more modern design.
E. To promote educational, recreational and cultural activities within our
municipality and to advance the principles, goals for community
development and the recommendations embodied in the
Comprehensive Plan.
A. The Chadds Ford Township historic districts shall be considered as an
overlay to various districts as shown on the Chadds Ford Township
Zoning Map.
B. If any proposal for construction, alteration or other change to a
structure in an historic district also requires subdivision and/or land
development approval by the Chadds Ford Township Board of
Supervisors, all approvals therefor shall be obtained prior to
application for review and approval required under this article.
[Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
C. No structure shall hereafter be used and no structure shall hereafter be
erected, reconstructed, altered, restored, demolished or razed, in
whole or in part, without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.
D. The exterior architectural character of any structure subject to the
provisions of this article shall not be altered until after an application
for work in an historic district has been submitted to the HARB and
approval for the work has been granted. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord.
No. 124]
E. Evidence of the approval required above shall be a certificate of
appropriateness issued by the Board of Supervisors, pursuant to 53 P.S.
§ 8004, or in the case of minor projects, approval for work in an historic
district issued by the HARB. Such certificate or approval document
shall be a statement signed by the Chairman of the Board granting such
approval, stating that the construction, demolition or changes for which
application has been made are approved. [Amended 7-2-2013 by
Ord. No. 124]
§ 135-126 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-127
1:512
§ 135-128. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended 7-2-2013
by Ord. No. 124]
F. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior elements of any building or
structure described herein; nor shall anything in this article be
construed to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
rehabilitation or demolition of any such elements which the Board of
Supervisors shall certify as required for public safety.
G. Any person requesting approval for work in an historic district under
this article shall be entitled to a meeting on such request before the
HARB and to a meeting before the Board of Supervisors, according to
the provisions of § 135-131. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
H. The HARB may determine that certain building changes which are
minor in nature need not undergo the same level of scrutiny as major
building changes. Standards for minor changes in an historic district
shall be recommended by the HARB, and revised from time to time, and
shall be approved by resolution of the Board of Supervisors and shall be
published by the HARB and posted on the Township website.
[Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
I. In order to provide guidance and insight into desirable goals and
objectives for the historic district or for the desirable types of
development in historic districts, and for the maintenance of consistent
policies in guiding the building public toward better standards of
design, the HARB shall maintain a file containing records of all
applications brought before the HARB, drawings submitted and
amendments of drawings pertaining thereto and drawings and
photographs or reproductions thereof showing buildings and structures
that in the HARB's opinion may serve as general guides to
appropriateness or as expressions of objectives to prospective
developers or property owners. Such documents shall remain the
property of Chadds Ford Township and shall be open for public review.
[Added 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
J. The HARB may create, and revise from time to time, architectural
guidelines for work in an historic district to further the description of
exterior architectural design criteria. Such guidelines shall be
approved by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, published by the
HARB and posted on the Township website. [Added 7-2-2013 by Ord.
No. 124]
A. The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall issue a permit for the
erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, rehabilitation,
demolition or removal of a building in the historic district only after the
Board of Supervisors has issued a certificate of appropriateness. Upon
receipt of a written disapproval by the Board of Supervisors, the CEO
shall disapprove the application for a permit and so advise the
applicant. Upon receipt of an application for a permit for work to be
§ 135-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-128
1:513
§ 135-129. Board of Historical and Architectural Review.
done in the historic districts, the CEO shall follow the procedures for
acting upon an application for a building permit set forth in Chapter
59 of the Chadds Ford Township Code, except as those procedures are
necessarily modified by the following requirements:
(1) The CEO shall review the application and other documents and
materials submitted by the applicant. If the application is
incomplete or if required documents and materials are not
submitted, the CEO shall notify the applicant and return the
application to the applicant.
(2) Upon receipt of a completed application, the CEO shall forward to
the Chairman of the HARB a copy of the application for work in an
historic district, together with copies of all other documents and
materials filed by the applicant.
(3) The CEO shall maintain in his/her office a record of all such
applications, and of his/her handling and final disposition of the
same, which shall be in addition to and appropriately crossreferenced
to his/her other records.
(4) The CEO shall require applicants to submit a sufficient number of
additional copies of material required to be attached to an
application for work in an historic district to allow compliance with
the foregoing.
B. The CEO shall have the power to institute any proceedings at law, or in
equity, necessary for the enforcement of this article in the same manner
as in his/her enforcement of the other articles contained in this chapter,
as enacted, and as may be amended from time to time.
A. Establishment, composition, appointment and terms of members.
(1) The Board of Historical and Architectural Review, hereinafter also
referred to as the "HARB," is hereby established to be composed of
not less than five members, appointed by the Board of Supervisors,
one of whom shall be a registered architect, one shall be a licensed
real estate broker, one shall be a building inspector, one a member
of the Planning Commission and the remaining member or
members shall have a knowledge of and an interest in the
preservation of the historic district. A minimum of three members
shall be Chadds Ford Township residents.
(2) The position of any member of the HARB appointed in his/her
capacity as a registered architect, a licensed real estate broker, a
building inspector, or as a member of the Planning Commission
who ceases to be so engaged shall be automatically considered
vacant.
§ 135-128 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-129
1:514
(3) The initial terms of the members of the HARB shall be as follows:
one member shall be appointed to serve until the first day of
January following the effective date of this article; one member
shall be appointed to serve until the first day of the second January
thereafter; one member shall be appointed to serve until the first
day of the third January thereafter; one member shall be appointed
to serve until the first day of the fourth January thereafter; and one
member shall be appointed to serve until the first day of the fifth
January thereafter, and the Board of Supervisors shall appoint their
successors on the expiration of their respective terms to serve for a
period of five years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be only
for the unexpired portion of the term. Any member may be removed
from office for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office
or for other just cause by a majority vote of the Board of
Supervisors, taken after the member has received 15 days' advance
notice of the intent to take such a vote. Any appointment to fill a
vacancy created by removal shall be only for the unexpired term.
(4) The HARB shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman and
create and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall
serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. The HARB may
make and alter bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its
procedures consistent with the ordinances of Chadds Ford
Township and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Duties and powers of the HARB.
(1) The HARB shall give counsel to the Board of Supervisors, to be
executed at a public meeting of the latter, regarding the
advisability of issuing a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to
said act of June 13, 1961, as amended. For this purpose the HARB
may make and alter rules and regulations for its own organization
and procedures consistent with this chapter and the laws of the
commonwealth.
(2) A majority of the HARB shall constitute a quorum and action taken
at any meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the
HARB.
(3) The members of the HARB shall serve without compensation but
may be reimbursed for direct expenses. However, pursuant to
appropriations authorized by the Board of Supervisors, it may
employ secretarial assistance and incur other expenses as may be
necessary to the enforcement of this article.
(4) The HARB shall make an annual report to the Board of Supervisors
which should include but not be limited to an accounting of
expenditures, justification for the appropriation of monies for the
upcoming year, a record of actions taken by the HARB in the
preceding year and any recommendations for any changes to this
article.
§ 135-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-129
1:515
(5) The HARB shall hold a regularly scheduled monthly public meeting,
provided that there is business to conduct, and shall record
minutes and transmit them to the Board of Supervisors.
(6) The HARB shall hold any additional public meetings and hearings
as provided in § 135-131 necessary to execute its powers and duties
as required by this article.
C. In addition to the above, upon specific authorization by the Board of
Supervisors, the HARB may be empowered to have the following duties:
(1) To conduct a survey of buildings for the purpose of determining
those of historic and/or architectural significance, pertinent facts
about them and any action to be undertaken in coordination with
the Planning Commission and/or other appropriate groups; and to
maintain and periodically revise the detailed listings of historic
sites and buildings and data about them, appropriately classified
with respect to national, state or local significance, to period or
field of interest.
(2) To propose, from time to time as deemed appropriate, the
establishment of additional historic districts and revisions to
existing historic districts.
(3) To formulate recommendations concerning the establishment of an
appropriate system of markers for selected historic and/or
architectural sites and buildings, including proposals for the
installation and care of such historic markers.
(4) To formulate recommendations concerning the preparation and
publication of maps, brochures, and descriptive material about the
Township's historic and/or architectural sites and buildings.
(5) To cooperate with and advise the Board of Supervisors, the
Planning Commission or other Township agencies in matters
involving historically and/or architecturally significant sites and
buildings (such as appropriate land usage, parking facilities and
signs, as well as adherence to lot dimensional regulations and
minimum structural standards).
(6) To maintain a list and map of potential archaeological sites which
shall remain confidential, until such time that the information is
disclosed to an applicant for use in conjunction with proposed work
on an affected site.
(7) To cooperate with and enlist assistance from the National Park
Service, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission, the Chadds Ford
Historical Society and other agencies, public and private, from time
to time, concerned with historic sites and buildings.
(8) To advise owners of historic buildings on matters of preservation.
§ 135-129 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-130
1:516
§ 135-130. Preapplication meeting. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No.
124]
§ 135-131. Application and review procedures for work in an
historic district. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
A. Prior to submitting an application for work in an historic district, an
applicant may request a meeting with the HARB to discuss the changes
under consideration and to review preliminary drawings, specifications,
and the like. The purposes of this meeting shall be to acquaint the
developer, owner or agent with application requirements and standards
of appropriateness of design and to provide the applicant with input
from the HARB regarding the project under consideration.
B. A preapplication review shall not require formal application, but a
request for a meeting must be made to the HARB at least seven days
before the date of the next regularly scheduled HARB meeting.
A. Application for work in an historic district.
(1) An application for work in an historic district must be submitted for
all proposed changes to the exterior features of any building or
structure subject to the provisions of this article.
(2) As provided in § 135-127, application may be made for small
projects that involve no change or minor changes to the exterior
architectural character of the building or structure. Approved
standards for such projects and examples of "minor" changes will
be kept on file in the Township offices and will be published by the
HARB and posted on the Township website.
(3) For all projects in an historic district that are subject to the
provisions of this article and that are not approved for minor
changes as provided in this article, an application must be made for
a certificate of appropriateness, pursuant to 53 P.S. § 8004.
(4) Instructions for submitting an application for work in an historic
district and the supporting documents required to be submitted
with the application are included on the application form and are
available in the Township offices and on its website.
(5) A submitted application for work in an historic district and
accompanying materials will be checked for completeness, and
incomplete submissions will be returned to the applicant.
(6) A completed application with all required documentation must be
received at least 10 calendar days prior to a regularly scheduled
meeting of the HARB in order to be placed on the agenda for that
meeting.
§ 135-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-131
1:517
(7) Copies of the completed application and all required documents
submitted by the applicant shall be filed with the CEO and the
HARB.
B. Review procedures for an application for minor change.
(1) Upon receipt of a complete application for a minor project with no
or little change to the exterior character of a building or structure,
the CEO and the Chairman of the HARB shall review the
application. If they mutually agree that the project meets the
standards for minor changes, they may waive the requirements for
additional consideration and review and issue approval for the
proposed work in an historic district. If the Chairman of the HARB
and the CEO do not agree, the application is referred to the full
HARB at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(2) In such case of an application being referred to the HARB, the
HARB may determine that the application meets the standards for
minor change and may waive additional requirements and issue
approval for the proposed work in an historic district. If the HARB
does not issue such approval, the applicant will be notified that the
proposed work will require a certificate of appropriateness and
that he/she may be required to submit additional documentation
and materials.
C. HARB review for an application for a certificate of appropriateness.
(1) Upon determination that a complete application for a certificate of
appropriateness has been received, the HARB shall review the
application at its regularly scheduled public meeting or at a special
meeting, to take place within 45 days of the date of the filing of the
complete application, to consider the counsel which it will give to
the Board of Supervisors. The HARB may schedule additional
meetings, as necessary, which shall take place within 30 days of
each other, unless mutually agreed otherwise by the HARB and the
applicant. The person applying for the permit shall be advised of
the time and place of said meeting(s) and invited to appear to
explain his/her reasons therefor. The HARB may invite such other
persons or groups (including any who have formulated an opinion
concerning the granting of a certificate of appropriateness), as it
desires, to attend the hearing(s). Any requirements for proper
advertisement and notification for public meetings, as required by
law, shall be observed.
(2) Within 45 days of the occurrence of the final meeting upon an
application for a certificate of appropriateness, the HARB shall
recommend to the Board of Supervisors the approval or denial of a
certificate of appropriateness.
(3) In any case involving the demolition or partial demolition of a
building or structure, before granting or denying approval, the
HARB may call upon the Township Engineer to provide it with a
§ 135-131 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-131
1:518
§ 135-132. Materials to be submitted with an application. [Amended
7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
The materials required to be submitted with an application are listed on the
application itself and on the Township website.
§ 135-133. Evaluation criteria for certificate of appropriateness.
Evaluation criteria to be used in passing upon an application for a certificate
of appropriateness are as follows:
report on the state of repair and stability of the building or
structure under consideration.
(4) In the case of recommendation for approval for the issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness, the HARB shall forthwith transmit a
report to the Board of Supervisors stating the basis upon which
such approval was made. If the HARB shall fail to transmit such
report within 45 days after the occurrence of the final meeting
concerning a certificate of appropriateness application, the
application shall be sent without recommendation, except where
mutual agreement has been made for an extension of the time limit.
(5) In the case of recommendation for disapproval for the issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness, the HARB shall forthwith transmit to
the Board of Supervisors a report stating the reasons therefor, and
may provide verbal advice and illustrative drawing(s) to the
applicant and make recommendations with regard to
appropriateness of design, arrangement, texture, material, color
and the like of the property involved. If the applicant decides to
make changes, he/she shall notify the HARB and the Board of
Supervisors, in writing, within 30 days following the rendering of a
decision by the latter as provided in § 135-135. A landowner or
developer may appeal the denial of the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness in accordance with the appeals provisions of the
Municipalities Planning Code.
D. If an applicant intends to refile a complete set of revised plans to
remedy the defects which led to the recommendation for disapproval,
then a new forty-five-day review period and procedure as described
above will apply.
A. The HARB may recommend against the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness for the erection, reconstruction, alteration,
rehabilitation, demolition, partial demolition or removal of any
structure within the historic districts which, in the HARB's opinion,
would be detrimental to the interests of the district and against the
public interests of the Township.
B. In determining the counsel to be presented to the Board of Supervisors
concerning the issuing of a certificate of appropriateness authorizing a
§ 135-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-133
1:519
permit for the erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration,
rehabilitation, demolition or razing of all or a part of any building within
the historic districts, the HARB shall consider the following matters:
(1) The effect of the proposed change upon the general historic and
architectural nature of the district and all contributing resources.
(2) The appropriateness of exterior architectural features which can
be seen from a public street or way only.
(3) The general design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the
building or structure and the relation of such factors to similar
features of buildings, structures, or contributing resources in the
district.
(4) Conformance to the provisions of §§ 135-136, 135-137 and 135-138,
and other requirements of this chapter pertaining to use
regulations, area bulk and height regulations, and structural
standards.
C. In addressing Subsection B(1) through (3), above, the HARB shall
consider at least the following criteria in making its decision relative to
the appropriateness of the proposed action:
(1) Proportion of building's or structure's facades. [Amended
7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
(2) Proportion and location of openings within the building or
structure. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
(3) Location and scale of entrances and/or porch projections.
(4) Relationship to existing colors, textures and materials.
(5) Consistency of architectural detailing.
(6) Consistency in the appearance of roof lines and shapes.
(7) Appropriateness and consistency of landscaping.
(8) Overall scale.
(9) Overall site planning and spatial definition produced by the
location and placement of structures.
(10) Relationship to existing building heights.
(11) Relationship to the front, rear and side yard setbacks of existing
buildings or structures. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
(12) Other building and site criteria which will insure the
appropriateness and consistency of the proposed action relative to
the existing character within the registered historic districts.
§ 135-133 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-133
1:520
D. The HARB shall also consider the degree to which the proposed work
complies with the Standards for Rehabilitation of the U.S. Department
of the Interior in making a decision relative to the appropriateness of
the proposal whenever rehabilitation work is proposed. The following
standards shall be used: [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building,
structure or site and its environment, or to use a property for its
originally intended purpose.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
(3) All buildings, structures and sites shall be recognized as products
of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis and
which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be discouraged.
(4) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure or
site and its environment. These changes may have acquired
significance in their own right, and this significance shall be
recognized and respected.
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
which characterize a building, structure or site shall be treated
with sensitivity.
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced, wherever possible. In the event replacement is necessary,
the new material should match the material being replaced in
composition, design, color, texture and other visual qualities.
Repair or replacement of missing architectural features should be
based on accurate duplications of features, substantiated by
historic, physical or pictorial evidence rather than on conjectural
designs or the availability of different architectural elements from
other buildings or structures.
(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods
that will damage the historic building materials shall not be
undertaken.
(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archaeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project.
(9) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and
additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or
cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size,
§ 135-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-133
1:521
§ 135-134. Findings of the Board of Historical and Architectural
Review. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
The HARB, according to the provisions of § 135-131C, shall submit to the
Board of Supervisors, in writing, its counsel concerning the issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness. This counsel shall be submitted in the form of
a written report which shall include but need not be limited to the following:
§ 135-135. Actions by the Board of Supervisors.
scale, color, material and character of the property, neighborhood
or environment.
(10) Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall
be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were
to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the
structure would be unimpaired.
E. The HARB shall also consider the Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic
Buildings of the U.S. Department of the Interior in making its decision
relative to the appropriateness of the proposal.
F. The HARB shall also consider the need for conducting an
archaeological investigation or excavation on any site with known or
potential archaeological resources, and shall advise the applicant of
required procedures.
G. The HARB shall also consider any architectural guidelines for work in a
historic district, which have been approved by the Board of Supervisors
and published by the HARB. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
A. The application and all documents and materials submitted by the
applicant.
B. A description of the effect of the proposed changes upon the general
historic and architectural nature of the district.
C. The opinion of the HARB (including any dissent) as to the
appropriateness of the work proposed, especially as to whether it will
preserve or destroy the historic aspect and nature of the district.
D. The specific counsel of the HARB as to the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness, including any conditions the HARB recommends.
A. Upon receipt of the written report from the HARB as provided in
§ 135-134, the Board of Supervisors shall consider at the next regularly
scheduled or special meeting the question of issuing to the CEO a
certificate of appropriateness authorizing a permit for work covered by
the application. The applicant shall be advised by the Township
Secretary of the time and place of the meeting at which his/her
application shall be considered. The applicant shall have the right to
§ 135-133 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-135
1:522
§ 135-136. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used or occupied, subject to Article XV pertaining to floodplain regulations,
and subject to the foregoing, for any of the following uses and for no others:
attend this meeting and be heard as to the reasons for filing the
application.
B. In determining whether or not to certify to the appropriateness of the
proposed construction, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration,
rehabilitation, demolition or razing of all or a part of any building within
the historic districts, the Board of Supervisors shall consider the same
factors as the HARB set forth in § 135-133 herein and its report
(§ 135-134).
C. If the Board of Supervisors approves the application, within 10 days of
its public meeting it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness
approving the work covered and authorizing the CEO to issue a permit,
if needed. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
D. If the Board of Supervisors disapproves the application within 45 days
of its public meeting, it shall do so in writing, and copies shall be given
to the CEO, the applicant and to the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission. The disapproval shall set forth the reasons
therefor, and shall indicate what changes in the plans and specifications
would meet the conditions for protecting the distinctive historical and
architectural character of the district.
E. In either case, the Board of Supervisors shall notify the applicant within
10 days of its meeting at which the application was considered, unless
mutually agreed otherwise.
F. When a certificate of appropriateness has been issued, a copy thereof
shall be transmitted to the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall from
time to time inspect the alteration or construction approved by such
certificate and shall make a monthly report of such inspection to the
HARB listing all work inspected and reporting any work not in
accordance with such certificate or violating any ordinances of the
Township.
A. Historic district overlay to the R-1 Residence District.
(1) Permitted principal uses.
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Agricultural uses.
(c) Recreational uses, and parks.
(d) Municipal uses.
§ 135-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-136
1:523
(2) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted principal uses, except as set forth in
Subsection A(3), below; and provided further that the sale of
farm products shall not be permitted as an accessory use.
(b) Parking in accordance with Article XIX.
(3) Conditional uses (refer to § 135-164).
(a) Educational and religious uses, and related accessory uses.
(b) Cultural uses, including museums, galleries and related
accessory uses.
(c) Signs and awnings in accordance with Article XVIII and
§ 135-139. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
B. Historic district overlay to the B Business District.
(1) Permitted principal uses (refer to Article IX).
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Shops and stores for retail sale of goods.
(c) Offices.
(d) Banks.
(e) Personal retail service shops.
(f) General retail service or limited repair shops.
(g) Bakery, pastry, candy, confectionery or ice cream shops making
goods for sale on the premises.
(h) Restaurants offering meals or refreshments to be served and
consumed on the premises within an enclosed building.
(i) Craftsmen shops.
(j) Cultural facilities, such as art galleries, auditoriums, libraries
and museums.
(k) Community centers, adult education centers or other similar
nonprofit facilities.
(l) Schools of private, commercial or educational institutions
offering instruction in dance, music, art, drama and the like.
(m) Bed-and-breakfast inns.
(n) Municipal uses.
§ 135-136 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-136
1:524
§ 135-137. Area, bulk and height regulations.
The applicable area, bulk and height regulations of the underlying R-1, B
and PBC districts shall apply.
§ 135-138. Structural standards.
(2) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental
to any of the above permitted uses, except as set forth in
Subsection B(3), below.
(b) Parking in accordance with Article XIX, except that no parking
shall be located in the front yard.
(3) Conditional uses (refer to § 135-164).
(a) Signs and awnings in accordance with Article XVIII and
§ 135-139. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
(b) Clubs or lodges.
(c) Commercial recreation facilities for fitness, racquetball,
squash, swimming and like activities.
(d) Educational, philanthropic or religious uses.
C. Historic district overlay to the PBC Planned Business Center District.
(1) Permitted principal uses.
(a) A planned shopping center.
(b) Offices.
(c) Business, trade, public or private schools.
(d) Indoor and outdoor commercial recreation facilities.
(2) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental
to the above permitted principal uses, except as set forth in
Subsection C(3), below.
(b) Parking in accordance with Article XIX, except that no parking
shall be located in the front yard.
(3) Conditional uses (refer to § 135-164).
(a) Signs and awnings in accordance with Article XVIII and
§ 135-139. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
§ 135-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-138
1:525
§ 135-139. Special design and development regulations.
A. All buildings and structures shall be preserved against decay and
deterioration and maintained free from structural defects by the
owner(s), or such other person(s) who may have the legal custody and
control thereof. The said owner, or other person having legal custody
and control thereof, shall repair and thereafter maintain said building
in a manner consistent with the building code, sanitary code and other
pertinent regulations of Chadds Ford Township and the County of
Delaware. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to:
(1) Require the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness prior to
undertaking routine maintenance unless such maintenance
includes erection, reconstruction, alteration, restoration,
rehabilitation, demolition or razing all or part of a structure.
(2) Require a level (or degree) of maintenance greater than that
required under provisions of other pertinent Township regulations.
(3) Require any action by the owner (other than preservation against
decay, deterioration, repair and routine maintenance as stipulated
in this section) to comply with the intent of this chapter before said
owner voluntarily chooses to erect, reconstruct, alter, restore,
rehabilitate, demolish or raze all or part of a building. It is,
however, anticipated that property owners will be stimulated by
this chapter to undertake the desired erection, reconstruction,
alteration, restoration, rehabilitation, demolition or razing as
promptly as consistent with their abilities to do so.
B. The HARB on its own initiative may file a petition with the Code
Enforcement Officer requesting that he/she proceed under the building
code of the Township to require correction of defects or repairs to any
structure within the district so that such structure shall be preserved
and protected in consonance with the purpose of this article and the
public safety. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
A. Landscaping. All landscaping shall be in accordance with § 135-161 of
this chapter, and the following:
(1) A twenty-five-foot landscaped area shall be created along the
frontage of all properties in the historic overlay districts.
(2) A three- to five-foot-high berm may be required by the HARB to be
placed along the property line to help conceal any new buildings
proposed in an underlying zoning district.
(3) Internal parking areas shall be screened from historic buildings in
accordance with § 135-158.
B. Environmental controls. All applicable regulations of § 135-162 of this
chapter shall apply.
§ 135-138 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-139
1:526
C. Outdoor storage and display. All regulations of §§ 135-48 and 135-63 of
the B and PBC districts shall apply.
D. Signs and awnings. Application for work in an historic district is
required for the erection, construction, reconstruction, repair,
rehabilitation, or restoration of any sign or awning to be located in an
historic district or within 100 feet of the exterior walls of any building in
the historic district and shall follow the procedures set forth in
§ 135-131. No permit for any such sign or awning shall be issued prior
to the review and recommendations of the HARB. Signs shall be crafted
to be attractive and of a quality in keeping with the character of the
historic district. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord. No. 124]
E. Lighting. All lighting shall be in accordance with §§ 135-48N and
135-63N and the following:
(1) All lighting shall be arranged to prevent off-site glare; shall not
illuminate areas beyond the property line on which it is located;
and shall not be visible beyond the boundaries of the property in
order to minimize disturbance to motorists, pedestrians and uses.
(2) Light standards and fixtures shall be in keeping with the character
of the historic district. Application for the erection, construction,
reconstruction, restoration, rehabilitation, repair or razing of light
standards and fixtures in an historic district shall follow the
procedures set forth in § 135-131. [Amended 7-2-2013 by Ord.
No. 124]
§ 135-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-139
1:527

ARTICLE XVII
BPO District (Baltimore Pike Overlay)
§ 135-140. Purpose.
The purpose of the Baltimore Pike Overlay District is to protect the
character of the Brandywine Gateway area, noted for its historic,
topographic, architectural, cultural and artistic heritage, by:
§ 135-141. Applicability and scope.
A. Implementing the recommendations of the Baltimore Pike Feasibility
Study, adopted June 4, 2003, through Resolution No. 2003-14.
B. Addressing the regulations of Article XVI, Historic District, of this
chapter, in particular for the area at and adjoining Chadds Ford Village.
C. Implementing the provisions of Section 605, Classifications, of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,104 in particular Section
605(1) and Section 605(2)(i), (iii), (iv), (vi), and (vii) relative to:
(1) Transitional provisions at and near the boundaries of existing
districts;
(2) Regulation of uses and structures at, along or near major
thoroughfares;
(3) Regulation of uses and structures at, along or near places of
relatively steep slope or grade;
(4) Regulation of uses and structures at, along or near public buildings
and public grounds;
(5) Regulation of uses and structures at, along or near places having
unique historical, architectural or patriotic interest or value;
(6) Regulation of uses and structures at, along or near floodplain
areas; and
(7) Regulation of uses and structures at, along or near other places
having a special character or use affecting and affected by their
surroundings.
A. The Baltimore Pike Overlay District provisions included in this article
shall apply to those portions of any property lying within the area
shown on the Zoning Map, as amended, entitled "Baltimore Pike
Overlay District," dated January 13, 2005, which is attached to this
article as Exhibit A.105
104. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10605.
105. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 135-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-141
1:529
§ 135-142. Use regulations.
The use regulations of the underlying zoning districts shall apply, except as
modified by § 135-143A and B.
§ 135-143. Area, bulk and height regulations.
§ 135-144. Special development regulations.
The Township shall impose any of the following regulations upon approval of
any building permit, conditional use or special exception, zoning variance,
certificate of appropriateness, or subdivision or land development
application within the Baltimore Pike Overlay District, as applicable, and to
the extent deemed necessary by the Township to implement the purposes
set forth in § 135-140:
B. The regulations of the underlying zoning districts shall apply, except to
the extent modified by Exhibit A, the use regulations in § 135-42, the
area, bulk and height regulations in § 135-143, and the special
development regulations in § 135-144.
A. The lot area regulations of the underlying zoning districts shall apply,
except that the minimum lot area shall be exclusive of certain
constraining features as set forth in the "lot area" definition in Article
II.
B. The building coverage regulations of the underlying zoning district
shall apply, except in the case of the R-1 District within the area shown
in Exhibit A106 where principal and accessory buildings shall occupy no
more than 12% of the lot area.
A. On-lot sewage disposal systems. On-lot sewage disposal systems shall
not be located on one-hundred-year floodplains, watercourses and
surface water bodies, wetlands, wetland margins, and slopes 25% and
greater.
B. Tree protection and replacement.
(1) All trees of twelve-inch caliper and greater shall be protected.
(2) If any tree twelve-inch caliper and greater is removed or destroyed,
it shall be replaced with a deciduous tree of at least three to 3 1/2
inches caliper.
C. Landscape screening and buffering. Landscape plantings shall be
installed and maintained within all yard areas adjoining Baltimore Pike.
One shade tree of at least three to 3 1/2 inches caliper shall be installed
and maintained for every 50 feet of road frontage.
D. Historic resource protection.
106. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 135-141 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-144
1:530
(1) In keeping with the provisions of Article XVI, Historic District, the
following shall apply:
(a) A twenty-five-foot-wide landscaped area along the frontage of
all properties in the historic overlay districts shall be installed
and maintained.
(b) A three- to five-foot-high berm shall be installed and
maintained whenever required by the HARB to be placed along
the property lines to help conceal new buildings.
(c) Landscape screening shall be installed and maintained to
conceal off-street parking areas, in accordance with Article
XIX.
(2) The "Architectural Guidelines for Construction in the Historic
Overlay Districts," dated April 28, 1987, shall apply.
(3) All new lighting shall not exceed 15 feet in height, and shall be
shielded to prevent glare. No such lighting shall exceed 1.0
footcandle at a property line so as to prevent trespass glare.
(4) All signage shall comply with § 135-139D, whereby all signs within
100 feet of the exterior walls of any building in the historic district
shall be crafted to be of the highest graphic quality in keeping with
the character of the historic district and shall be approved by the
HARB. In addition, all signage shall comply with the "Architectural
Guidelines for Construction in the Historic Overlay Districts," dated
April 28, 1987.
(5) No new buildings shall exceed 5,000 square feet in ground floor
area.
E. Plan submission requirements. In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 110, Subdivision and Land Development, the following shall
apply:
(1) All applicants shall submit a report indicating compliance with the
requirements of this article.
(2) All applicants shall also submit a report to indicate measures to
mitigate adverse impacts, as per § 110-52C(18) of Chapter 110,
Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 135-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-144
1:531

ARTICLE XVIIA
Steep Slope Conservation District
[Added 10-8-2015 by Ord. No. 141]
§ 135-144.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to expand upon the community development
objectives associated with environmental protection and preservation of
natural resources expressed in Chapter 135 by:
§ 135-144.2. General provisions.
§ 135-144.3. Zoning Map overlay.
A. Conserving and protecting those areas having steep slopes from
excessive and inappropriate development.
B. Preventing development that would cause excessive erosion and
consequently promote increased flood crests and associated hazards
both upstream and downstream.
C. Protecting the quality of stream water that would be threatened by
excessive grading and development in the Steep Slope Conservation
District.
D. Protecting the natural vegetative cover in the Steep Slope Conservation
District, thereby reducing runoff and flooding potential.
A. Compliance. No area within the Steep Slope Conservation District shall
hereafter be used without full compliance with the terms of this district
and other applicable regulations.
B. Repeal and greater restrictions. This district is not intended to repeal or
impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, when this district imposes greater restrictions, its provisions
shall prevail.
C. Municipal liability. Any determination that a proposed use complies
with this district, or any approval of a subdivision or land development
plan, or any issuance of a building permit within the Steep Slope
Conservation District shall not constitute a representation, guarantee
or warranty of any kind by the Township, or by any official or employee
thereof, of the practicability or safety of the proposed use and shall
create no liability upon the Township, its officials or employees. This
chapter does not imply that areas not designated as containing steep
slopes or very steep slopes will always be free from the adverse effects
of erosion or other effects of nearby steep slopes.
A. The Steep Slope Conservation District shall not be an independent
zoning district but shall be a district overlay over all zoning districts
within Chadds Ford Township.
§ 135-144.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-144.3
1:533
§ 135-144.4. Definition and interpretation of district boundaries.
§ 135-144.5. Mapping.
The Township is directed to develop a map of the areas of steep slope and
very steep slope within the Township based on the analysis of the contours
displayed on the United States Geological Survey (USGS) Quadrangles for
Media and West Chester, Pennsylvania. Such map shall be for the purpose
of ease of administration only and shall be subject to the actual field
topographic study required by § 135-144.4B above.
§ 135-144.6. Use regulations.
B. The district shall have no effect on the permitted uses in the underlying
zoning district, except when such uses are in conflict with the permitted
uses enumerated as set forth in this article.
C. In areas where this overlay district applies, its requirements shall
supersede the requirements of the underlying zoning district(s).
A. The regulations of the Steep Slope Conservation District shall apply to
all areas of steep slopes and very steep slopes, as those terms are
defined in § 135-4, within the Township.
B. The applicant shall use an actual field topographic survey as a source of
contour information and the basis for depicting steep and very steep
slopes as described below. This field survey must depict the subject
site's topography at the time the plan is submitted for review under this
chapter.
C. All contours must be shown at a two-foot vertical change interval. All
areas of steep slope and areas of very steep slope must be depicted
clearly using hatching or shading to differentiate between the two
areas.
D. The use regulations herein are only applicable where contiguous areas
of steep or very steep slopes, or of any combination of these two
categories, continue over a vertical grade change of six feet or more.
A. Areas of very steep slope.
(1) Uses permitted by right. The following uses shall be permitted by
right:
(a) Agricultural uses not requiring structure or conservation.
(b) Woodland preserves.
(c) Conservation and recreation not requiring structures.
(d) Open space associated with planned residential developments.
§ 135-144.3 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-144.6
1:534
(2) Conditional uses, subject to Chapter 135. The following uses shall
be conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 135:
(a) Conservation and recreation requiring structures.
(b) Agricultural structures or cultivation.
(c) Utilities, easements, and rights-of-way.
(d) Accessory structures to any uses otherwise permitted in
Subsection A(1) above.
(e) Roads and driveways.
(f) Front, side or rear yards, provided that no structure is located
less than 20 feet from the edge of a very steep or steep slope.
(3) Prohibited activities. Prohibited activities shall be as follows:
(a) Cut and fill, other than that related to uses permitted in
Subsection A(1) and (2) hereof.
(b) Soil or rock extraction, other than that relating, to uses
permitted in Subsection A(1) and (2) hereof.
B. Areas of steep slope.
(1) Uses permitted by right. The following uses shall be permitted by
right:
(a) Any use permitted by right in Subsection A(1) hereof.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Replacement on-lot sewage disposal systems required by an
existing residential dwelling as a result of the failure of such
dwelling's existing sewage disposal system, and for which no
other viable replacement alternative exists as determined by
the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer. Viable alternatives
shall include, but not be limited to, the connection of the
dwelling to a public or community sewage disposal system, but
shall not include pump and haul.
(3) Conditional uses. The following uses shall be conditional, uses,
subject to Chapter 135:
(a) Conditional uses listed in Subsection A(2) hereof.
(b) Single-family detached dwelling.
(c) Stormwater management facility.
(d) On-lot sewage disposal system.
(e) Sanitary sewer and sewage pumping station.
§ 135-144.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-144.6
1:535
§ 135-144.7. Standards for approval of conditional uses.
(f) Buildings or other structures permitted in industrial districts.
(g) Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to the
conditional uses set forth in this subsection.
(4) Prohibited activities. Prohibited activities shall be as follows:
(a) Cut and fill, other than that related to uses permitted in
Subsection B(1), (2) and (3) hereof.
(b) Soil or rock removal, other than that related to uses permitted
in Subsection B(1), (2) and (3) hereof.
A. In addition to the standards described in Chapter 135 relating to
conditional uses, the Township Supervisors shall consider the following
aspects of a conditional use application when considering requests for a
conditional use under this chapter:
(1) The extent to which the proposal would impact the topography;
soils, and vegetation and the methods proposed to mitigate
potential adverse environmental impacts.
(2) The potential impact of the proposal on adjacent properties.
(3) The degree to which the proposal is consistent with the purposes in
§ 135-144.1 above.
B. Prior to approval of a conditional use application, the applicant shall
provide evidence that:
(1) The development or use is being proposed in the Steep Slope
Conservation District because no other location is feasible.
(2) Earthmoving activities and vegetation removal will be conducted
only to the extent necessary to accommodate proposed uses and
structures and in a manner that will not cause excessive surface
water runoff, erosion, sedimentation, and unstable soil conditions.
(3) Mitigation techniques will be utilized, including, but not limited to,
retaining walls, tree wells, the establishment of ground covers and/
or low-spreading shrubs, the use of erosion-control fabric and the
like. Such techniques shall be evidenced through the submission of
plans and construction details which depict, delineate, and
otherwise describe the land development proposal.
(4) Proposed buildings and structures will be of sound geotechnical
engineering design, and footings will be designed in response to
the site's slope, soil, and bedrock characteristics. Such design shall
be evidenced through the submission of plans and construction
details which depict, delineate, and otherwise describe the land
development proposal.
§ 135-144.6 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-144.8
1:536
§ 135-144.8. Administration.
All applications for any use of land in the Steep Slope Conservation District
shall be submitted to the Township Supervisors and the Township Engineer
and shall include the following materials and information:
A. Site survey of the tract in question, leading to the submittal of a site
plan of the property indicating existing grades with contour lines at
two-foot intervals based on the United States geodetic datum.
B. Proposed grades within the area proposed for development or use.
C. Landscape plan indicating proposed paved areas, storm drainage
facilities, retaining walls, tree removal and proposed tree replacement,
ground cover, and shrubbery location. The modifications proposed to
the existing land cover shall also be indicated.
D. Architectural plans of the exterior and foundation of the proposed
structure.
E. Plan, profile and typical cross sections of the entrance drive and street
providing public access, with the seal of a registered professional
engineer thereon.
F. A statement indicating all methods to be used in overcoming any
structural or physical problems created by steep slopes, how the
existing environment will be protected and how materials will be
delivered to the site without disrupting the environment, signed and
sealed by a registered architect or engineer.
G. A statement, signed by the applicant at the time of subdivision, land
development, or building permit application, stating that there is a full
understanding of all difficulties associated with access to sites
containing or being near steep or very steep slopes.
H. A waiver of municipal or other liability for failure to provide, or
difficulty in providing, emergency vehicle access to the subject site,
granted by the applicant. This waiver shall be in accordance with
§ 135-144.2C above and shall be approved by the Township Solicitor
prior to any grant of a conditional use under this chapter.
§ 135-144.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-144.8
1:537

ARTICLE XVIII
Signs
§ 135-145. Purpose and applicability. [Amended 6-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 64-S]
Chadds Ford Township is a community in historic southeastern
Pennsylvania within which lies the Brandywine Valley, Brandywine
Battlefield, and the Brandywine Battlefield National Historic Landmark. The
purpose of this article is to preserve the Township's historic heritage, create
a desirable environment in which to live, visit, and conduct business, and to
provide protection to motorists, pedestrians and bicyclists from distractions
which may result in property damages as well as serious injury. It is the
purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the public by providing a comprehensive system of reasonable,
consistent and nondiscriminatory standards and requirements which are
intended to:
A. Assist in the identification of residences, businesses, churches and
other establishments.
B. Reduce hazardous situations, confusion, driver distraction, and visual
clutter which can be caused by signs employing movement, light,
fluctuating or moving lighting, flashing images, excessive size and/or
messaging which distracts motorists, pedestrians and/or bicyclists.
C. Protect and enhance the vistas and historical character of the
Brandywine Valley, Brandywine Battlefield, and the Battlefield National
Historic Landmark and preserve and enhance the natural and scenic
characteristics of this historic, suburban community.
D. Enhance the attractiveness and economic well-being of the Township as
a place to live, visit and conduct business, while supporting its rural
character and the tourism fostered by its natural and historic
landmarks.
E. Protect the public from the dangers of unsafe signs and structures.
F. Permit signs that are compatible with their surroundings, aid
orientation, and preclude placement of signs which conceal, obstruct or
intrude upon adjacent land uses.
G. Encourage signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in which
they are located and consistent with the category of use to which they
pertain.
H. Limit the size and number of signs and sign messages to the minimum
reasonably necessary to identify a residential or business location and
the nature of any such business.
I. Establish sign size in relationship to the scale of the lot and building on
which the sign is to be placed or to which it pertains.
§ 135-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-145
1:539
§ 135-146. Permits and fees.
A sign permit is required for all signs hereafter erected, except those listed
specifically hereafter in § 135-151. A permit shall be obtained upon the
filing of an application accompanied by a plan drawn to scale showing
the sign, its size and its location with respect to the building and to the
boundaries of the lot upon which it will be situated, together with the
applicable permit fee, if such proposed sign complies with the provisions of
this article and all other Township ordinances and regulations. Fees for sign
permits shall be set by resolution of the Board of Supervisors from time to
time.
§ 135-147. Nonconforming signs.
Signs and their respective illumination which are lawfully existing at the
time of the passage of this chapter and which do not conform to the
requirements of this chapter shall be considered nonconforming signs, and
once destroyed or removed shall be replaced only with conforming signs
and lighting. A nonconforming sign may be painted, repaired (including
lighting) and altered in its wording, provided that such modifications do
not exceed the dimensions of the existing sign. If a nonconforming sign
is changed or altered in any other manner, then the sign must be either
brought into compliance with all requirements of this chapter, including but
not limited to all dimensional, height, locational and design requirements,
or permanently removed. A sign which was not in conformance with the
zoning ordinance in effect on the date it was erected is an unlawful sign and
is not a nonconforming sign.
§ 135-148. Abandoned signs.
J. Preclude signs from conflicting with the principal permitted use of the
site or adjoining sites.
K. Regulate signs in a manner so as to not unreasonably interfere, distract,
obstruct, and/or endanger motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians.
L. Require signs to be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and
satisfactory manner; and prevent an attractive nuisance or abandoned
signs.
A. No abandoned sign shall be maintained or permitted to be maintained
on any premises. An abandoned sign for the purpose of this chapter is a
sign erected on and/or related to:
(1) The use of a property which becomes vacant and unoccupied for a
period of six months or more;
(2) Any sign which was erected for a prior occupant or business; or
(3) Any sign which relates to a time, event, or purpose which has
passed.
§ 135-145 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-148
1:540
§ 135-149. Prohibited signs. [Amended 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
It is unlawful to erect or maintain the following signs:
§ 135-150. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all sign uses, including those signs
not requiring a permit:
B. Any such abandoned sign shall be removed by the landowner or person
controlling the property within 10 days of the abandonment as
described above.
A. Spinning, animated or twirling signs, or any other moving objects used
for commercial advertising purposes whether containing a message or
not.
B. Flashing, blinking, twinkling, oscillating, or lighted moving signs of any
type, except those portions of signs which indicate time and
temperature.
C. Signs placed, inscribed or supported upon the highest roof line or upon
any structure which extends above the highest roof line of any building.
D. Signs painted on the facade or roof of any building or structure.
E. Signs on mobile stands which can be moved from place to place and
thereby not permanently affixed to the ground, except when covered by
a temporary permit, such as for a promotional event.
F. Signs mounted on utility poles, trees, fence posts and/or any other
existing structure which is not a part of the sign.
G. Signs which emit smoke or vapors.
H. Balloons or other inflated structures, whether or not tethered close to
the ground.
I. Flags, banners, pennants or streamers, except as permitted by
§ 135-152H.
J. Signs painted, applied or mounted on vehicles where the vehicles are
not operational and/or not currently registered and permitted by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
A. Materials/maintenance/removal. Every sign permitted by this chapter
must be constructed of durable materials, firmly supported, and must
be kept in good condition and repair. Any sign which is allowed to
become dilapidated shall be removed by, and at the expense of, the
landowner or lessee of the property on which it is located.
B. Traffic interference. No sign shall be so located or arranged that it
interferes with traffic through glare, through blocking of required sight
lines for streets, sidewalks or driveways, through confusion with a
§ 135-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-150
1:541
traffic control device (by reason of color, location, shape or other
characteristic), or through any other means.
C. Authorization. No signs except those of a duly constituted
governmental body, including traffic signs and similar regulatory
notices, shall be allowed within street lines, unless specifically
authorized otherwise by the Township and in compliance with any
prevailing regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation or other applicable laws and regulations.
D. Architectural design. All permanent signs affixed to any permitted
building shall be integrated into the architectural design of the building
on which they are placed.
E. Double-faced signs.
(1) Any sign may be double-faced, provided that it has two parallel
surfaces that are opposite and matching in size and shape and are
not over 16 inches apart for internally illuminated signs and not
over six inches apart for noninternally illuminated signs.
(2) The sign shall be considered as one sign and only one face shall be
used to calculate the total size of the sign.
(3) Should the two surfaces deviate from being parallel, or should they
differ in size or shape, or if they are more than 16 inches apart for
internally illuminated signs or six inches apart for noninternally
illuminated signs, the sign shall be considered as two signs.
F. Freestanding signs. Such signs shall be permitted on the premises of
the use for which they are intended and may be erected, provided that:
(1) No freestanding sign shall be erected closer to the street right-ofway
line than a distance which is the lesser of: five feet; or 1/2 the
distance between the street right-of-way line and the building at its
closest point. In no case shall the sign intrude onto or above the
street right-of-way.
(2) All freestanding signs shall be designed with a base of material
inhibiting all plant growth at least six inches from the supports or
body of the sign. Mulch, stones and concrete are all suitable
examples of growth-inhibiting materials.
(3) The face area of the sign support structure (or diameter times
height for round supports) shall not exceed 50% of the total area of
the allowed sign area.
(4) No portion of said sign shall exceed 10 feet above the average
ground level.
(5) Any vehicle to which a sign or display is affixed or on which a sign is
painted, which is used in such a manner that the carrying or display
of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the vehicle's primary
§ 135-150 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-150
1:542
purpose as a means of transportation, shall be considered a
freestanding sign and as such be subject to the provisions
regarding freestanding signs in the district in which such vehicle
is located. If sufficient space is available, vehicles with signage are
to be parked as much out of sight of the public right-of-way as
possible.
G. Projecting signs. Signs which project from a building may be erected
and maintained, provided that:
(1) Any support for such sign shall project no more than 15 inches from
the facade of said building.
(2) Such sign shall not project more than four feet from the building
facade.
(3) No part of the sign shall be less than seven feet nor more than 12
feet above the ground or walkway level.
(4) No projecting sign shall be permitted within 15 feet of any other
projecting sign.
H. Illuminated signs including digital on-premises signs shall be
illuminated only when provided for hereafter in each specific district.
The following regulations shall apply to all permitted illuminated signs:
[Amended 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
(1) Signs shall be illuminated so that such lighting permits no direct
light to shine on abutting properties or in the normal line of vision
of people when using the streets.
(2) The source of said lighting shall be shielded from vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
(3) All externally illuminated signs including digital signs shall be
turned off 1/2 hour after the closing of the business or entity which
they identify or advertise except those signs named in
§ 135-152A(3)(a) herein.
(4) Signs may be internally illuminated or backlighted through
transparent or translucent materials. The area of the sign will be
considered to be the total area of the illuminated area or structure.
(5) No illuminated sign shall be lighted on days when the business or
permitted use is not open for business except those signs named in
§ 135-152A(3)(a) herein.
(6) The source of said lighting shall be shielded from vehicular or
pedestrian traffic. Signs that are not effectively shielded to prevent
glare, that impair vision, or that otherwise interfere with any
driver’s operation of a motor vehicle are prohibited.
§ 135-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-150
1:543
(7) Illumination shall only be of an even intensity at all times and shall
not be more than 0.5 footcandle per square foot of display area.
When an illuminated sign is located on a property that abuts a
residential property, no light shall be detectable along the property
boundary.
(8) No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the
effectiveness of, or obscures, an official traffic sign, device, or
signal.
(9) Signs, which contain, include, or are illuminated by any flashing,
intermittent, or moving light or lights are prohibited, except those
giving public service information, such as time, date, temperature,
weather, traffic information, and/or public bulletins.
(10) Where space must be provided between two parallel faces for the
installation of lighting fixtures, these faces shall not be further
apart than 16 inches and such lighting fixtures and all light sources
shall be concealed from behind:
(a) Standard opal glass or another substance of equal or similar
light transmission factor;
(b) Hoods; or
(c) Any acceptable method of indirect lighting approved by the
Township Board of Supervisors upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission.
(11) Illuminated signs shall be uniformly lit not to exceed 0.5
footcandles per square foot of display area, and a uniformity ratio
of 0.5.
(12)No illuminated sign shall be lighted on days when the business or
permitted use is not open for business except those signs named in
§ 135-152A(3)(a) herein.
I. Removal. Each sign shall be removed within 10 days of the time when
the circumstances leading to its erection no longer apply, or as provided
for otherwise herein.
J. Applicability. All sign provisions of this chapter shall apply to smoke
stacks, water towers, silos and other similar structures.
K. Dynamic message display signs [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
(1) Signs incorporating dynamic message displays, as defined herein,
shall be permitted except within any residential district where they
are prohibited.
(2) Size. The dynamic message display may not exceed 70% of the total
sign area.
§ 135-150 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-150
1:544
§ 135-151. Allowed signs not requiring a permit.
The following signs, exactly as herein described, are exempt from the need
to secure permits but shall still be subject to the general regulations of
§ 135-150 hereof:
(3) Brightness. All electronic message signs must be equipped with
automatic day/night dimming capabilities. At nighttime or during
periods of ambient low light, the sign must automatically dim the
intensity of the light emitted whereby its brightness shall not
exceed 0.5 footcandle per square foot of display area.
(4) Lettering shall be of sufficient size for immediate recognition.
(5) Displayed messages shall be simple and static for immediate
recognition. Messages shall be complete in each display cycle and
shall not require viewers to see multiple display cycles to derive its
meaning.
(6) Display cycles shall change no sooner than every five minutes.
(7) Transitions from one message to the next shall be instantaneous
with no scrolling, fading, streaming, flashing or other animated
effect.
(8) Community Service. All dynamic message display sign owners must
notify AMBER ALERT and Community Service and register its
location for use as needed.
(9) All property owners utilizing a dynamic message display sign must
remove all exterior promotional banners and sandwich board signs.
A. Holiday decorations. Decorations for a recognized, officially designated
holiday, provided that they do not create a traffic or fire hazard. The
period for such decorations shall not exceed three months prior to and
one month after such holidays.
B. Official signs. Official and governmental signs, which shall include
safety signs, trespassing signs, signs indicating scenic or historical
points of interest, and traffic signs. Such signs may be illuminated
subject to § 135-150H hereof.
C. Owner/address signs. Signs designating the name of the owner or
occupant of a property, the address of such property, the private
ownership of roadways or other property, provided that:
(1) Such sign is not in excess of two square feet in area.
(2) Not more than one such sign is erected for each use.
D. Informational signs. Informational signs, such as "entrance," "exit," "no
parking," "visitor's parking," "no hunting," "no trespassing," "keep off
the grass," and the like, on the same lot as the use to which the sign
§ 135-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-151
1:545
relates, or the prohibition of the use to which the sign relates, provided
that:
(1) The area of said sign shall not exceed two square feet in area.
(2) Such sign shall not contain any advertising.
E. Incidental signs. No more than eight incidental signs may be attached
to a store front, window, door or other outside surface of a given
commercial use or business. The subject matter of such signs shall be
restricted to information concerning credit cards, hours of operation,
trading stamps, notices of services or restrictions or shall pertain to a
major service, commodity or facility offered on the premises. The total
area of all such signs shall not exceed two square feet and is not to be
considered in the total area of signs requiring a permit.
F. Temporary yard sale signs. Temporary yard sale or garage sale signs,
provided that such signs:
(1) Do not exceed four square feet in area.
(2) Shall be removed within 48 hours after said sale.
G. Temporary real estate signs. Temporary real estate signs advertising
the premises upon which they are erected as "for sale," "sold," "for
rent," or "rented," when erected by the landowner, a broker or other
person interested in the sale or rental of such premises, provided that:
(1) Such sign is located and maintained within the property lines of the
subject premises and is not greater than one in number for each
street on which the premises has frontage.
(2) The size of any such sign is not in excess of four square feet.
(3) Signs indicating the completion of a transaction, such as "sold,"
"rented" or "leased," shall be removed along with the supporting
sign within 10 days of the transaction.
H. Temporary contractor signs. Temporary signs of contractors,
mechanics, architects, painters, paper hangers and other artisans for a
period not to exceed 30 days, and only when the work is being
performed, provided that the size thereof is not in excess of four square
feet. In the case where such persons work on the premises on which
such signs are erected for a period greater than 30 days, then a sign
permit must be obtained. The sign must be removed within 10 days
after the work has been completed or a certificate of occupancy has
been issued.
I. Temporary window signs. Temporary window signs used to serve as an
accessory sign to the sign associated with the principal permitted use,
subject to the following regulations:
§ 135-151 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-151
1:546
§ 135-152. Allowed signs requiring a permit.
The following signs exactly as herein described under each specific district
are permitted provided a sign permit has been obtained for said sign:
(1) Temporary window signs shall be permitted only in commercial or
business districts or on properties where lawful nonconforming
commercial or business uses occur in other nonresidential districts.
(2) The total area of temporary window signs shall not exceed the
lesser of 25% of the total glass area of the window in which it is or
they are placed, or eight square feet.
(3) A temporary window sign shall only be permitted to be used for the
advertisement of sales or special events and shall be permitted to
be displayed for a period of 30 days or less.
J. Temporary political signs. Temporary signs used to announce a political
campaign, ballot issue or question, or the candidacy of a person seeking
elected office provided: [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
(1) Signs may not be installed sooner than 60 calendar days before the
date of the election (primary and/or general) in which a candidate
is seeking office or the issue is to appear on the ballot.
(2) Signs must be removed within 12 calendar days after the date of
the election.
(3) Express permission of the property owner must be granted prior to
the installation of any temporary political sign.
(4) Such sign or display shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
(5) Signs shall not be illuminated.
(6) The sign and location shall comply with § 135-150.
A. Residential districts. The following signs may be erected and
maintained in the residential districts upon issuance of a sign permit:
(1) Business signs for lawful nonconforming uses which are located in
a building other than a residence and which indicate the name or
activity of the occupant of the building, provided that:
(a) Not more than one such sign shall be erected for each unit.
(b) Such sign shall not exceed four square feet in area.
(c) A property with frontage on more than one street may erect
one sign along each street frontage, provided that a minimum
street frontage of 150 feet is maintained between signs.
[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
§ 135-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-152
1:547
(2) Signs identifying a school, college, church, hospital, municipal
building, or other such institution or public service facility,
provided that:
(a) Such sign does not exceed 20 square feet.
(b) Only one such sign is erected.
(c) The sign height of any freestanding sign shall not exceed four
feet measured from the finished grade to the highest point of
the sign. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
(d) A property with frontage on more than one street may erect
one sign along each street frontage, provided that a minimum
street frontage of 150 feet is maintained between signs.
[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
(3) Only the following signs shall be illuminated in the residential
districts:
(a) An identification sign of a physician, dentist, Magisterial
District Judge, hospital, and any such other person or
establishment whose services in an emergency are considered
essential to public health, safety and welfare.
(b) An identification sign of a school, church, or other similar
permitted use, provided that said sign may be illuminated only
between the hours of dusk and 12:00 midnight, prevailing
time.
(c) Street address identification not to exceed two square feet in
area.
(d) Signs shall not be internally illuminated or backlighted.
Downlighting shall be used to uniformly illuminate signs.
[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
(e) Lighting intensities are subject to the requirements set forth in
§ 135-150H. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
(4) Signs naming a subdivision or land development, provided that:
(a) Only one such sign is permitted at each exclusive entrance to a
subdivision or land development.
(b) Each such sign does not exceed 16 square feet in area.
(c) Such signs are restricted to the subdivision or land
development name.
B. B Business Districts. The following signs may be erected and
maintained in business districts upon issuance of a sign permit:
§ 135-152 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-152
1:548
(1) Any sign permitted in a residential district which relates to a use
permitted in the business district.
(2) In the case where three or fewer separate businesses are located
on a lot held in single and separate ownership:
(a) The total area of any permitted sign shall not exceed 20 square
feet in area.
(b) Not more than one ground or freestanding sign shall be
permitted along each street frontage of the lot, provided that if
the lot's frontage on a street is more than 600 feet and the
Board of Supervisors determines that an additional sign is
needed for safety reasons, the Board may authorize one
additional such sign to be located at least 300 feet from any
other ground or freestanding sign.
(c) One parallel sign may be located on the building of each
separate business establishment.
(d) A business established as a group of related uses aimed at a
single market segment shall be considered to be one business.
(3) In the case of a group of four or more separate businesses on a lot
held in single and separate ownership, one single freestanding sign
including individual signs identifying different establishments may
be erected on a common backing, provided that:
(a) The total area of the sign does not exceed 50 square feet.
(b) Any individual sign does not exceed 20 square feet.
(c) The structural backing for all such signs shall be uniform and
no sign may extend, in any direction, beyond the outside edge
of the backing.
(4) In the case of a group of four or more separate businesses on a lot
held in single and separate ownership, in addition to the signage
authorized by Subsection B(3), each individual business shall be
permitted a parallel sign on its building, provided that:
(a) Each individual parallel sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in
area.
(b) Buildings located on a freestanding pad site within a
development may elect to use multiple parallel signs, up to four
in number, with no more than one sign per facade and a total
area of all parallel signs not exceeding 20 square feet.
(5) On a lot which contains a single standalone business or commercial
establishment or use (as opposed to multiple establishments or
uses), other than a use such as an automobile service station, retail
store, or the like, two accessory parallel signs may be erected and
§ 135-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-152
1:549
maintained, provided that each such sign does not exceed four
square feet in area.
(6) All signs in business districts may be illuminated subject to
§ 135-150H hereof.
C. Planned Office Center and Planned Business Center districts. The
following signs may be erected and maintained in the Planned Office
Center and Planned Business Center districts upon issuance of a sign
permit:
(1) One freestanding sign for every four acres of tract area designating
the name and address of the building or combination of buildings
and identifying the occupants of said building(s), provided that the
area of such sign shall not exceed 50 square feet.
(2) One sign shall be permitted for each separate storefront or other
separate business located within a group of office, commercial or
other permitted uses on a lot held in single and separate
ownership, provided that:
(a) Only parallel signs shall be permitted for each individual
establishment.
(b) The size of such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
(c) In the case of a corner store, two signs totalling 20 square feet
may be permitted.
(3) All signs in the Planned Office Center and Planned Business Center
districts may be illuminated subject to § 135-150H hereof.
(4) Buildings located on a freestanding pad site within a development
may elect to use multiple parallel signs, up to four in number, with
no more than one sign per facade and a total area of all parallel
signs not exceeding 20 square feet.
D. Light Industrial District. The following signs may be erected and
maintained in the Light Industrial District upon issuance of a sign
permit:
(1) Any sign permitted in all other districts which specifically relates to
a permitted use in the Light Industrial District.
(2) In the case where any other single business or principal permitted
use is operated on a lot held in single and separate ownership, a
sign to display the name of the owner of the premises and the
activity conducted thereon or product produced thereon, provided
that:
(a) The total area of any sign shall not exceed 20 square feet.
(b) Only one freestanding or ground sign shall be permitted along
each street on which the lot has frontage.
§ 135-152 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-152
1:550
(c) One parallel sign shall be permitted on the main building.
(3) In the case where a group of businesses or principal permitted uses
lawfully exists on a lot held in single and separate ownership, one
single freestanding sign including individual signs identifying
different establishments may be erected on a common backing,
provided that:
(a) The total area of the sign does not exceed 50 square feet.
(b) Any individual sign does not exceed 20 square feet.
(c) The structural backing for all such signs shall be uniform and
no sign may extend, in any direction, beyond the outside edge
of the backing.
(4) In the case where a group of businesses or permitted principal uses
lawfully exists on a lot held in single and separate ownership, each
individual business or use shall be permitted a sign, provided that:
(a) Only parallel signs shall be permitted for each individual
establishment.
(b) Each individual sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.
(c) Buildings located on a freestanding pad site within a
development may elect to use multiple parallel signs, up to four
in number, with no more than one sign per facade and a total
area of all parallel signs not exceeding 20 square feet.
(5) All signs in the Light Industrial Districts may be illuminated subject
to § 135-150H hereof.
E. Special purpose signs.
(1) Marquee signs. Marquee signs for theaters, cinemas, exhibition
centers and similar public assembly uses shall be permitted only
upon specific authorization of the Board of Supervisors. Such signs
shall not be legible from through traffic streets, shall not have
letters larger than six inches in height and shall not exceed six
square feet per theater screen or auditorium, up to a maximum
marquee sign of 100 square feet.
(2) Drive-through service lanes.
(a) Restaurants. One food menu sign may be placed on each drivethrough
automobile access lane at the order-taking location.
Such signs may be illuminated from within during business
hours and are subject to all general regulations of this chapter.
The area shall not exceed 32 square feet.
(b) Banks. For each service lane equipped with an automatic teller
machine, one identification sign for the name of the banking
service, not to exceed four square feet in area, and one sign
§ 135-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-152
1:551
explaining the operation of the machine, not to exceed two
square feet in area, shall be allowed.
(c) Others. Other business uses desiring signage for an
automobile service lane shall require a special sign permit
from the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Gasoline service stations are subject to the same regulations as
other business uses, except as indicated below:
(a) A directory of services offered is allowed, not to exceed 10
square feet in area, and if placed on or within the 10 feet of the
main service building.
(b) One PA Authorized Inspection Station sign is allowed, not to
exceed one square foot in area.
(c) Signage on pumps, dispensers, canopies, etc., is to be included
in the normal signage area allowance. When hardware or
structures with such nonconforming signs are replaced or
renewed, any new hardware or structures shall be subject to
this chapter.
(d) Informational signs of the following types shall be allowed:
[1] Full- or self-service: not to exceed two square feet per
service island.
[2] Gasoline grade: not to exceed 1/2 square foot in area per
pump.
[3] Price of each grade: not to exceed two square feet in area
for each grade.
F. Temporary signs. The following temporary signs may be erected and
maintained on-site (i.e., on the premises where the event or activity to
which they relate is to occur), in the zoning districts indicated:
(1) Temporary signs announcing a political, public, educational,
charitable, civic, religious or similar event are permitted in all
zoning districts, provided that:
(a) Each sign does not exceed 32 square feet.
(b) Such sign may be erected for a period not to exceed 30 days in
any calendar year.
(c) One such sign may be erected for each street frontage on the
property where the event is to occur.
(2) Temporary promotional signs or displays in Business, Planned
Business Center, Planned Office Center or Light Industrial districts.
§ 135-152 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-152
1:552
(a) Temporary promotional signs or displays shall be permitted for
retail sales and service uses for a maximum of seven
consecutive calendar days on not more than four occasions
during a calendar year.
(b) One such sign or display shall be permitted for each business
use held in separate ownership or tenancy.
(c) Such sign or display shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
(d) Temporary window signs or displays shall not exceed a total of
32 square feet or 50% of the window area in any contiguous
group of windows, whichever is less.
(e) Mobile or movable signs with movable type shall have
enclosed, locked covers to prevent unauthorized access and
may be illuminated only during business hours. Flashing,
animated, etc., displays are not permitted.
G. Real estate signs. The following signs may be erected and maintained in
all zoning districts upon issuance of a sign permit:
(1) Signs advertising the sale or construction of a subdivision or land
development, provided that:
(a) Not more than one sign is permitted per street entrance to the
subdivision or land development and must be located on the
property to be subdivided or developed.
(b) The size of any such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in
area.
(c) Such signs shall not be erected until the subdivision or land
development plan has been approved by the Township and
recorded.
(2) Signs naming a subdivision or land development, provided that:
(a) Not more than one sign is permitted at each street entrance to
the subdivision or land development and must be located on
the property to be subdivided or developed.
(b) The size of such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area.
(c) Such signs are restricted to the development name.
(3) Signs advertising a commercial lot, building, or group of buildings
for sale or rent, provided that:
(a) Not more than one sign is permitted upon each street on which
the property has frontage, which must be located on the
property to be sold or rented.
(b) The size of such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area.
§ 135-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-152
1:553
(4) All signs permitted by Subsection G(1) and (3) above shall be
removed when all the buildings, stores or lots on the premises have
been rented or sold, or within one year of the date the application
for such sign was approved, whichever occurs first. Such signs
shall be permitted for an additional period of six months upon
application to the Code Enforcement Officer, provided that at the
time less than 90% of the buildings, stores or lots on the premises
have been rented or sold.
(5) A land development sign is permitted for future developments prior
to construction, subject to a permit and final approval. The sign is
good for a one-year period and must be removed once the
construction is started.
(6) Temporary real estate directional signs indicating the location and
direction of premises available for, or in the process of,
development, but not erected upon such premises, and having
inscribed thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder or
agent, provided that:
(a) The size of any such sign shall not be in excess of two square
feet.
(b) Such signs shall be kept within a radius of one mile of such
development.
(c) Such signs shall be spaced at locations only where a change in
direction is involved, but no closer than 500 feet apart unless
otherwise approved by the Township Code Enforcement
Officer.
(d) The maximum number of such signs shall be three. All such
signs shall be removed when all the buildings, stores or lots on
the premises have been rented or sold or within six months
from the date on which the sign was erected, whichever occurs
first. Such signs may be permitted for a maximum of two
additional six-month periods upon application to the Code
Enforcement Officer, provided that at the time less than 75% of
the buildings, stores or lots on the premises have been rented
or sold.
H. Flags or banners. Flags are allowed on freestanding poles not higher
than the maximum height for buildings in the Township or on poles
attached to buildings, not to project higher than the highest part of the
building or the maximum height allowed in the district, whichever is
lower. Flags of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Delaware County, and Chadds Ford Township may be flown subject to
the following restrictions:
(1) Heights shall meet the requirements spelled out above.
§ 135-152 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-152
1:554
(2) The sizes of the flags are not to exceed the sizes flown at the county
seat in Media, Delaware County, Pennsylvania. Larger-size flags
shall be considered as advertising attractions and shall not be
permitted except as regulated by the temporary sign regulations in
this chapter.
(3) A maximum of four flags may be flown at one time.
(4) Flags or banners, other than the flags of the United States of
America, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of Delaware, or
Chadds Ford Township, with text, emblems, mottos, logos and the
like shall be considered signs and shall be subject to this chapter.
Personal family coats of arms and religious or decorative flags may
be flown in residential districts, and are subject to the height
restrictions above.
(5) The United States flag flown in the Township shall be displayed in
accordance with the rules of the Second National Flag Conference
adopted by Congress in 1942, as amended. Displays with the
features or likeness of the United States flag which are not flown in
conformance with the requirements of the above act are regarded
as banners and are not permitted.
I. Canopy and awning signs. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 64-S]
(1) One canopy or awning sign shall be permitted to advertise an
individual business use occupying an individual structure on a
single lot. For uses in combination, such as a shopping center,
industrial park or office park, each use will be permitted one
canopy or awning sign for identification and/or advertising
purposes.
(2) The total display area of a canopy or awning sign shall not exceed
one square foot for each linear foot of a building or tenant space
frontage.
(3) Signs shall display only the business name, logo, proprietor,
property address, business telephone number and/or other
business contact information.
(4) Letters, logo and numerals, not exceeding a height of eight inches
shall be located on the vertical face within 14 inches from the base
of the awning.
(5) The minimum clearance between the awning and grade shall be not
less than seven feet.
(6) All canopy and awning signs shall have a setback of not less than
two feet from the curbline but may not extend more than five feet
from the building line.
(7) Illumination of awning signs is subject to the requirements set forth
in § 135-150H and approval of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 135-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-152
1:555
(8) A canopy or awning without lettering or other advertising shall not
be regulated as a sign.
J. Billboards and off-premises signs. [Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No.
64-S]
(1) Billboards and off-premises signs shall not be permitted except
within the B-1 and PBC-1 District as a special exception granted by
the Zoning Hearing Board. Any special exception granted shall
meet the following criteria in addition to those set forth in the MPC
and be required to adhere to the following regulations:
(a) Only one billboard (off-premises sign) may be erected,
constructed or maintained on any property.
(b) All billboards (off-premises signs) shall be demonstrated to be
oriented toward the road upon which the billboard (offpremises
signs) fronts or faces to cause the least impact upon
the neighboring properties.
(c) No billboard (off-premises signs) shall obstruct the view of
motorists on adjoining roads, or the view of adjoining
commercial or industrial uses, which depend in any measure
upon visibility for identification.
(d) Billboards (off-premises signs) shall be stationary. Billboards
(off-premises signs) using digital technology shall produce
static images, which may be changeable via a computer.
Billboards (off-premises signs) shall not scroll, flash, twinkle,
feature motion pictures, moving images, or have mechanical or
animated movement.
(e) Only one advertisement, display, or message may appear on a
billboard (off-premises signs) face at any one time.
(f) Changes from one advertisement or display, or from one
message to another (cycle) must be an instantaneous transition
and may occur no more frequently than every five minutes.
(g) An application for a billboard (off-premises sign) greater than
50 square feet shall be accompanied by a site plan and shall
meet all applicable requirements as set forth in the Chadds
Ford Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
(h) An application for a billboard (off-premises sign) greater than
50 square feet shall be accompanied by certification, under
seal and signature by a professional engineer registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, that the existence of the
billboard (off-premises sign), as proposed, shall meet all
construction standards as set forth in the Township building
codes and shall not present a safety hazard.
§ 135-152 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-152
1:556
(i) Prior to final approval by the Zoning Hearing Board of any
application for a billboard (off-premises sign) greater than 50
square feet, a deposit of $25,000, to be put in escrow, is
required in the event that removal of the billboard (offpremises
sign) is required. Interest may be accumulated.
(2) Billboards (off-premises signs) shall be constructed in accordance
with all applicable Township and state codes. In addition:
(a) A minimum setback equal to 150% of the height of the
billboard (off-premises sign) shall be provided on all four sides
(front, rear and side yards). The setback area shall be free from
all other buildings, structures and improvements except those
demonstrated to be necessary for the operation, maintenance,
or security of the billboard (off-premises sign).
(b) The maximum height of the highest point of the billboard (offpremises
sign), including its support structure, shall not
exceed 15 feet, as measured from the base of the sign or grade
of the nearest adjacent roadway, whichever is higher.
(c) Billboards (off-premise signs) may have no more than one sign
face, which may not exceed 300 square feet. The back of every
billboard sign must be finished and painted a uniform color
with the type and nature of the finishing to be approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
(d) No billboard (off-premises sign) shall be located within 1,000
feet of any other billboard (off-premises sign) on either the
same or opposite side of the street, as measured between the
closest points of each sign, including the supporting structure.
This includes billboards (off-premises signs) located in other
Townships and municipalities.
(e) No billboard (off-premises sign) shall be located within 500
feet of any street intersection, as measured horizontally in all
directions from the nearest edge of the sign face.
(f) No billboard (off-premises sign) shall be located within 500
feet of any residential district, as measured horizontally in all
directions from the nearest edge of the sign face.
(g) No billboard (off-premises sign) shall be constructed within the
clear sight triangle of any public street or commercial
driveway and shall not in any manner obstruct or impede
traffic safety, including ingress and egress.
(h) A billboard (off-premises sign) sign face shall be independently
supported and have vertical supports of metal which are
galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust and corrosion.
§ 135-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-152
1:557
(i) One vertical support shall be capable of enabling the entire
sign face to be able to withstand a minimum wind load of 100
miles per hour, or wind loading as required by the applicable
building code, whichever is more restrictive.
(j) The entire base of the billboard (off-premises sign) structure
shall be permanently landscaped with suitable shrubbery and/
or bushes placed in such a manner as to screen the foundation
of the structure. A landscaping plan shall be submitted for
review and approval by the Code Enforcement Officer prior to
the issuance of a building permit. The owner shall maintain
said landscaping in accordance with accepted conservation
practices and shall replace any dead or diseased plants
promptly. Landscaping shall form a base and backdrop to the
billboard (off-premises sign) whenever practical.
(k) No bare cuts are permitted on a hillside, and all cuts or fills are
to be permanently seeded or planted.
(l) Illumination of any and all sign faces shall be shielded to
prevent the light source from being seen from any direction.
Any lighting used for billboards shall be designed to only
illuminate the face of the billboards (off-premises signs) and
not cast glare onto adjacent properties or in an upward
direction, and in accordance with § 135-150H. All illuminated
and/or digital billboard (off-premises sign) shall be turned off
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
(3) Maintenance of billboards (off-premises signs).
(a) All properties upon which a billboard (off-premises sign) is
erected shall be regularly maintained so as not to create a
nuisance by means of weeds or litter.
(b) The billboard (off-premises sign) structure shall be entirely
repainted at a minimum of every five years.
(c) Every three years, the owner of the billboard (off-premises
sign) shall have a structural inspection made of the billboard
(off-premises sign) by a qualified Pennsylvania registered
structural engineer and shall provide to the Township a
certificate from the engineer certifying that the billboard (offpremises
sign) is structurally sound.
(d) Annual inspections for the billboard (off-premises sign) shall be
conducted by the Township Code Enforcement Officer to
determine compliance, and billboards (off-premises sign) found
to be in violation shall be brought into compliance within 30
days of notice or ordered removed upon proper notification by
the Township.
§ 135-152 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-152
1:558
(e) Any abandoned billboard (off-premises sign) must be removed
within 30 days after notice. If the owner fails to remove an
abandoned billboard (off-premises sign) within 30 days after
receipt of notice, the Township may remove the billboard (offpremises
sign) at the owner's expense.
(f) The owner of the property on which the billboard (off-premises
sign) is located, as well as the owner of the billboard (offpremises
sign), must acknowledge and agree to abide by the
aforementioned rules and regulations as they pertain to
billboards (off-premises signs).
(g) Any property upon which a billboard (off-premises sign) of 100
square feet or greater shall be subject to reassessment.
(h) The owner operator of any billboard (off-premises sign) greater
than 100 square feet agrees to occasionally disseminate
emergency alerts and/or public service information.
§ 135-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-152
1:559

ARTICLE XIX
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 135-153. Required off-street parking.
A. Unless specified otherwise in another article of this chapter, all offstreet
parking spaces shall be provided and satisfactorily maintained in
accordance with the following provisions for each building or use
which, after the effective date of this chapter, is established, erected,
enlarged or altered for any of the following purposes or uses in any
district. For uses not specifically listed, the requirements for the most
similar use listed shall be followed.
B. The required parking spaces set forth below shall be considered to be
minimum standards. Additional spaces may be required if the Board of
Supervisors finds that conditions warrant the increase in parking
spaces for certain uses or activities.
Use
Off-Street Parking Space
Required
Agricultural Uses
Agriculture One for each full-time employee
Residential Uses
All types of dwelling units Two for every dwelling unit
Home professional offices Two for every dwelling unit, plus
one for every 100 square feet of
space used for the office
Assisted living residences
[Added 8-5-2015 by Ord. No.
134]
0.5 for each living and/or
residential unit, plus one space
for each employee on the shift of
greatest employment
Public or Private Recreational Uses
Private clubs, lodges One for every 100 square feet of
floor area available to patrons
Golf course Five for each hole, plus club
requirement as listed above
Golf driving range Two for each tee
Miniature golf One for each hole
Bowling alley Five for each lane
Gymnasium, stadium One for every four seats
Public swimming pool One for every 12 square feet of
water surface, or one for every
five persons for whom dressing
facilities are provided (whichever
is greater)
§ 135-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-153
1:561
Use
Off-Street Parking Space
Required
Outdoor commercial recreation One for every 1,500 square feet
of area
Indoor commercial recreation One for every 150 square feet of
gross floor area devoted to such
use
Governmental, Institutional and
Educational Uses
Places of public or private
assembly, including churches,
auditoriums, theaters, and
assembly halls
One for every four permanent or
temporary seats, plus one for
every 100 square feet of meeting
room area
Club, lodge One for every 50 square feet of
assembly area, or one for every
five persons of total capacity
(whichever is greater)
Community center, library,
museum
One for every 250 square feet of
floor area in public use
Hospital, sanitarium One for each bed, plus one for
each employee on the shift of
greatest employment
Convalescent home, nursing
home
1/2 for each bed, plus one for
each employee on the shift of
greatest employment
Private kindergarten, or child
institutional home
One for each adult attendant,
plus one for every 500 square
feet of gross floor area
Schools One for each faculty member and
other full-time employee, plus
two for each classroom, plus one
for every 12 students aged 16
years or older
Dormitory One for every three residents
Retail, Commercial and Other
Business Uses
Retail store or shop One for every 100 square feet of
gross sales floor area or area
serving customers
Department store or
supermarket
One for every 75 square feet of
store sales floor area or other
area serving customers
§ 135-153 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-153
1:562
Use
Off-Street Parking Space
Required
Personal service businesses such
as barbershops, photo shops,
tailors, beauticians, shoe repair
and the like
One for every 100 square feet of
gross floor area
Restaurant, cafeteria, tavern or
cafe
Two for every 100 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one for
each employee
Fast-food restaurant One for every 65 square feet, plus
one for each employee on the
shift of greatest employment
Self-service laundromat One for every 50 square feet of
gross floor area
Automobile service and repair Four for each bay, or one for
every 200 square feet of floor and
ground area devoted to service
and repair (whichever is greater),
plus one for each employee
New and used automobile sales
and service agency
One for every 200 square feet of
floor and ground area devoted to
sales, service and repair, plus one
for each employee
Banks, credit unions and the like One for every 75 square feet of
floor area for serving customers
Medical or dental offices and
clinics
Six for each practitioner
Funeral home One for every four seats for
patron use, or one for every 50
square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is greater
Professional offices and
businesses
One for every 250 square feet of
gross floor area
Other office building One for every 200 square feet of
floor space in office use, but in no
case less than two for each
tenant
Shopping center For centers having a gross
leasable area from 25,000 to
400,000 square feet: four for
every 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable area
§ 135-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-153
1:563
§ 135-154. General regulations for off-street parking.
Use
Off-Street Parking Space
Required
For centers having a gross
leasable area from 400,000 to
600,000 square feet: 4 1/2 for
every 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable area
For centers having a gross
leasable area of greater than
600,000 square feet: five for
every 1,000 square feet of gross
leasable area
Movie theater One for every four seats, plus one
for every employee on the shift of
greatest employment
Hotel, motel or inn 1.2 for each rental room or suite,
plus one for every three seats in
restaurants or meeting rooms
Bed-and-breakfast inn One for each rental room, plus
one for each innkeeper, plus one
for each employee on the shift of
greatest employment
Temporary places where
Christmas trees, flowers,
produce or other goods are sold
10 minimum, plus any additional
spaces as determined by the
Code Enforcement Officer after
personally observing traffic
conditions at such locations
Industrial and Other Related Uses
Industrial and other related uses One for each employee on the
shift of greatest employment, or
one for every 500 square feet of
gross floor area (whichever is
greater), plus one for each
company vehicle
C. For buildings or uses other than those specified above, determination of
the appropriate parking space requirements shall be made by the Board
of Supervisors consistent with the standards set forth herein for
comparable buildings or uses.
A. Existing parking. Structures and uses in existence at the date of
adoption of this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this
article, provided that the type or extent of use is not changed, and
further provided that any parking facility now serving structures or
uses shall not be reduced in the future below such requirements.
§ 135-153 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-154
1:564
§ 135-155. Parking area design standards.
Parking design standards shall be as follows:
B. Changes in use. Whenever a structure is altered or a use is changed or
extended which increases its parking requirements, then the total
additional parking required for the alteration, change or extension shall
be provided in accordance with the requirements of § 135-153.
C. Conflict with other uses. No parking area shall be used for any use that
interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve.
D. Continuing character of obligation. All required parking spaces shall be
provided and maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities
were designed to serve. Off-street parking facilities shall not be
reduced in total extent except when such reduction is in conformity
with the requirements of this article.
E. Location of parking spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall be
on the same lot or premises with the principal use served.
F. Fractional spaces. Where the computation of required parking spaces
results in a fractional number, the fraction of 1/2 or more shall be
counted as one.
G. Maintenance of parking areas. All parking areas, loading areas, and
driveways shall be graded and surfaced with asphalt or other suitable
materials to prevent dust and erosion. Such areas shall also be drained
in conformance with municipal standards to prevent excessive water
flow onto streets or adjoining property. All parking spaces and parking
areas shall be clearly line-striped and maintained.
H. Lighting. All artificial lighting used to illuminate any parking area shall
be arranged to prevent glare on adjoining properties, and shielded to
insure that the source of the light will not be visible beyond the
boundaries of the property in order to minimize disturbance to
motorists, pedestrians or adjoining properties and uses.
I. Handicapped persons parking. All uses shall designate reserved
parking spaces for handicapped persons as close as possible to the
main entrance of the building, with the exception of single-family or
twin dwellings, service stations, garages, cemeteries, or any other use
for which 10 or fewer parking spaces are required under this chapter.
Said spaces shall be considered as part of the required spaces and shall
be appropriately marked with signs to designate handicapped use, as
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Parking design standards shall be in accordance with such standards as
set forth in Chapter 110, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 135-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-155
1:565
§ 135-156. Design and layout of off-street loading facilities.
B. Outdoor parking spaces and the approaches thereto shall be paved to at
least a depth of four inches of approved paved material and no
certificates of occupancy shall be issued until the facilities required by
this chapter are completed.
C. Required parking spaces within a parking lot shall have an area of at
least 162 square feet (nine feet by 18 feet) to which there is adequate
access from a street; except for those spaces designated for
handicapped use which shall be of the number required by applicable
codes and regulations, and have an area of at least 252 square feet (14
feet by 18 feet).
D. All parking areas in nonresidential zoning districts shall be designed so
that vehicles cannot back directly into a public street.
E. All parking shall be accessible from a street and an individual driveway.
A. In addition to the off-street parking space required in this article, any
building erected, converted and/or enlarged for any nonresidential use
shall provide off-street areas for loading and unloading and commercial
vehicle parking space adequate for their needs.
B. The minimum-size loading space shall be 50 feet in depth and 12 feet in
width, with an overhead clearance of 15 feet, exclusive of drives and
maneuvering space, and located entirely on the lot being served. Any
overhead canopy should extend a minimum of four feet beyond a
loading dock.
C. All loading space shall have adequate access from a street or way which
does not block or interfere with the required parking as specified in
§ 135-153. This required space will be provided in addition to
established requirements for patron and employee parking.
D. In no case shall the public rights-of-way be used for loading or
unloading of materials. Furthermore, no loading dock or space shall be
located or arranged in such a way that it is necessary to back any
vehicle into or off any public right-of-way, nor require the use of any
public right-of-way for maneuvering space.
E. Two-way driveways shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width and a
maximum of 36 feet wide. One-way driveways shall be a minimum of 12
feet in width.
F. All accessory driveways and entrance ways shall be graded, paved and
drained to Township standards, to the extent necessary to prevent
nuisance of dust, erosion, or excessive water flow across streets and
adjoining properties.
§ 135-155 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-156
1:566
§ 135-157. Access for off-street parking and loading areas.
Access to and from all off-street parking, loading, and vehicle service areas
along public rights-of-way shall consist of well defined separate or common
entrances and exits and shall comply with the following provisions:
§ 135-158. Screening and landscaping.
All screening and landscaping shall conform to the provisions of § 135-161
and the following:
G. All off-street loading berths shall be provided on either the side or rear
of the lot. In no case shall off-street loading berths be provided in the
front of the lot.
H. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to at no
time constitute a nuisance, a hazard, or an impediment to traffic.
I. All lighting fixtures used to illuminate parking areas shall be shielded to
insure that the source of light will not be visible beyond the boundaries
of the property in order to minimize disturbance to motorists,
pedestrians, or adjoining properties and uses.
A. Access drives shall not open upon any public right-of-way within 150
feet of the nearest right-of-way line of any intersecting public street or
highway.
B. The required sight distance for access drives which open upon any
street or highway shall be in accordance with the regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
A. Screening between any parking area and the street line shall be
effective at the time of occupancy, subject to the following provisions:
(1) All off-street parking areas which provide more than five parking
spaces shall be screened from any abutting property of a more
restrictive zoning district.
(2) Effective screens may be accomplished through the use of the
following: plant materials, fencing or walls, and/or mounding
through the use of earthen berms forming a continuous visual
buffer.
(3) The area for planting, fencing, walls or earthen berms shall not
extend beyond the street line. No off-street parking or loading and
unloading facilities shall be located within 20 feet of the street line,
unless otherwise provided in other sections of this chapter.
(4) When planting screens are employed, the following shall apply:
(a) A buffer planting strip shall be provided. It shall be a minimum
of 15 feet in width unless required otherwise in this chapter.
§ 135-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-158
1:567
(b) Planting screens shall be of sufficient height and sufficient
density to constitute a continuous visual buffer five feet in
height at the time of planting except as provided below. The
type and spacing of plant materials shall be subject to review
and approval by the Board of Supervisors.
(c) At all intersections of accessways, the required screening shall
not be greater than 24 inches in height for a distance of 15 feet
from the street line, provided that this distance may be
increased to avoid blocking sight distance to or from a site.
(5) Whenever fencing or walls are employed, the effective height of the
continuous visual buffer shall be no less than five or more than six
feet, subject to other regulations of the Code of the Township of
Chadds Ford.
(6) Whenever earthen berms are employed, the effective height of the
continuous visual buffer shall be no less than five feet in height.
B. Landscaping within any parking area which provides more than five
parking spaces shall be subject to the following provisions:
(1) Off-street parking areas and parking lots shall be landscaped to
reduce wind and air turbulence, heat and noise, and the glare of
automobile lights; to reduce the level of carbon dioxide; to provide
shade; to ameliorate stormwater drainage problems; to replenish
the groundwater table; and to provide for a more attractive setting.
(2) Each parking lot shall have one three- to three-and-one-half-inchcaliper
shade tree for every five parking spaces, if there are no
existing shade trees. Shrubs, ground covers and other plant
materials are encouraged to be used to complement the trees, but
shall not be the sole contribution to the landscaping.
(3) The type of plant materials to be used shall be subject to review and
approval by the Board of Supervisors.
(4) The landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably dispersed
throughout the parking lot, except where there are 20 or more
parking spaces, in which case the following shall apply:
(a) Landscaped "islands" shall be provided at the end of each
parking bay. Such islands shall be a minimum of eight feet in
width and 18 feet in length. Such islands shall be provided to
enhance the appearance of the parking area and to control
access and movement within the parking area.
(5) All planting islands and planting beds within a parking lot shall be
surfaced with ground covers and/or dwarf shrubs and shall not be
grassed. Stone mulch may be used in conjunction with shrubs and
ground covers, and shredded hardwood mulch shall only be used to
form the plant saucers.
§ 135-158 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-159
1:568
§ 135-159. Highway frontage development.
In order to encourage the sound development of highway frontage and
to minimize traffic congestion and hazard, the following special provisions
shall apply:
A. All areas for off-street parking, off-street loading and unloading, and the
storage or movement of motor vehicles shall be physically separated
from the highway or street by a raised curb, buffer planting strip, fence,
wall, berm, or other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle
entrance or exit, except for necessary accessways or access roads
which provide ingress to and egress from such parking, loading or
storage area. All parking areas or lots shall be designed to prohibit
vehicles from backing out on the street, and the capacity of each lot
shall provide adequate storage area and distribution facilities upon the
lot to prevent backup of vehicles on a public street while awaiting entry
to the lot.
B. In the case of a shopping center, office complex, group of multifamily
dwellings or similar grouping or buildings on a lot, and in any other
multibuilding development in the nonresidential zoning districts:
(1) All buildings shall front upon a service street, common parking lot
or similar area and not directly upon a public street.
(2) All points of vehicular access to and from a public street shall be
located not less than 150 feet from the intersection of any public
street lines; provided, however, that such a point of vehicular
access, which, in effect, converts a "T" intersection into an
intersection of two streets which cross one another, shall be
permitted.
(3) Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to
and from public streets and highways serving the unified
development, without undue congestion to or interference with
normal traffic flow within the Township.
(4) All streets and accessways shall conform to the design standards of
Chapter 110, Subdivision and Land Development. Provisions shall
be made for adequate signalization, turn, standby and deceleration
lanes, and similar facilities where desirable.
(5) All driveways, aisles, maneuvering spaces, vehicular service areas
or spaces between or about buildings, other than those related to a
dwelling, shall be adequately illuminated during night hours of use
at no cost to the Township.
(6) Direct vehicular access shall be strongly discouraged onto any
collector or arterial highway and reverse frontage shall be
encouraged.
(7) All traffic controls shall be in accordance with § 135-162.
§ 135-159 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-159
1:569

ARTICLE XX
Buffer Areas, Landscaping and Environmental Controls
§ 135-160. Buffer area standards.
§ 135-161. Landscaping requirements.
A. Buffer areas, as defined in Article II and required in various districts,
shall be adjacent to a property boundary.
B. Buffer areas shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with
§ 135-161 with a buffer planting strip which forms a continuous visual
buffer. In the event the buffer planting strip does not provide a
continuous visual buffer due to site topography and visibility conditions,
the required plantings shall be placed upon a berm to elevate their
effectiveness.
C. All plantings shall be installed and maintained for the full width
required in a particular district, except that certain structures may be
placed within the buffer area, including:
(1) The required landscape treatment such as berms, fences, or walls
which aid in screening and do not conflict with the character of
adjoining properties or block the clear sight distance required at
intersections.
(2) Appurtenant landscaping structures, such as tree wells, tree
guards and tree grates, and retaining walls used to preserve stands
of existing trees or used for other functional purposes.
(3) Roads and/or driveways which provide direct ingress/egress for the
tract, including appurtenant structures within such road rights-ofway
such as curbs, sidewalks, and signs, which shall be landscaped
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(4) Underground utilities.
(5) No structures other than those set forth in this Subsection C shall
be placed within a buffer area, and no parking of any kind shall be
permitted within the required buffer area.
(6) All existing deciduous and evergreen trees above two inches in
caliper and/or six feet in height shall be preserved in the buffer
areas, except where clearance is required to insure sight distance.
A. All required landscaping shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the Board of
Supervisors. A landscaping plan shall depict all proposed plantings as
required within buffer areas in the form of a buffer planting strip, and in
other landscaped areas which relate to, complement, screen or
accentuate buildings, roads, parking areas, sidewalks, walkways,
§ 135-160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-161
1:571
sitting areas, service or maintenance structures, courtyards, and other
site features.
B. The landscaping plan shall be submitted at the time when all other
required applications and/or plans are submitted. It shall be based on
and reflect the following:
(1) The functional and aesthetic factors which relate to the tract, and
to the principal and accessory buildings and other structures.
(2) Concealing views to the tract.
(3) Enhancing views from and within the tract.
(4) Screening and complementing proposed buildings and other
structures.
(5) Creating visual interest for the users and/or residents of the
proposed project.
(6) Using plant materials which are hardy and acclimated to the
conditions at the tract and within the Township.
C. The landscaping plan shall include notes, diagrams, sketches, or other
depictions to present the consideration and analysis of the following:
(1) An analysis of the site in terms of the existing views to and from the
areas which are proposed for development; existing topography
and vegetation conditions; and other existing conditions which are
relevant to the site.
(2) An analysis of proposed planting and other landscaping needs as
related to screening views of buildings; screening buildings and
sections of buildings; screening parking areas and other areas
where vehicles are parked; screening storage areas; screening site
utilities; and other appropriate types of screening.
(3) The consideration of locations where plantings and other
landscaping is needed to provide visual interest; define outdoor
spaces; complement the proposed architectural style; and achieve
other functional and aesthetic requirements for buffer areas, buffer
planting strips, and other landscaped areas.
(4) The intent to preserve existing trees wherever possible. The
protection of trees 12 inches or more in caliper (measured at a
height 4 1/2 feet above the original grade) shall be demonstrated as
a factor for determining the location of buildings, open space,
structures, underground utilities, walks, paved areas and other
structures. Areas in which trees are to be preserved shall remain at
original grade level and in an undisturbed condition.
§ 135-161 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-161
1:572
D. A preliminary and final landscaping plan shall reflect the following
detailed criteria, unless more specific criteria are provided for in other
articles of this chapter:
(1) Buffer planting strips shall be installed and maintained in the
buffer areas at the width required in this chapter to form a
continuous visual buffer. In addition to ground covers and
evergreen shrubs, the buffer planting strip shall be comprised of
evergreen trees (such as spruce, pine or hemlock) which are a
minimum of eight feet in height at the time of planting and shall be
spaced in two alternating rows on ten-foot centers. The combined
evergreen shrub and tree plantings shall constitute a continuous
visual screen at the time of occupancy of any buildings, and/or at
the time of initiation of any use. In the event such plantings do not
provide a continuous visual buffer, the plantings shall be placed
upon a berm at a height from three feet to five feet to elevate their
effectiveness.
(2) Shade trees shall be provided along all streets and shall be located
at least three feet beyond the right-of-way line. No less than one
three-and-one-half- to four-inch-caliper tree shall be planted for
each 30 feet of roadway length. Such trees shall be planted in
alternating rows whereby trees on one side of the street are placed
at intervals of 60 feet. However, such trees may be grouped in
certain cases to achieve a particular design objective when
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(3) The outer perimeter of all parking areas shall be screened.
Effective screens may be accomplished through the use of plant
materials, fencing or walls and/or mounding through the use of
earthen berms.
(4) Parking lots shall be landscaped as required in Article XIX.
(5) All buildings in the B, B-1, POC, PBC, PBC-1, LI, R-A, R-M and PRD
districts shall be landscaped in accordance with the following
criteria:
(a) A combination of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs
shall be used as "foundation" plantings, i.e., plantings to be
installed in reasonably close proximity to the facades.
(b) At least one three-and-one-half- to four-inch-caliper specimen
deciduous tree shall be planted for every fifty-foot length of
building facade measured from end to end of buildings, without
regard to indentations and the like in the buildings, facades,
and excluding any enclosed walkway connectors and elevator
cores, such trees to be a minimum of 11 feet to 13 feet in
height at the time of planting; and one eight- to ten-foot
specimen evergreen tree shall be planted for every 50 feet of
length of building facade.
§ 135-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-161
1:573
(c) Five evergreen and/or deciduous shrubs shall be planted for
every 20 feet of length of building facade.
(d) Trees and shrubs shall be grouped in accordance with specific
needs and objectives.
(6) Other landscaping, including trees, shrubs and ground covers,
shall be provided along walkways, in courtyards, around sitting
areas, at the entrance to the site and in other highly visible
locations, especially on the outer side of any internal access roads
which are visible from a public street which may adjoin a tract, at
the entrance to buildings, and around structures used for service,
storage or maintenance purposes.
(7) The location, type, size, height and other characteristics of
landscaping shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
(8) Shrubs shall not be placed closer than three feet from any property
line, and trees shall not be closer than six feet.
E. The preliminary landscaping plan shall be drawn at a scale of at least
one inch equals 50 feet. It shall be totally coordinated with the overall
site plan and shall contain the following:
(1) A delineation of existing and proposed plant materials.
(2) A delineation of other landscaping features such as berms, planting
beds to be used for herbaceous plants, areas to be devoted to
lawns, and other elements of the proposed improvements such as
fences, walls, berms, retaining walls, lighting, benches, signs,
paving, stone, tree wells and the like.
(3) One plan view color-rendering of the preliminary landscaping plan
shall be submitted for review by the Township, in addition to the
number of prints which are otherwise required. The colorrendering
shall reflect total coordination with the overall site plan
in terms of its relationship to proposed buildings, roads, parking
areas, walks walls, fencing, benches, signs, lighting and other like
structures.
(4) A written narrative of the analysis and objectives for plantings as
required under Subsection C above.
F. A final landscaping plan shall be submitted after the Township has
reviewed the preliminary landscaping plan and submitted comments on
the plan to the applicant. The final landscaping plan shall be drawn at a
scale of at least one inch equals 30 feet. It shall be totally coordinated
with the overall site plan and shall contain the following:
(1) A final version of all of the plan requirements stated in Subsection
C above, for a preliminary plan.
§ 135-161 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-161
1:574
(2) A plant list wherein the botanical and common name of proposed
plants are tabulated, along with the quantity, caliper, height, and
other characteristics.
(3) Details for the planting and staking of trees, the planting of shrubs,
and any other details which depict other related installation.
(4) Information in the form of notes or specifications concerning
planting beds to be used for herbaceous plants, areas to be devoted
to lawns, and the like. Such information shall convey the proposals
for seeding, sodding, mulching and the like.
(5) A cost estimate for the landscaping installations shall be submitted
with the final landscaping plan. The costs shall serve as the basis
for establishing an escrow account for the landscaping
improvements.
(6) Information regarding the continued maintenance of all plantings,
and notes indicating that all plantings will be installed, maintained,
and replaced within six months if dead or diseased, in locations as
shown on the approved landscaping plan.
G. Plant characteristics and maintenance.
(1) All plants shall conform with the standards for nursery stock of the
American Association of Nurserymen.
(2) Trees and shrubs shall be typical of their species and variety and
have normal growth habits; well developed, densely foliated
branches; and vigorous, fibrous root systems.
(3) Trees and shrubs shall be free from defects and injuries and
certified by appropriate federal and state authorities to be free
from diseases and insect infestations.
(4) Trees and shrubs shall be freshly dug and nursery grown. They
shall have been grown under climatic conditions similar to those in
the locality of the project or properly acclimated to conditions of
the locality of the project.
(5) Any tree or shrub which dies shall be replaced. Any tree or shrub
which is deemed, in the opinion of the Township, not to have
survived or grown in a manner characteristic of its type shall be
replaced. Substitutions for certain species of plants may only be
made when approved by the Board of Supervisors.
(6) It shall be the responsibility of the landowners, tenants and/or
other occupants of the premises to adequately and properly
maintain the landscaped areas, which responsibility shall include
watering, cleaning of weeds and debris, pruning and trimming,
replacement of dead or diseased plantings, and fertilizing to
maintain healthy growth.
§ 135-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-161
1:575
§ 135-162. Environmental controls.
(7) The branching of all trees along the right-of-way of any property
shall be kept trimmed nine feet above any sidewalk and 11 feet
above all streets.
(8) All shrubs and other growth abutting the sidewalks shall be kept
cut back 12 inches from the edge of the sidewalks.
(9) Existing trees and shrubs at the corner of an intersection and/or
driveways shall be cut to the height of 24 inches from point of
intersection of corner property lines back 25 feet to avoid blocking
sight distance to oncoming traffic; and shrubs or ground covers to
be planted shall be of the dwarf variety and shall not exceed 24
inches in height at maturity.
H. The landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect or other
allied professional who is deemed to be qualified as determined by the
Board of Supervisors.
A. It is the intent of these regulations to prevent land or buildings,
including those permitted by right or by conditional use or special
exception, from being used or occupied in any manner so as to create
any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable condition,
such as fire, explosion, or other hazards; vibration; glare or heat;
surface water pollution and groundwater contamination; traffic
congestion; or soil erosion and sedimentation. All uses shall operate in
conformance with the environmental controls set forth herein, and
relevant statues, codes, rules and other regulations of the United States
government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Delaware County, and
governmental, quasi-governmental, and governmentally regulated
bodies, companies, and authority entities. The most stringent
regulation applicable shall be used.
B. All plans for proposed development in the Township shall illustrate,
depict, note, or otherwise demonstrate compliance with this section
and in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 110, Subdivision
and Land Development.
C. Vibration control. Operating or permitting the operation of any device
that creates vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold
of an individual at or beyond the property boundary of the source if on
private property or at 50 feet from the source if on a public space or
public right-of-way shall be prohibited. For the purposes of this section,
"vibration perception threshold" means the minimum ground- or
structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a normal person
to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to,
sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects.
D. Storage control.
§ 135-161 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-162
1:576
(1) No flammable, highly volatile or explosive liquids, solids, or gases
shall be stored in bulk above the ground, except that tanks or
drums of fuel directly connecting with energy devices, heating
devices, or appliances located and operated on the same lot as the
tanks or drums of fuel may be stored above ground, provided that
such tanks or drums are not more than 2,000 gallons. All such
tanks or drums shall be painted or otherwise coated white or other
heat reflective color. All federal, state and local laws shall be met.
(2) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials, and products
stored outdoors, including those permitted in Subsection D(1)
above, shall be enclosed by a fence of a type, construction and size
and shall be adequate to protect and conceal the facilities from any
adjacent properties. Fencing shall not only encompass the question
of safety but also constitute a contiguous visual buffer. All federal,
state and local laws shall be met.
(3) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transported off by any causes or forces of
nature, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream or
other watercourse or otherwise render such stream or other
watercourse undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation,
or which will destroy or otherwise harm aquatic life, be allowed to
enter any stream or other watercourse or cause or contribute to a
violation of federal, state or local law.
(4) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transported off by any causes or forces of
nature, to damage, destroy or create hazards or contamination to
humans, terrestrial wildlife, soil and/or vegetation.
(5) Underground storage of flammable, combustible, explosive or
other hazardous substances or materials, and the construction or
installation of tanks and other receptacles therefor, shall be in
accordance with the Fire Prevention Code107 and subject to the
approval of the Fire Marshal to the extent such approval is not
preempted by federal or state law. Any such approval, if given, may
be given subject to such conditions as the Board of Supervisors
deems necessary to protect the public health, welfare and safety.
(6) All materials or wastes which cause or are reasonably likely to
cause fumes, odors or dust, or which constitute a fire hazard, or
which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects,
shall be stored outdoors only if enclosed in containers adequate to
eliminate such hazards. All federal, state and local laws shall be
met.
E. Glare and heat control. Direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from
spotlights, floodlights or from high-temperature processes such as
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 59, Construction Codes.
§ 135-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-162
1:577
combustion or welding or from other sources, so as to be visible at the
lot line of the receiving land use, shall be prohibited. There shall be no
emission or transmission of heat or heated air so as to be discernible at
the lot line of the receiving land use.
F. Fire and explosion control. All activities and all storage of flammable
and explosive materials at any point within a lot shall be provided with
adequate safety and fire-fighting devices in accordance with the
International Building Code and International Fire Code108 in effect at
the time such activity or storage is occurring. In addition, there shall be
no open burning within any R-A, R-M, PRD, B, B-1, POC, PBC or PBC-1
district.
G. Traffic control.
(1) No activity shall occur which would adversely affect traffic flow
and/or present traffic controls within the Township by creating a
level of service below that which is specified in this subsection.
(2) To minimize potential adverse conditions, the level of service for
traffic along any portion of a road which leads to the points of
ingress and egress of a tract or other proposed property shall be a
level of service "C" or better. The term "level of service" and the
categories thereof are used herein in accordance with the
definitions or meanings ascribed thereto in the document entitled
"Trip Generation, An Institute of Transportation Engineers
Informational Report, Second Edition, 1979," or the edition in use
at the time a development or other building application is made.
(3) The determination of levels of service shall be made after an
experienced transportation engineer/traffic consultant conducts a
traffic study, the cost of which shall be borne by the owner of the
tract or other property owner. Said study shall be based in part on
the aforementioned report, and in part on the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Handbook of Vehicle Code
Regulations, in particular the following chapters: 471 to 610,
pertaining to engineering and traffic studies; 471 to 611, pertaining
to maintenance and protection of traffic; and 471 to 615, pertaining
to official traffic control devices. Said study shall indicate
compliance with the requirement for a level of service "C" or better
as set forth in Subsection G(2), above, and shall include the data
upon which the conclusions of said study are based, including,
without limitation, traffic counts, the hours thereof, the dates
thereof, and the types of motor vehicles comprising such counts.
(4) All streets and/or intersections showing a level of service below "C"
shall be considered deficient, and specific recommendations for the
elimination of these problems shall be listed. This listing of
recommended improvements shall include, but not be limited to,
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 59, Construction Codes.
§ 135-162 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-162
1:578
the following elements: internal circulation design, site access
location and design, external street and intersection design and
improvements, and traffic signal installation and operation,
including signal timing.
H. Soil erosion, sedimentation and grading control. No construction or
development activity shall occur unless in strict compliance with
Chapter 110, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the
Township of Chadds Ford. Such reference is made to call particular
attention to the controls which shall be exercised when clearing trees
and other vegetation, or otherwise changing or altering the land form.
I. Sewage disposal control. A one-hundred-percent replacement area
shall be provided for any community on-lot or on-site disposal system or
any sand mound system. Such replacement area shall serve as an
absorption area as necessary.
§ 135-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-162
1:579

ARTICLE XXI
Additional Regulations
§ 135-163. Applications and permits.
§ 135-164. Conditional use standards, criteria and procedures.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work for the erection
or alteration of any building or the erection of any sign in the Township
until a permit so to do has been duly issued therefor by the said Zoning
Officer.
B. The Zoning Officer may issue a permit upon application therefor with
an accompanying plan containing all of the information necessary to
enable him to ascertain whether the proposed building or sign complies
with the provisions of this chapter and upon payment of such fee as the
Supervisors may provide.
C. If the Zoning Officer decides that the said application does not comply
with the provisions of this chapter, the permit shall be forthwith
refused.
D. A permit of occupancy must be obtained from the Zoning Officer before
any building or property for which a building permit has been issued
may be used.
A. In evaluating an application to the Board of Supervisors for a
conditional use, the Board shall require the applicant to provide
reports, maps, plans and other papers to insure that the proposal:
(1) Will be consistent with the community development objectives
articulated in this chapter (pursuant to Section 606 of the MPC109).
(2) Will be consistent with the statement of purpose articulated for the
district in which the use is proposed.
(3) Will be consistent with the Chadds Ford Township Comprehensive
Plan, in particular, the plans for land use, community facilities and
utilities.
(4) Will conform to all requirements of Chapter 110, Subdivision and
Land Development, and all other regulations and ordinances.
(5) Will not adversely affect the health, safety, and general welfare of
the surrounding area and the Township.
(6) Will promote the harmonious and orderly development of the
zoning district involved.
(7) Will be compatible with the character and type of development
existing in the area which surrounds the site in terms of the size,
109. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10606.
§ 135-163 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-164
1:581
scale, height and bulk of the proposed uses and the size, shape and
placement of buildings and other structures.
(8) Will not detract from or cause harm to neighboring properties by
creating a negative impact on the aesthetic character of the
community.
(9) Will be compatible with the uses permitted in the surrounding area
in terms of the density and/or intensity of land use.
(10)Will reflect effective site planning and design in terms of energy
efficiency, environmental protection, and aesthetic composition.
(11)Will be reflective of sound engineering and land development
design and construction principles, practices and techniques.
(12)Will be consistent with the logical, efficient and cost-effective
extension of public services and utilities and will not adversely
affect the public services and utilities of surrounding properties of
the Township as a whole in terms of public water, sewers, police
and fire protection, and schools.
(13)Will include proposals for the effective disposal of solid waste.
(14)Will provide safe and efficient access to roads and will not create
traffic congestion, hazardous traffic conditions, or excessive traffic
volumes.
(15)Will be developed so as to limit the number of access points along a
major public street, and to develop frontage of buildings on access
roads which are parallel or perpendicular to a major public street.
(16)Will provide any improvements needed to guarantee compatibility
with adjoining roads.
(17)Will provide continuity of existing circulation systems, including
roads, sidewalks, trails and other walkways.
(18)Will provide adequate off-street parking and loading which will be
minimally visible from adjoining public streets.
(19)Will utilize effective stormwater management techniques and soil
erosion and sedimentation control techniques which are in
character with and complementary to the proposed site grading
and landscaping.
(20)Will provide for adequate environmental controls and performance
standards to minimize noise, vibration, glare, heat, odor, smoke,
dust, fumes, vapors, gases, air emissions, water emissions, and
outdoor storage.
(21)Will preserve woodlands and other trees existing at the site to the
maximum extent possible.
§ 135-164 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-164
1:582
(22)Will not be disruptive to existing topography, surface water
resources and groundwater resources.
(23)Will include proposals for effective mitigation of potential adverse
environmental impacts through a satisfactory environmental
impact assessment report.
(24)Will provide landscaping to buffer and screen the use from
surrounding properties, to complement buildings and other
structures on the site, and to enhance the overall character of the
development.
(25)Will include proposed landscaping, in addition to that required as
stated above, in areas such as the entrance, along property
boundaries, in areas which are highly visible, such as along roads,
walks or trails, and in other places where the use of trees, shrubs
and ground cover would be functional and appropriate.
(26)Will provide fencing, walls, berming, terraces, walkways, and other
site improvement features to complement the proposed
landscaping.
(27)Will provide effective, subdued lighting using light posts and
fixtures complementary to the proposed architecture and the
character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(28)Will provide adequate signage which shall be crafted to be
attractive and of the highest graphic quality in keeping with the
character of surrounding properties.
B. The Board of Supervisors may attach such conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those already required by this chapter, as it may deem
necessary to implement the purposes of the Municipalities Planning
Code110 and this chapter, and to protect the public welfare, which
conditions and safeguards may relate to, but are not limited to, the
design of buildings, roads and parking areas, landscaping and its
maintenance as a sight or sound screen, lighting, noise, safety, and the
prevention of noxious, offensive or hazardous conditions.
C. General procedures.
(1) In the case of an application for conditional use, the Planning
Commission shall perform a review and provide counsel to the
Board of Supervisors concerning the grant of approval or
disapproval of the proposed use. Such review shall be conducted
and a written report submitted to the Board of Supervisors within
45 days of the date of the first Planning Commission meeting
following the date the plan has been filed. The Planning
Commission shall discuss the application at at least one of its
regularly scheduled public meetings during the review period.
110. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 135-164 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-164
1:583
§ 135-165. General structural and lot requirements.
(2) The Board of Supervisors may, in the case of an application for
conditional use, schedule a hearing for public review and comment.
Such hearing shall commence during the ninety-day review period
unless mutually agreed otherwise with the applicant. Within 90
days, the Board of Supervisors, at a regularly scheduled meeting or
special meeting, shall take action to either approve or disapprove
the use.
(3) The Planning Commission and Board of Supervisors shall be
responsible for providing notification to the applicant, no less than
20 days prior to the occurrence of any hearing at which testimony
will be heard and/or action taken upon approval or disapproval, in
order that he/she may present his/her case at such hearing. The
Township shall notify, no less than 10 days prior to such hearing, all
abutting property owners and owners of property within 250 feet of
the property in question.
(4) Proof of proper notification shall be required as a precondition
before any formal action is taken on the application.
(5) Notification of the action taken by the Board of Supervisors shall be
made in writing to the applicant. In the event of disapproval it shall
be accompanied by a statement of the reasons therefor. In the
event of disapproval, the applicant may file a new application for
conditional use or subdivision and/or land development for another
use of the subject property.
(6) In the event of approval, should the applicant fail to obtain the
necessary Township approvals and permits within 12 months of
notification, or, having obtained the necessary approvals and
permits, fails to commence work thereunder within six additional
months, it shall be conclusively presumed that the applicant has
waived, withdrawn, or abandoned his/her application, and all
provisions, conditional use(s) and permits granted to him/her shall
be deemed automatically rescinded by the Board of Supervisors.
(7) The grant of approval by the Board of Supervisors for a conditional
use shall in no way release the applicant from his/her obligation to
comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter; Chapter 110,
Subdivision and Land Development; and any other applicable
Township, state and federal regulations.
A. Any structure in Chadds Ford Township used for residential purposes
must contain a habitable floor space of 750 square feet.
B. On any corner lot, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected or
altered, and no hedge, tree, shrub, or other growth shall be maintained,
which may cause danger to traffic on a street by obscuring the view.
§ 135-164 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-165
1:584
§ 135-166. Nonconforming uses.
§ 135-167. Height regulations for buildings and structures.
C. No lot area shall be so reduced that the dimensions of any of the open
spaces shall be smaller than herein prescribed.
D. No open shed, storage shed, wagon shed, pen or barn may be
constructed within 100 feet from the front street line.
E. No building may be erected, altered or used, and no lot or premises may
be used, for any business that is noxious or offensive by reason of odor,
dust, smoke, gas, vibrations or noise. No internal combustion engine
shall be used unless objectionable noise and vibration be eliminated
and it is equipped and supplied with an effective muffler or silencer.
A. The lawful use of a building or premises existing at the time that this
chapter becomes effective may be continued although such use does
not conform with the provisions of this chapter. A building used for a
nonconforming use shall not be enlarged and a nonconforming use shall
not be extended except that, when approved by the Zoning Hearing
Board, a building may be enlarged by a maximum of 25% of its cubical
contents at the time that this chapter becomes effective and a
nonconforming use may be extended by a maximum of 25% of the use
existing at the time that this chapter becomes effective; provided,
however, that any such enlargement of a building or extension of a use
shall conform with all the regulations of this chapter except as to the
nonconforming use and shall extend beyond the lot or premises held in
single and separate ownership on the date that this chapter becomes
effective, on which such nonconforming use existed at the effective date
of this chapter. A nonconforming use if changed to a conforming use
may not thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use. A
nonconforming use which has been discontinued for a period of one
year shall not thereafter be permitted, and the property may thereafter
be used only for a conforming use.
B. A nonconforming building which has been damaged or destroyed by fire
or other cause may be rebuilt at its former location and of its former
size and used for the same purpose as before its destruction. When a
nonconforming use has been injured or destroyed by proceedings in
eminent domain it may be restored in so far as possible upon such part
of the land as remains.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no part of a roof
shall protrude more than 40 feet above the average elevation of finished
grade along the exterior walls of the structure.
B. Any person aggrieved by such restriction may apply to the Board of
Supervisors for an exemption similar, but not limited, to the exemption
provided in § 135-168. In considering any exemption from Subsection A,
§ 135-165 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-167
1:585
§ 135-168. Exceptions to height regulations for buildings and
structures.
The Board of Supervisors shall determine if the height regulations
prescribed within this chapter may be exempted for spires, steeples,
belfries, cupolas or domes not used for human occupancy, or for chimneys,
ventilating fans, air-conditioning equipment, roof structures for the housing
of elevators and/or stairways, fire or parapet walls, skylights, flagpoles,
watermills, silos, smokestacks, and ornamental or other necessary
mechanical appurtenances.
§ 135-169. Swimming pool regulations.
Swimming pools, hot tubs and like structures (hereinafter collectively
referred to as swimming pool or pools) are permitted as accessory use
structures to principal permitted residential uses, or to principal
nonresidential uses in districts which permit swimming pools as accessory
uses at facilities such as hotels, motels, and swimming pool companies. The
following conditions and requirements shall apply:
the Board of Supervisors shall consider the criteria set forth in
§ 135-164.
A. Swimming pools designated to contain six or more inches of water shall
be erected in conformity with these regulations.
B. The swimming pool shall be solely for the use of the occupants of the
property on which it is located, and their guests, and may not be
operated commercially nor any fee charged for the use of the pool.
C. A permit shall be required to locate, construct or maintain a swimming
pool as an accessory use structure.
(1) Prior to approval of a permit, the lot shall be marked by permanent
markers.
(2) The location of the pool and its distance from the permanent
markers shall be clearly shown on the application.
(3) An as-built drawing showing the location of permanent markers
and position of the pool shall be provided to the Township prior to
any use of a pool.
D. No permit shall be granted for the installation or construction of any inground
pool, permanent pool or portable pool having a capacity of
20,000 gallons or more, unless the Township Engineer has certified that
the drainage of such pool is adequate and will not interfere with the
water supply system, with existing sanitary facilities or with public
streets, or neighbors' property.
§ 135-167 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-169
1:586
(1) Construction drawings and drainage calculations shall be
submitted to the Township Engineer together with the application
for a permit.
(2) No Township Engineer approval is required for pools with less than
a twenty-thousand-gallon capacity.
(3) In all cases where the land is inadequate, the permit shall require
the pool to be emptied by suction instead of drainage across
property.
E. If the water for the swimming pool is supplied from a private well, there
shall be no cross-connection with a public water supply system.
F. If the water for the swimming pool is supplied from a public water
supply system, the inlet shall be above the overflow level of the pool by
no less than six inches.
G. Swimming pools and structures related to the pool may be located in
the rear or side yard, but shall not be closer to any rear or side lot line
than the distance of the required building setbacks, but in no case less
than 50 feet from any property line. Any walks, paved areas or open
decks related to the pool not forming part of the residence shall be no
closer than 1/2 of the setback distance. Supervisors shall have the right,
but not the duty, to waive these requirements in case the property
cannot comply (PRD).
H. Swimming pools shall not be located under any electrical lines, or over
any utility lines including electric, sewer and water lines, nor closer
than 10 feet to any part of a septic system.
I. No water from any swimming pool shall be discharged onto adjoining
properties or streets.
J. Every swimming pool hereafter constructed shall be completely
enclosed by a fence having a height of not less than four feet and shall
have a self-locking or latching gate to control access by unauthorized
persons, and to protect children and stray animals.
K. Fencing shall be placed either near or adjacent to the pool or at such
other place on the premises as to constitute an adequate barrier against
entrance onto the land or into the pool. Permanent structures, such as a
side of a building, may be considered as part of the fence when
approved by the Zoning Officer.
(1) Such fence shall be constructed of wire, wood, decorative masonry
or other material approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) A temporary fence, adequate as aforesaid, shall be placed the day
construction begins and maintained throughout completion of
construction.
L. The maximum aperture of any fence shall be two inches.
§ 135-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-169
1:587
§ 135-170. Wireless communications facilities outside public rightsof-
way. [Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 152111]
In recognition of federal and state laws, the following special regulations
shall apply to wireless communications facilities outside the public rightsof-
way:
M. Fences shall be constructed and shall be maintained in a good
workmanlike manner and in a safe condition.
N. The fencing requirement of these regulations shall not apply to a
swimming pool four feet or more above grade when equipped with
removable steps or ladders, provided that said steps or ladders shall be
removed when the pool is not in use.
O. The fencing requirement of these regulations shall not apply to a
natural pond or a man-made pond not intended for swimming, unless
deemed necessary by the Board of Supervisors.
P. These regulations shall be effective immediately after adoption as an
amendment to this chapter.
Q. Owners of swimming pools which were in existence prior to the
effective date of this section shall not be required to comply with the
fencing requirements set forth above; however, upon a transfer or sale
of the property upon which the pool is located, the new owner will be
required to comply with these regulations within 30 days.
R. No pool shall be operated or maintained in a noisy manner. Outdoor
speakers are not permitted and any pool permitted by this chapter shall
be subject to any noise control ordinance either now in effect or
subsequently adopted.
S. If the Supervisors deem it necessary, they may adopt regulations for
hours of operation of pools by resolution from time to time.
T. All pools shall be buffered as set forth in this chapter.
U. Lighting shall be placed so no light reflects beyond the lot boundaries.
V. Registration of pools. All owners of pools existing at the time of the
adoption of this section shall register them with the Township within 30
days of the effective date of this section.
W. The Township shall have the right, but not the duty, of periodically
inspecting any pool in the Township.
X. Time of completion. All pools shall be completed within 90 days of the
grant of the permit unless the time is extended by the Code
Enforcement Officer for good cause.
111. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 137-170, Towers, cellular and
wireless towers, facilities and equipment.
§ 135-169 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-170
1:588
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section and the standards established
hereunder is to govern the use, construction and siting of wireless
communications facilities outside the public rights-of-way, so as:
(1) To accommodate the need for wireless communications facilities,
communications towers, communications antennas, and related
equipment, while regulating their location and number in the
Township.
(2) To minimize adverse visual effects of wireless communications
facilities through careful design, siting and vegetative screening.
(3) To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from structural
failure and falling ice and debris through engineering and careful
siting of communications towers and communications antennas.
(4) To maximize the use of any new or existing communications towers,
wireless support structures or other tall structures so as to reduce
the number of communications towers needed in the future.
B. Noncommercial usage exemption. Township residents utilizing satellite
dishes and antennas for the purpose of maintaining television, phone,
radio and/or Internet connections at their respective residences shall
be exempt from the regulations enumerated herein. Amateur radio
operators are also exempt from the regulations enumerated in this
section.
C. Statutory exemptions. The provisions enumerated herein shall apply to
all proposed wireless communications facilities, except those that fall
under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act112 or
applications deemed to be eligible facilities requests pursuant to the
FCC's October 2014 Report and Order.
D. Standard of care and safety standards.
(1) Wireless communications facilities shall be designed, constructed,
operated, maintained, repaired, modified and removed in strict
compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and safetyrelated
codes, including, but not limited to, the most recent
editions of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, and Electrical Code, as
well as the accepted and responsible workmanlike industry
practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. At all
times, wireless communications facilities shall be kept and
maintained in good condition, order and repair by qualified
maintenance and construction personnel, so that the same shall not
endanger the life of any person or any property in the Township.
(2) Wireless communications facilities shall be designed to withstand
the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition to
112. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 135-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-170
1:589
the standard designed by the American National Standards
Institute, as prepared by the engineering departments of the
Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications Industry
Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as amended).
(3) Wireless communications facilities shall comply with all federal and
state laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
(4) A wireless communications facility shall not, by itself or in
conjunction with another wireless communications facility,
generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and
regulations of the FCC, including, but not limited to, the FCC Office
of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65, entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(5) Wireless communications facilities shall not interfere with public
safety communications or the reception of broadband, television,
radio or other communication services enjoyed by occupants of
nearby properties.
E. Location.
(1) Communications towers may be permitted by conditional use
subject to the conditional use standards and criteria of this chapter
in an overlay zoning district consisting of the SEPTA right-of-way
and the PECO Energy right-of-way, both of which are located to the
south of, and running parallel to, Baltimore Pike (U.S. Route 1) from
the intersection of said rights-of-way with Wilmington-West Chester
Pike to the intersection of said rights-of-way with the Brandywine
Creek, provided that the application shall otherwise comply with
this section and the other relevant provisions of this chapter.
(2) Communications antennas shall not be located on single-family
residences, duplexes, or townhomes.
(3) Historic areas. To the extent permitted by state and federal law, no
communications antenna or communications tower may be located
upon any property, building, structure, or lot that is listed on either
the National or Pennsylvania Register of Historic Places, overseen
by the Township HARB, or that is deemed by the Township to be of
specific historical significance. This restriction shall not apply to
potential facilities placements on buildings or land owned by the
Township.
F. Time frames for municipal response.
(1) Applications for eligible facilities requests. Within 30 calendar days
of the date that an application for an eligible facilities request is
filed with the Township, the Township shall notify the applicant in
writing of any information that may be required to complete such
application. Within 60 calendar days of receipt of a complete
§ 135-170 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-170
1:590
application, the Township shall make its final decision on whether
to approve the application and shall advise the applicant in writing
of such decision.
(2) Timing of applications for the construction of new communications
towers. All parties shall comply with MPC time frames to the extent
that they are not preempted by federal regulations.
Notwithstanding MPC regulations, within 30 calendar days of the
date that an application for a communications tower is filed with
the Township, the Township shall notify the applicant in writing of
any information that may be required to complete such application.
All applications for communications towers shall be acted upon
within 150 days of the receipt of a fully completed application for
the approval of such communications towers, and the Township
shall advise the applicant in writing of its decision.
G. Use, area and height regulations.
(1) The total height of a communications tower shall not exceed 100
feet from the base of structure to the top, including any
communications antennas or other appurtenances. Height
extensions or additional antennas added to an existing wireless
support structure shall not substantially change the height of the
communications tower without prior approval of the Township,
unless such extensions or additions are eligible facilities requests.
(2) The total height of a communications tower or communications
antenna shall not exceed 20 feet beyond the maximum height
permitted in the respective zoning district.
(3) All other uses ancillary to a communications tower (including but
not limited to a maintenance depot, etc.) are prohibited unless
otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the proposed
communication tower will be located. Such other ancillary uses
shall not be considered accessory uses.
(4) Setbacks from the base of any new communications tower to be
constructed (as opposed to mounting the communications antenna
on an existing structure) shall be the minimum distance between
the base of the communications tower or any guy wire anchors and
any property line or right-of-way line, and shall be the largest of the
following:
(a) The minimum front yard setback in the underlying zoning
district;
(b) Thirty percent of the communications tower height; or
(c) Fifty feet.
(5) No signs of any type are permitted on communications antennas,
antenna support structures, or communications towers.
§ 135-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-170
1:591
H. Standards of approval. The following standards of approval shall apply
to all wireless communications facilities, except those applications
deemed to be eligible facilities requests or falling under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act:113
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate, using accepted technological
evidence, that the communications antenna or communications
tower must be located where proposed in order to infill a gap in
coverage or capacity and no other viable alternatives exist. The
existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless coverage or capacity
shall be a factor in the Township Board of Supervisors' decision on
an application for approval of the proposed facility.
(2) If the applicant proposes to construct a new communications tower
or a new communications antenna, the applicant shall provide
written evidence that it first considered land, buildings, and traffic
lights owned by the Township to place the proposed facility and
that such placement would not infill the applicant's gap in coverage
or capacity. The applicant shall further provide evidence that it
contacted the owners of tall structures within a one-mile radius of
the proposed communications tower, or a one-quarter-mile radius
from a proposed antenna, requested permission to install the
antenna on those structures, and was denied for reasons other than
economic ones. Tall structures shall include, but not be limited to,
smokestacks, water towers, buildings in excess of four stories,
wireless support structures of other communications antennas,
cellular communications and personal communications service
providers, other communications towers (fire, police, etc.), and
other similar tall structures.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate that the height of the proposed
communications tower or communications antenna is the minimum
required to function satisfactorily. No taller height than this
minimum height shall be approved, unless the applicant provides
proof that another provider of wireless services has already agreed
to collocate on the applicant's wireless support structure or
communications tower at a greater height than is required by the
applicant.
(4) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed communications
antenna or communications tower is safe and the surrounding
properties will not be negatively affected by structural failure,
falling ice or other debris, electromagnetic fields, or radio
frequency interference. All communications towers shall be fitted
with anticlimbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers.
(5) In order to reduce the number of communications towers needed in
the Township in the future, the proposed communications tower
shall be required to accommodate, where possible, other users,
113. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 135-170 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-170
1:592
including other wireless communication, cellular communication,
personal communication and electronic networking service
provider companies, and local police, fire, and ambulance
companies.
(6) The applicant must demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission to provide wireless communications,
cellular communications, personal communications and/or
electronic networking services.
(7) Engineer certification. In the case of a proposed communications
tower, a structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania shall issue
to the Township a written certification of the such tower's ability to
meet the structural standards offered by either the Electronic
Industries Association or the Telecommunication Industry
Association and certify the proper construction of the foundation
and the erection of the structure. This certification shall be
provided during the conditional use proceedings before the
Township Board of Supervisors or, at a minimum, be made as a
condition attached to any approval given such that the certification
be provided prior to issuance of any building permits. All other
plans and drawings of a proposed wireless communications facility
shall contain a seal and signature of a professional structural
engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
I. Landscaping.
(1) Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
(2) Landscaping shall be required to screen and buffer as much of the
communications tower and/or related equipment as possible.
(3) Where the proposed communications tower abuts residentially
developed land, residential zoning districts, public land, or streets,
the perimeter shall be landscaped with at least one row of
deciduous trees, not less than 3 1/2 inches in caliper, spaced not
more than 30 feet apart, on center, and within 25 feet of the cell
site boundary, as well as at least one row of evergreen trees or
shrubs, at least 14 feet high when planted and spaced not more
than 15 feet apart and within 40 feet of the cell site boundary.
Alternatives such as walls or solid fences constructed of wood or
stone, of at least eight feet in height, may be permitted by the
Board of Supervisors based on security or other reasons.
(4) Appearance.
(a) Wireless communications facilities shall employ stealth
technology in order to be aesthetically and architecturally
compatible with the surrounding environment. Proposed
wireless communications facilities shall maximize the use of a
like facade to blend with the existing surroundings and
§ 135-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-170
1:593
neighboring buildings to the greatest extent possible. The
application of the stealth technology chosen by the applicant
shall be subject to the approval of the Township Board of
Supervisors. Additionally, the Board of Supervisors shall
consider whether its decision upon the subject application will
promote the harmonious and orderly development of the
zoning district and/or surrounding area involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development
existing in the area; benefit neighboring properties by
preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic character of
the community; preserve woodlands and trees existing at the
site to the greatest possible extent; and encourage sound
engineering and construction principles, practices and
techniques.
(b) Alternatively, when proven by the applicant that stealth
technology is not appropriate, the Township may require that a
communications antenna or communications tower be painted
gray or have a galvanized finish retained.
(5) Lighting. No wireless communications facility may be lighted
except when required by the FAA.
J. Fencing. A security fence shall be required around the proposed
communications tower and related equipment. Such security fence
shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and shall otherwise comply
with the height regulations of all applicable Township ordinances.
K. Noise. Communications towers shall be operated and maintained so as
not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under state
law and the Township Code, except in emergency situations requiring
the use of a backup generator, where such noise standards may be
exceeded on a temporary basis only.
L. Site plan. A one-inch-equals-fifty-feet site plan shall be required for all
proposed communications towers, showing the proposed tower,
building, fencing, buffering, and ingress and egress. The site plan shall
comply with the provisions of Chapter 110, Subdivision and Land
Development, as amended; however, no communications tower
applicant shall proceed through the land development process.
M. Maintenance requirements. The cell site shall be maintained and kept
in good repair as required by FCC regulations, the federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, state law, and all Township
ordinances not inconsistent therewith.
N. Inspection. The Township reserves the right to inspect any wireless
communications facility to ensure compliance with the provisions of the
Zoning Ordinance and any other provisions found within the Township
Code or state or federal law. The Township and/or its agents shall have
the authority to enter the property upon which a wireless
§ 135-170 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-170
1:594
§ 135-170.1. Wireless communications facilities within public
rights-of-way. [Added 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 152114]
In recognition of federal and state laws, the following special regulations
shall apply to wireless communications facilities within the public rights-ofway:
communications facility is located at any time, upon reasonable notice
to the operator, to ensure such compliance.
O. Abandonment. It being the legislative finding of the Board of
Supervisors of Chadds Ford Township that a communications antenna,
communications tower, and/or related equipment have been
abandoned, and present a danger to the health, safety and welfare of
the general public, then all abandoned structures shall be removed not
more than one year after abandonment. The owner of the wireless
communications facility shall be responsible for all related demolition
costs.
P. Fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees
directly related to the Township's actual costs in reviewing and
processing the application for approval of a wireless communications
facility, as well as related inspection, monitoring, and related costs.
Q. Retention of experts. The Township may hire any consultant and/or
expert necessary to assist the Township in reviewing and evaluating the
application for approval of a wireless communications facility and, once
approved, in reviewing and evaluating any potential violations of the
terms and conditions of these provisions. The applicant and/or owner of
the proposed wireless communications facility shall reimburse the
Township for all costs of the Township's consultant(s) in providing
expert evaluation and consultation in connection with these activities.
R. Financial security for communications tower. Prior to receipt of a
zoning permit for the construction or placement of a communications
tower, the applicant shall provide to the Township financial security
sufficient to guarantee the construction of the communications tower.
Said financial security shall remain in place until the communications
tower is fully constructed.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section and the standards established
hereunder is to govern the use, construction and siting of wireless
communications facilities within the public rights-of-way, so as:
(1) To accommodate the need for wireless communications facilities
and related equipment, while regulating their location and number
in the Township.
114. Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, former § 135-170.1, Outdoor dining, was
renumbered as § 135-170.2.
§ 135-170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-170.1
1:595
(2) To minimize adverse visual effects of wireless communications
facilities through careful design and siting.
(3) To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from structural
failure and falling ice and debris through engineering and careful
siting of communications towers and communications antennas.
(4) To maximize the use of any new or existing communications towers,
wireless support structures or other tall structures so as to reduce
the number of communications towers needed in the future.
(5) To protect the health, safety, and welfare of structures abutting,
and citizens traversing, the public rights-of-way.
B. Conditional use approval required. To the extent permitted by federal
and state law, all applicants proposing the siting of new wireless
communications facilities in the public rights-of-way shall obtain
conditional use authorization from the Township Board of Supervisors
prior to beginning construction of such wireless communications
facilities.
C. Timing of approval for applications. The Township shall comply with all
federal timing requirements for the consideration of applications for
new towers and collocated antennas that fall under Section 6409(a) of
the Spectrum Act, and/or any orders promulgated by the FCC or any
other governing entity. When federal time frames conflict with those in
the MPC, federal time frames shall prevail.
D. Statutory exemptions. The provisions enumerated herein shall apply to
all proposed wireless communications facilities, except those that fall
under the Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act115 or
applications deemed to be eligible facilities requests pursuant to the
FCC's October 2014 Report and Order.
E. New wireless communications facilities applications shall be
accompanied by a professional engineer's report containing the
following:
(1) Certification that any proposed communications tower will fill a
significant gap in wireless coverage or capacity that exists in the
applicable area and that the type of wireless facility being proposed
is the least intrusive means by which to fill that gap in wireless
coverage. The existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless
coverage or capacity shall be a factor in the Township's decision on
an application for approval of tower.
(2) Evidence that the proposed communications tower must be located
where it is proposed in order to serve the applicant's service area
and that no other viable alternative location exists; evidence that
the applicant cannot adequately extend or infill its communications
115. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11702.1 et seq.
§ 135-170.1 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-170.1
1:596
system by the use of equipment such as redoes, repeaters,
antennas, and other similar equipment installed on existing
structures, such as utility poles or their appurtenances and other
available tall structures.
(3) A technical evaluation of the feasibility of constructing the
proposed wireless communications facility on land owned and
maintained by Chadds Ford Township. If the applicant proposes to
construct a new communications tower or communications
antenna, the applicant shall provide written evidence that it first
considered land, buildings, and traffic lights owned by the
Township to place the proposed facility and that such placement
would not infill the applicant's gap in coverage or capacity. The
Township Board of Supervisors may deny a conditional use
application to construct a new communications tower if the
applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount an antenna on
property owned by the Township.
(4) If the proposed wireless communications facility cannot be sited on
land, traffic signals, or buildings owned by the Township, the
applicant shall demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall
structures, buildings, approved wireless support structures, and
existing communications towers within a one-quarter-mile radius of
the site proposed for the communications tower or antenna, sought
permission to install an antenna on those structures, buildings,
and/or towers and was denied for one of the following reasons:
(a) The proposed communications antenna and related equipment
would exceed the structural capacity of the existing building,
structure or tower, and its reinforcement cannot be
accomplished at a reasonable cost.
(b) The proposed communications antenna and related equipment
would cause radio frequency interference with other existing
equipment for that existing building, structure, or tower and
the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(c) Such existing buildings, structures, or towers do not have
adequate location, space, access, or height to accommodate
the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended
function.
(d) A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached
with the owner of such building, structure, or tower.
(5) A signal coverage/propagation map of the area to be served by the
proposed communications tower. The propagation shall show
signal intensity in dBm, as well as major roads, residential
developments, and commercial areas. The Township reserves the
right to request propagation maps for other sites or height
alternatives.
§ 135-170.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-170.1
1:597
(6) Certifications that the proposed tower shall comply with all
applicable state and federal regulations, as well as all pertinent
provisions enumerated herein.
F. Location and development standards.
(1) Available infrastructure. As part of its application for approval, the
applicant must demonstrate that it cannot infill the capacity or
coverage gap in its system by utilizing existing infrastructure (i.e.,
utility or light poles) in the public rights-of-way as a support
structure for a communications antenna, rather than constructing
a new communications tower. To the extent permissible under state
and federal law, communications antennas attached to existing
infrastructure shall not exceed six feet in height and shall employ
stealth technology, if possible, in their design.
(2) Communications towers in the right-of-way shall not exceed a
height comparable to the average height of utility poles or
electrical poles within a two-block radius of the proposed facility,
unless the applicant can prove to the satisfaction of the Township
Board of Supervisors that a taller tower is the only method by
which the applicant can infill its gap in coverage or capacity.
(3) Communications towers are prohibited within 75 linear feet of
areas in which all utilities are located underground.
(4) Communications towers shall not be located in the front facade
area of any structure.
(5) Communications towers are prohibited in the F-P Flood Plain
Overlay District.
G. Design regulations.
(1) The communications tower or communications antenna shall
employ the most current stealth technology available in an effort to
appropriately blend into the surrounding environment and
minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the stealth
technology chosen by the applicant shall be subject to the approval
of the Township Board of Supervisors.
(2) To the extent permissible under state and federal law, any height
extensions to an existing communications tower wireless support
structure shall require prior approval of the Township, and shall
not violate the provisions described herein.
(3) Communications towers shall be designed structurally, electrically,
and in all respects to accommodate both the applicant's
communications antennas and comparable communications
antennas for the maximum amount of future users based on the
size of the proposed communications tower.
§ 135-170.1 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-170.1
1:598
H. Equipment location. Towers and related equipment shall be located so
as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians
and/or motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the rightof-
way as determined by the Township. In addition:
(1) To the extent technologically feasible, ground-mounted related
equipment shall be located within two feet of the public right-ofway.
For reasons of safety and aesthetics, such equipment shall
neither protrude onto the curb nor obstruct the sidewalk in areas
where sidewalks abut the public rights-of-way.
(2) Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend in
with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Township Board
of Supervisors.
(3) Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall be
removed at the sole expense of the owner within 14 days of
notification.
(4) Any underground vaults related to communications towers shall be
reviewed and approved by Township Board of Supervisors.
I. Time, place and manner. The Township shall determine the time, place
and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all
towers in the right-of-way based on public safety, traffic management,
physical burden on the right-of-way, and related considerations. For
public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be
consistent with the police powers of the Township and the requirements
of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Code.116
J. Engineer certification. A structural engineer registered in Pennsylvania
shall issue to the Township a written certification of the proposed
tower's ability to meet the structural standards offered by either the
Electronic Industries Association or the Telecommunication Industry
Association and certify the proper construction of the foundation and
the erection of the structure.
K. Stealth technology. Towers and antennas shall employ stealth
technology and shall be aesthetically and architecturally compatible
with the surrounding environment and shall maximize the use of a like
facade to blend with the existing surroundings and neighboring
buildings to the greatest extent possible. The Township Board of
Supervisors shall consider whether its decision upon the subject
application will promote the harmonious and orderly development of
the zoning district and/or surrounding area involved; encourage
compatibility with the character and type of development existing in the
area; benefit neighboring properties by preventing a negative impact
on the aesthetic character of the community; preserve woodlands and
trees existing at the site to the greatest possible extent; and encourage
116. Editor's Note: See 66 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 135-170.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-170.1
1:599
sound engineering and construction principles, practices and
techniques.
L. Permit required for modifications. To the extent permissible under
applicable state and federal law, the proposed modification of an
existing communications tower, which substantially changes the
wireless support structure or is not an eligible facilities request, shall
first obtain a building permit from the Township. Nonroutine
modifications shall be prohibited without such permit.
M. Public safety communications. No communications tower shall interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communication services enjoyed by occupants
of nearby properties.
N. Maintenance. Towers shall be fully automated and unattended on a
daily basis and shall be visited only for maintenance or emergency
repair. Such maintenance shall be performed to ensure the upkeep of
the tower in order to promote the safety and security of the Township's
residents, and utilize the best available technology for preventing
failures and accidents.
O. Historic properties. To the extent permissible under state and federal
law, no tower or antenna may be located upon any property, or on a
building, structure that is listed on either the National or Pennsylvania
Register of Historic Places, overseen by the Township HARB, or that is
deemed by the Township to be of local historic significance. No tower in
the public rights-of-way shall be located along a highway or other road
that is considered by the Township to be a scenic route, including the
Brandywine Valley Designated Scenic Byway and Creek Road.
P. Signs. All towers shall post a sign in a readily visible location identifying
the name and phone number of a party to contact in the event of an
emergency. The only other signage permitted on the tower shall be that
required by the FCC, or any other federal or state agency.
Q. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, except as required by
law. If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan
for sufficient lighting, demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an
effect as is permissible under state and federal regulations. The
applicant shall promptly report any outage or malfunction of FAAmandated
lighting to the appropriate governmental authorities and to
the Township Manager. This requirement shall not apply to towers
employing stealth technology in the right-of-way that are designed to
resemble streetlights.
R. Noise. Towers shall be operated and maintained so as not to produce
noise in excess of applicable noise standards under state law and the
Township Code, except in emergency situations requiring the use of a
backup generator, where such noise standards may be exceeded on a
temporary basis only.
§ 135-170.1 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-170.1
1:600
§ 135-170.2. Outdoor dining. [Added 11-2-2016 by Ord. No. 147]
S. Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Township, or such longer period as the Township
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case
of an emergency, the owner of a tower in the right-of-way shall, at its
own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or
alter the position of any tower when the Township, consistent with its
police powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations,
shall determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
(1) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Township or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(2) The operations of the Township or other governmental entity in the
right-of-way;
(3) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement; or
(4) An emergency as determined by the Township.
T. Permit fees. The Township may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Township's actual costs in reviewing
and processing the application for approval of a new tower, as well as
related inspection, monitoring, and related costs.
A. To assure quality standards and safety, the following provisions shall
apply:
(1) The outdoor dining area shall be directly abutting and on the same
lot as the principal building in which the associated restaurant is
located.
(2) All outdoor dining areas shall be subject to compliance with all
applicable health, building, zoning, accessibility, fire, and plumbing
codes, and requirements of any other regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction, as applicable.
(3) Areas of outdoor dining shall not interfere with any means of
ingress or egress to a building, or with any emergency or safety
exits. Access to the outside service area, except for an emergency
entrance and exit, shall be limited to entrances and exits through
the building with which the outside premises area is adjacent.
(4) Pedestrian barriers. Outdoor dining areas shall be enclosed and
separated from the pedestrian or travel way to allow for the privacy
of the dining patron and to permit the unimpeded flow of traffic.
Dining area enclosures shall consist of a wall, bollard, or fence,
approved by the Township. The following minimum standards shall
apply:
§ 135-170.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-170.2
1:601
(a) Pedestrian barriers shall have sufficient weight to prevent
them from being tipped or knocked over.
(b) If the pedestrian barrier is to be permanent, the method of
attachment shall be subject to approval by the Township. No
barrier shall be permanently attached to a public sidewalk or
an area located within the right-of-way.
(c) Pedestrian barriers shall be at least 36 inches high to prevent a
tripping hazard, unless more restrictive requirements are
required by other municipal codes.
(5) Parking. In accordance with § 135-153B.
(6) Outdoor dining shall be permitted between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m. All seating of patrons shall provide for the outdoor
dining area are to close at the required hour.
(7) No outdoor dining area shall be established within 100 feet of the
property line of a single-family or two-family detached or
semidetached dwelling unit located completely or partially within a
residential zoning district.
(8) Outdoor dining areas shall be located on a permanent surface.
Temporary flooring shall not be used.
(9) The use of outdoor heaters shall be in compliance with the
International Fire Code, as amended.
(10) The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be incidental to the sale or
consumption of food. Outside bar service and/or walk-up bar
service for the sole purpose of the consumption of alcohol without
the consumption of food is prohibited.
(11) Storage of materials. At the conclusion of the outdoor dining
season, all portable equipment (i.e., barriers, furniture, roof
coverings, etc.) shall be stored within the facility in a location that
does not interfere with the operation of the food establishment, or
shall be stored off site.
(12) All outdoor dining locations shall be subject to periodic inspection
for compliance with the standards of this section. Two or more
violations of this section may result in a revocation of all zoning or
building permits applicable to the outdoor dining use, until such
violations are remedied.
(13) Noise. Outdoor dining shall be subject to Chapter 89, Noise. All
activities, including the playing of music or other forms of
entertainment, shall comply with the noise limitations of the
Township Code and any other regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction, as applicable.
§ 135-170.2 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-170.2
1:602
ARTICLE XXII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 135-171. Administration.
A Zoning Hearing Board shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors in
the manner prescribed in the Municipalities Planning Code,117 as amended,
and as provided below.
§ 135-172. Establishment and membership.
§ 135-173. Organization and procedure.
A. There shall be a Zoning Hearing Board consisting of three residents of
the Township who shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors; and
the Board of Supervisors shall appoint one such member to serve until
the first day of January following the effective date of this chapter, one
until the first day of the second January thereafter, and one until the
first day of the third January thereafter, and the Board of Supervisors
shall appoint their successors on the expiration of their respective
terms to serve for three years, and shall fill any vacancy for the
unexpired portion of such vacant term. The Board of Supervisors may
reappoint members at the expiration of their terms. Members of the
Board shall hold no other office in the Township.
B. The Board of Supervisors may appoint by resolution at least one but no
more than three residents of the Township to serve as alternate
members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall
be three years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of § 135-173B,
an alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as provided by law
for Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a
voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers
and duties set forth in this article and as otherwise provided by law.
Alternates shall hold no other office in the Township, including Zoning
Officer or membership on the Planning Commission. Any alternate may
participate in any proceeding or discussion of the Board but shall not be
entitled to vote as a member of the Board nor be compensated pursuant
to the Municipalities Planning Code unless designated as a voting
alternate member pursuant to this section.
C. Any member of the Board may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in office, or for other just cause, by a
majority vote of the Board of Supervisors, taken after the Board
member has received 15 days' advance written notice of the intent to
take such a vote, and a hearing shall be held in connection with such
vote if the member shall so request in writing.
117. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 135-171 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-173
1:603
§ 135-174. Hearings and decisions.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in the following
manner:
A. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of
any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be required
consisting of not less than a majority of all the members of the Board.
B. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a
quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on
the Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the
alternate was initially appointed until the Board has made a final
determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate
pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
C. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with this chapter and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Board shall keep full public
records of its business, which records shall be the property of the
Township, and shall submit a report of its activities to the Board of
Supervisors.
D. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Board of Supervisors, the
Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks,
attorneys, consultants and other technical and clerical services.
However, the Solicitor for the Zoning Hearing Board shall be a different
individual than the Solicitor for the Board of Supervisors. Members of
the Zoning Hearing Board may receive compensation for the
performance of their duties, as may be fixed by the Board of
Supervisors, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation
authorized to be paid to the members of the Board of Supervisors.
A. All hearings and decisions shall be public.
B. Notice of hearings shall be given in the following manner:
(1) To the public, pursuant to "public notice" as defined in Article II. It
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the matter to be
considered at the hearing.
(2) To the applicant, the Zoning Officer, the Township Secretary, the
Secretary of the Planning Commission, Board of Supervisors, to
abutting owners and owners within 500 feet of the lot, and to any
person who has made timely request for the same, or their legal
counsel (if such counsel shall have filed appearance with the Board)
by mailing notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing at
least 15 days in advance of the date fixed for hearing. In addition to
§ 135-173 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-174
1:604
the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing
shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least
one week prior to the hearing. [Amended 9-1-2010 by Ord. No.
64-R]
(3) Notice of hearings, both published and written, shall state, in
addition to the time, place and purpose of the hearing, the location
of the lot or structure involved, the nature and extent of the relief
sought, and the general nature of the question involved. Notice of
said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of
land.
(4) The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the
applicant's request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time.
(5) In the event more than one hearing is required to consider any
application, or a hearing is continued while in progress to another
date, announcement at the hearing to be continued of the next
hearing date shall be deemed adequate notice of said continued or
subsequent hearing. In the event the date or time of the hearing is
changed, then public notice must again be provided as set forth
above. If for any reason the continued hearing is not held within 45
days of the first hearing, then public notice must be provided as set
forth above.
C. Hearings shall be conducted by the Board (or hearing officer), and the
Chairperson or, in his absence, the Acting Chairperson, shall administer
oaths and may issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses
and the production of relevant documents and papers, including
witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
D. The parties to the hearing shall be the Township, any person affected by
the application who has made a timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person, including civic or community
organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. All persons who wish
to be considered parties must enter appearances in writing.
E. The parties shall have the right to be represented by legal counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses.
F. The Board (or hearing officer) shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings; the appearance fee of a stenographer shall be shared
equally by the applicant and Board, and a transcript of the proceedings
and copy of graphic or written material received in evidence shall be
made available to any party at cost.
G. The Board (or hearing officer) shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved, except upon notice, and opportunity for all parties to
participate; shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
§ 135-174 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-174
1:605
§ 135-175. Functions of Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
memoranda or other materials unless the parties are afforded an
opportunity to contest the material so noticed; and shall not inspect
the site or its surroundings after the commencement of hearings with
any party or his respective counsel unless all parties are given an
opportunity to be present.
H. The Board (or hearing officer) shall render a written decision or, when
no decision is called for, make written findings on the application within
45 days after the last hearing before the Board unless waived by the
applicant according to the law. Each decision shall be accompanied by
findings of fact and conclusions based thereon, together with the
reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of the
Municipalities Planning Code118 or on any Township ordinance, rule or
regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the
reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts
found. Where the Board (or hearing officer) fails to render a decision
within the period required, the decision shall be deemed to have been
rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has agreed in
writing to an extension of time.
I. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
in accordance with the law; and to all other persons who have filed their
names and addresses with the Board not later than the last day of the
hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice of
the decision or findings, and a statement of the place where the full
decisions or findings may be examined.
A. Challenges to the validity of this chapter or Zoning Map. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall hear challenges to the validity of this chapter or
the Zoning Map as follows:
(1) A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the
validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map or any provision thereof
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which
he has an interest shall submit the challenge to either the Zoning
Hearing Board or the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land
of another by this chapter or the Zoning Map, or any provision
thereof, who desires to challenge its validity shall submit their
challenge pursuant to the Sections 909.1 and 609.1 of Act 247, as
amended by Act 170.119
118. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
119. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10909.1 and 10609.1, respectively.
§ 135-174 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-175
1:606
(3) In addition to the procedures set forth in Section 916.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code,120 in all such challenges the Zoning
Hearing Board shall decide all contested questions and shall make
findings on all relevant issues of fact and of interpretation, and
submit such findings as part of the record on appeal to the court.
B. Variances.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that
the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. The Board may grant a variance, provided that the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(a) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in
which the property is located;
(b) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed in
strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that
the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property;
(c) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant;
(d) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare; and
(e) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief, and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation or ordinance in issue.
(2) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter and the Municipalities Planning Code.
C. Special exceptions. The Board shall hear and decide special exceptions
in accordance with the standards set forth below; and, in granting
special exceptions, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions
and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may
deem necessary to implement of the purposes of this chapter:
120. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
§ 135-175 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-175
1:607
§ 135-176. Time limit after granting a variance or special
exception.
In the event of approval, should the applicant fail to obtain the necessary
Township approvals and permits within 12 months of notification; or, having
obtained the necessary approvals and permits, fails to commence work
thereunder within six additional months, it shall be conclusively presumed
that the applicant has waived, withdrawn, or abandoned his/her application;
(1) Whenever the Board hears a special exception for uses specified in
this chapter, the standards of § 135-164A and B shall apply. Special
exceptions related to the Floodplain Conservation District shall be
evaluated in accordance with § 135-97.
(2) The applicant shall submit a report to evidence proof of compliance
with the standards and criteria of § 135-164A and B.
D. Substantive challenges to the validity of this chapter, except those
brought before the Board pursuant to Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of
Act 247, as amended by Act 170.121
E. Challenges to the validity of this chapter raising procedural questions
or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption, which
challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after the
effective date of the chapter.
F. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including but not
limited to the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the
application therefor, the issuance of any cease-and-desist order or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or
lot.
G. Appeals from a determination by the Township Engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of the Floodplain
Conservation District provisions of this chapter.
H. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section 916.2 of
the Municipalities Planning Code.122
I. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Township
Engineer in the administration of this chapter or provision thereof with
reference to sedimentation and soil erosion control and stormwater
management insofar as the same relate to development.
J. Applications for variances from the terms of the Floodplain
Conservation District of this chapter.
K. Applications for special exceptions under the Floodplain Conservation
District of this chapter.
121. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1, respectively.
122. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 135-175 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-176
1:608
and all variance(s), special exception(s) or other relief and permits granted
to him/her shall be deemed automatically rescinded by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
§ 135-177. Rules and procedures for application to the Board.
A. All appeals and applications made to the Board shall be in writing, on
forms prescribed by the Board.
B. Every appeal or application shall refer to the specific provision of this
chapter involved and shall exactly set forth the interpretation that is
claimed, the grounds for any challenges to the validity of this chapter,
the use for which a special exception is sought, or the details of the
variance that is applied for and the grounds on which it is claimed that
the variance should be granted, as the case may be.
C. Applications and appeals, together with the required filing fee as
established by the Township, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the
Zoning Hearing Board.
D. No action by the Zoning Hearing Board will begin until a complete
application form is filed along with the required fee.
E. All notices, hearings and orders shall be made or shall occur in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
§ 135-176 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-177
1:609

ARTICLE XXIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 135-178. Zoning Officer.
There shall be a Zoning Officer who shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors and be responsible for the administration and enforcement of
this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall meet qualifications established by
the Township and shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township
experience and a working knowledge of municipal zoning, subdivision and
land development standards, and construction principles. The Zoning
Officer shall not hold any elected office in the Township.
§ 135-179. Amendments.
The Board of Township Supervisors may from time to time amend,
supplement, change, modify, or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning
Map, by proceeding in the manner as set forth in Sections 609, 609.1 and
609.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended by Act
170 of 1988.123
§ 135-180. Enforcement notice.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Board of Supervisors.
A. Whenever it appears to the Township that a violation of any provision of
this chapter has occurred, enforcement shall be initiated by the
appropriate Township officials (Code Enforcement Officer, Building
Officer, Zoning Officer, etc.) by sending an enforcement notice as
provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Township intends to take actions.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provision
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
123. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609 et seq.
§ 135-178 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-180
1:611
§ 135-181. Causes of action.
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to
be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or
used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the Board of Supervisors
or, with the approval of the Board of Supervisors, an officer of the Township,
or any aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his
property or person will be substantially affected by the alleged violation,
in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure,
landscaping or land, or to prevent, in or about such premises, any act,
conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When any such action is
instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served
upon the Township at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun by
serving a copy of the complaint on the Board of Supervisors. No such action
may be maintained until such notice has been given.
§ 135-182. Violations and penalties.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of a provision of this chapter shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a
result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or
payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the
Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good-faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating the chapter to have believed that
there was not such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge and
thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees
collected for the violation of the chapter shall be paid over to the
Township.
§ 135-180 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-182
1:612
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 135-182 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-182
1:613

ARTICLE XXIV
Open Space Conservation Option
[Added 12-27-2017 by Ord. No. 153]
§ 135-183. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to provide single-family detached residential
development options that will foster the protection of critical natural
resources and conserve open space in Chadds Ford Township. The
provisions contained in this article are intended:
§ 135-184. Eligibility.
As a conditional use in the R-1 Zoning District, a property may be developed
under the open space conservation option, provided that the following
conditions are met:
§ 135-185. Density and open space composition.
A. To protect streams, floodplains, wet soils, steep slopes, woodlands and
wildlife habitat areas.
B. To conserve and permanently protect open space areas.
C. To provide commonly owned open space areas for passive and/or active
recreational use.
D. To reduce paved areas, resulting in a lesser increase in stormwater
runoff, as well as a reduction in land development improvement and
maintenance costs.
E. To minimize the potential adverse aesthetic effects of land development
on the Township as a whole and on neighboring property owners, by
encouraging the use of site planning which will limit the visual impact
of development from the vantage point of surrounding properties and
nearby public roads.
F. To minimize adverse impacts on adjacent subdivisions and properties
devoted to agricultural uses.
G. To endorse smart growth techniques and conservation design practices.
H. To implement the recommendations of the Chadds Ford Township
Comprehensive Plan.
A. The tract of land to be developed shall be in single ownership or, in the
case of multiple ownership of the tract, the application filed jointly by
all of the owners of the tract.
B. The tract of land shall consist of contiguous lots containing a minimum
of 10 acres.
§ 135-183 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-185
1:615
§ 135-186. Area and bulk regulations.
A. The number of allowable dwelling units shall be based on a sketch plan
developed by the applicant in accordance with conventional
development under the R-1 Zoning District. The plan shall be prepared
in accordance with § 110-18 of the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, with each lot meeting the bulk and area requirements of
§ 135-9.
B. If an existing dwelling unit is located on the tract proposed for
development, said unit will be counted toward the overall number of
allowable units and shall be subject to all other provisions of this
article.
C. A minimum of 45% of the gross tract area shall be designated as and
devoted to common open space.
D. A maximum density bonus of 0.1 dwelling unit per gross tract acre may
be added to the number of allowable dwelling units if one or more of the
following design objectives is met by the development, as determined
by the Board of Supervisors.
(1) The applicant proposes off-site public improvements such as street
and intersection, stormwater management, or water and sewer
improvements that significantly reduce the need for public
expenditures to address issues in the vicinity of the tract.
(2) The development is designed in an environmentally sensitive
fashion such that a minimum of 70% of the area designated as
common open space shall not be disturbed by site improvements or
earth disturbance activities.
(3) The development includes significant active and passive recreation
components that would be open to the general public.
(4) The common open space is designed such that it advances
community objectives, including connection to trails, open spaces,
or greenways outside of the subject tract.
A. Open space conservation option: single-family detached dwellings:
Standard Size
Lot Area 1 acre, minimum.
Lot Width - Building Line 150 feet at the front-yard building
line, which minimum must extend
toward the front street for the
required depth of the front yard.
Lot Width - Street Line 50 feet, minimum.
§ 135-185 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-186
1:616
§ 135-187. Design standards.
Standard Size
Front Yard 75 feet, minimum, from front
property line to the nearest point
of the main or accessory building.
For corner lots, the yards fronting
on each street shall have a
minimum depth of 75 feet.
Side Yards 30 feet, minimum, between
nearest point of the main or
accessory building to adjacent
property line. There shall be two
side yards which shall not total
less than 80 feet in aggregate
width, except for corner lots,
where there shall be at least one
side yard with a minimum depth
of 40 feet.
Rear Yard 50 feet, minimum, between
nearest point of the main or
accessory building to rear
property line.
Driveway No driveway private street or fire
lane shall be located within 10
feet of any side or rear lot line.
Building Coverage 15%, maximum, inclusive of
principal and accessory
structures.
Impervious Coverage 20%, maximum.
Building Height 40 feet, maximum, subject to
§§ 135-167 and 135-168.
A. Tract buffer.
(1) A minimum buffer area of 75 feet shall be provided along the
perimeter property line for the tract. The buffer area shall conform
to the standards set forth in § 135-160.
(2) A buffer planting strip with a minimum width of 25 feet shall be
provided within the tract buffer area. The buffer planting strip shall
be landscaped and maintained in accordance with § 135-161.
B. The development shall be designed to preserve and incorporate
natural, historical and cultural features. As part of the conditional use
application, the plan shall identify such features and provide
information on how the features will be preserved.
§ 135-186 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-187
1:617
§ 135-188. Common open space.
C. As part of the conditional use application, the plan shall identify scenic
vista points which will remain after development of the site, and which
will provide visual amenities for the development. Vista points may
include unobstructed views looking into the development from adjacent
public roads and unobstructed views within the development, each
incorporating open space and/or other preserved natural features.
D. Sidewalks and/or pedestrian trails shall be provided to provide access
to common open space areas, notably when active or passive recreation
areas are proposed.
A. Consideration shall be given to the arrangement and location of
common open space to take advantage of physical characteristics of the
site and to place common open space within easy access and view of
dwelling units, while at the same time preserving environmentally
sensitive areas and visual resources. Areas set aside for common open
space shall contain no structure other than a structure related to active
and passive recreational use and approved by the Township Board of
Supervisors.
B. The Board of Supervisors may require a portion of the required
common open space to be designed, constructed and maintained for
active and passive recreation facilities.
C. Any land parcel designated as common open space shall have a lot area
of not less than 20,000 square feet, and a width of not less than 150
feet, except for areas designated for trails, which shall have a width of
not less than 30 feet.
D. The common open space shall include at least one centrally located
parcel with frontage on a public street of at least 50 feet. This central
open space shall be designed for common use by the residents of the
development.
E. No more than 20% of the common open space may contain common
elements of the proposed development, such as utility easements and
sanitary sewer or stormwater management facilities. Common open
space shall not include land within the rights-of-way of streets.
F. For all common open space, written agreements shall be prepared to
the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors and shall be executed as a
declaration of easements, covenants and restrictions in perpetuity for
the preservation of the common open space. Such agreements shall be
recorded with the final plan.
G. An essential element of the use of common open space shall be a
written description and plan for the ownership and maintenance of
common open space designating those areas to be offered for
dedication or to be owned by the specific form of organization
§ 135-187 CHADDS FORD CODE § 135-188
1:618
proposed. Ownership and maintenance of the common open space shall
be accomplished through one of the following:
(1) An offer of dedication to the Township. The Township shall not be
obligated to accept dedication of the common open space.
(2) With permission of the Board of Supervisors, and with appropriate
deed restrictions in favor of the Township and in language
acceptable to the Township Solicitor, the developer may transfer
ownership of the common open space or a portion thereof to a
private, nonprofit organization among whose purposes is the
preservation of common open space land and/or natural resources.
The organization shall be a bona fide conservation organization
with a perpetual existence, the conveyance must contain
appropriate provision for reverter or retransfer if the organization
is unable to maintain the land, and the organization shall enter into
a maintenance agreement with the Township.
(3) The developer shall provide for and establish an organization for
the ownership and maintenance of the common open space. The
developer shall provide the Board of Supervisors with a description
of the organization, including its bylaws and methods for
maintaining the common open space, subject to the review and
approval of the Township Solicitor.
§ 135-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135-188
1:619
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
121 4-1-2009 Manager Ch. 19
122 12-14-2009 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
64-R 9-1-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
64-S 6-1-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
123 11-21-2011 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 116, Art. V
124 7-2-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
125 9-4-2013 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 110
126 10-2-2013 Street vacation NCM
127 5-12-2014 Zoning Map amendment NCM
128 9-3-2014 Restricted vegetation Ch. 126
129 7-2-2014 Vehicles and traffic: traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 125, Art. II
130 7-2-2014 Cable television franchise
agreement
See Ch. 55
131 9-3-2014 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 135
132 Not adopted
133 PSATS Pension System NCM
134 8-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
135 6-3-2015 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 110
136 5-6-2015 Stormwater management Ch. 105
137 6-3-2015 Manager amendment Ch. 19
138 Not adopted
139 11-4-2015 Noise Repealed by Ord.
No. 139-A
139-A 3-2-2016 Noise Ch. 89
140 8-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
§ 135-188 CHADDS FORD CODE § DL-1
1:620
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
141 10-8-2015 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 110; Ch. 135
142 11-4-2015 Intergovernmental
cooperation: Delaware Valley
Health Trust
Ch. 14, Art. IV
143 7-6-2016 Solid waste amendment Ch. 100
144 11-2-2016 Special events Ch. 102
145 9-7-2016 Sewers: :holding tanks
amendment; community
sewage disposal systems
amendment; sewage facilities
amendment; sewers:
prohibited discharges; grease
traps amendment; sewers:
grinder pumps amendment;
sewers: definitions
Ch. 95, Art. I; Ch.
95, Art. II; Ch.
95, Art. III; Ch.
95, Art. IV; Ch.
95, Art. V; Ch. 95,
Art. VI
146 9-7-2016 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 105
147 11-2-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 135
148 12-7-2016 Intergovernmental
cooperation: PSATS
Unemployment Compensation
Group Trust
Ch. 14, Art. V
149 3-1-2017 Trails, Parks and Open Space
Regulations
Ch. 91
150 Not Adopted
151 6-7-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 135
152 8-2-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 135
153 12-27-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 135
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:621