Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1601(d) [53P.S.§ 66601(d)] of the Second Class
Township Code, the codification of a complete body of legislation for the
Township of Concord, County of Delaware, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
as revised, codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 214,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Township of Concord, which shall be
known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Township of Concord,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Board of Supervisors of the Township of Concord, and it is the intention
of said Board of Supervisors that each such provision contained within the
Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only
such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall
be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to
be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of legislation not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Township of Concord and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to August 5, 1997.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the township prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the township or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the township.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the township or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the township or other instruments or evidence of
the township's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the township.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
§ 1-4 CONCORD CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature adopted
subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of
this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances
and resolutions shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed
supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the township or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or resolution regulating traffic and parking.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the township for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions.
Additional similar changes are hereby made to various ordinances
included in the Code as set forth in Schedule B1 attached hereto and
made a part hereof. It is the intention of the Board of Supervisors that
all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and
resolutions so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code as set forth in Schedule A2 attached hereto and made a part
hereof. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity
with the desired policies of the Board of Supervisors, and it is the intent
of the Board of Supervisors that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the legislation so changed have been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
1. Editor's Note: Schedule B is on file in the township offices.
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221."
Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
township offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.
C. Nomenclature changes. The following changes have been made
throughout the Code:
(1) "Justice of the Peace" and "District Magistrate" are hereby
amended to read "District Justice."
(2) "Building Official" and "Code Enforcement Officer" are hereby
amended to read "Building Inspector."
(3) "Department of Environmental Resources (DER)" is hereby
amended to read "Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)"
or "Department of Conservation and Natural Resources,"
whichever is appropriate.
(4) "Department of Community Affairs" is hereby amended to read
"Department of Community and Economic Development."
D. Statutory references. In regard to the adoption and reorganization of
the Second Class Township Code, 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq., all statutory
references to said code are hereby updated accordingly.
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 CONCORD CODE § 1-9
1:6
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Township Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Township Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Township Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of
the Board of Supervisors to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated into such Code as that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such changes. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the post-bound book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Township Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Township
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
legislation adopted by the Board of Supervisors subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Board of Supervisors shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Township Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in
the manner required a notice of the proposed adoption of the Code and
public notice of a public hearing on Chapters 60 (zoning officer), 160 and
161 (subdivision and land development), and 210, 211, 212 and 214 (zoning
and zoning use approval) in a newspaper of general circulation in the
township. The enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with
the publication of the notice of the proposed adoption and public notice of
public hearing, as required by law, and the availability of copies of the Code
for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:7
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a fine of
not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's
fees, incurred by the township in the enforcement of this chapter. No
judgment shall be imposed until the date of the determination of the
violation by the District Justice and/or Court. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the township may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers
or agents of the township are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,
including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Board of Supervisors that this ordinance and the Code would
have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been
included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after January 10, 1998.
§ 1-13 CONCORD CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE II
Violations and penalties
[Adopted 12-3-1996 by Ord. No. 206]
§ 1-16. Enforcement procedure.
The Building Inspector shall impose a civil penalty fine as prescribed by this
article upon a determination that an ordinance and/or Code violation has
occurred or is occurring.
A. The Building Inspector shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending a notice of violation to the violator or violators by certified mail
or by serving it personally upon the violator or violators. The notice
shall state at least the following:
(1) A citation to the ordinance involved;
(2) The specific violations;
(3) The date and time, if appropriate;
(4) The amount of the civil penalty;
(5) The nature of the proceeding as being civil;
(6) The time within which the civil penalty is to be paid;
(7) The place of payment; and
(8) The consequences of failure to pay the civil penalty on or before the
due date.
B. In the event that the violator pays the prescribed civil penalty fine
within 15 days of the date on the notice of violation, the civil penalty
fine shall be reduced by a sum equal to 50% of the fine.
C. In the event that the violator fails to pay to Concord Township the civil
penalty fine on or before the due date, Concord Township shall
commence a civil enforcement proceeding in a court having
jurisdiction.
D. Upon determining that a violation has or is occurring, the Building
Inspector may, at the officer's sole discretion, issue a notice of violation,
as prescribed herein, containing a grace period of not more than 30
days, permitting the violator to correct the violation and comply with
the ordinance violated by the specified date. Compliance and the
payment of 25% of the imposed civil penalty fine by the specified date
shall constitute payment in full of the civil penalty fine. In determining
whether to permit a grace period for ordinance violation correction, the
Building Inspector shall consider the willfulness of the violation, likely
damage to person and/or property, cost of correction and abatement,
savings resulting to the person in consequence of such violation,
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
disturbance to the peace and welfare of the community and other
relevant factors.
§ 1-16 CONCORD CODE § 1-16
1:10
Chapter 7
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 136. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
§ 1-16 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 1-16
7:11

ARTICLE I
Sewer Authority
[Adopted 9-4-1973 by Ord. No. 82]
§ 7-1. Intent.
The Board of Township Supervisors hereby signifies its intention and desire
to organize an Authority under the provisions of the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended.3
§ 7-2. Execution of Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Township Supervisors are
hereby authorized and directed to execute on behalf of Concord Township
Articles of Incorporation for said Authority.4
§ 7-3. Publication of notice.
The Township Secretary is hereby directed to cause a notice of the
substance of this article, including the substance of the above Articles of
Incorporation, to be published once in the Delaware County Daily Times,
a daily newspaper published and of general circulation in the County of
Delaware, and in the Delaware County Legal Journal, the legal journal
designated by the Rules of Court for the publication of legal notices in
said county, as required by the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as
amended.5
§ 7-4. Filing of Articles of Incorporation.
The Chairman and Secretary of the Board of Township Supervisors are
directed to file said Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary
proofs of publication, with the Secretary of the Commonwealth and to do all
other acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation
of the Concord Township Sewer Authority.
§ 7-5. Powers and duties.
The initial project to be undertaken by said Authority is to acquire, hold,
construct, improve, maintain, operate, own or lease, either in the capacity
of lessor or lessee, sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof and sewage
treatment works, including works for treating and disposing of industrial
waste, for Concord Township and such other territory as it may be
authorized to serve.6
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: Said Articles of Incorporation are on file in the township offices.
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: Former Section 6, which immediately followed this section and set forth the
names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Authority, was deleted at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 7-1 AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL § 7-5
7:13
Chapter 13
COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS
§ 13-1. Terms and conditions.
The Township of Concord hereby elects to become a member of the Crum
and Ridley Creeks Council of Governments (C.O.G.) upon the terms and
conditions of municipal membership, as set forth in the Preamble and
Bylaws of the Crum and Ridley Creeks Council of Governments, which are
set forth in Appendix A to this chapter and made part hereof.
§ 13-2. Representative of township.
The Manager of the Township of Concord is hereby appointed as the voting
representative of Concord Township to sit on the Council of Governments.
§ 13-3. Appropriation of funds.
There is hereby appropriated from the municipal treasury an amount
sufficient to pay the 1991 annual membership dues in the Council of
Governments.
Chapter 19
FIRE OFFICIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire hydrant districts — See Ch. 104. Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
§ 7-5 CONCORD CODE § 13-3
13:14
ARTICLE I
Fire Marshall
[Adopted 4-6-1981 as Res. No. 6-1981]
§ 19-1. Appointment; powers and duties; compensation.
A. The Concord Township Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors for a term of one year at the Board's annual reorganization
meeting conducted on the first Monday of January of each year. The
Fire Marshal shall report to the Board of Supervisors, and the duties
and responsibilities of the position shall include:
(1) Administration and coordination of fire investigations to determine
the causes of fires in the township;
(2) Initiating with the appropriate law enforcement officials
investigation and action on any suspicious fires with which criminal
activity may reasonably be suspected;
(3) Maintaining records of all fire alarms and fire calls, organized by
classifications of types and location;
(4) Preparing and submitting to the Board, on a standardized reporting
form, of a monthly report on all fires, investigations, inspections
and other activities of the office, which report shall contain data for
the current month just ending and the year-to-date and comparable
data for the current month and year-to-date in the preceding year;
(5) Assisting the Township Building Inspector, when requested by such
officer, in inspections for violations of regulations where risk and
other fire prevention matters are involved;
(6) Conducting fire prevention programs for community groups,
including the publication and dissemination of informational
pamphlets, news releases and articles within the appropriations
available for such purposes;
(7) Ensuring proper training for such assistants as the Board may
authorize for the functions and duties of the office;
(8) Maintaining liaison with and keeping the Board informed of the
capabilities and needs of all fire companies serving the township;
and
(9) Such other duties as may be assigned to the Fire Marshal by
township ordinance or other law or by the Board.
B. This appointment of the Concord Township Fire Marshal shall take
effect on this date with compensation set forth at the annual
reorganization meeting of the Board of Supervisors.7
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 19-1 FIRE OFFICIALS § 19-1
19:15

ARTICLE II
Deputy Fire Marshal
[Adopted 4-6-1981 by Res. No. 7-1981]
§ 19-2. Appointment; powers and duties; compensation.
A. The Concord Township Deputy Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the
Board of Supervisors for a term of one year at the Board's annual
reorganization meeting conducted on the first Monday of January of
each year. The Deputy Fire Marshal shall report to the Fire Marshal (or,
in his absence, to the Board), and the duties and responsibilities of the
position shall include the following:
(1) Assisting the Fire Marshal in the performance of the duties and
responsibilities of the office; and
(2) Acting as Fire Marshal in the latter's absence.
B. This appointment of the Concord Township Deputy Fire Marshal shall
take effect on this date with compensation set forth at the annual
reorganization meeting of the Board of Supervisors.8
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 19-2 FIRE OFFICIALS § 19-2
19:17
Chapter 21
INTERGOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION
§ 19-2 CONCORD CODE § 19-2
19:18
ARTICLE I
PSATS Unemployment Compensation Group Trust
[Adopted 1-5-2015 by Ord. No. 361]
§ 21-1. Agreement adopted.
§ 21-2. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the Trust is authorized for the purpose
of pooling resources for the purpose of providing unemployment
compensation insurance for participating employers at reasonable cost.
§ 21-3. Conditions of participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the restated trust agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the Trust:
§ 21-4. Withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the Trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the restated trust agreement, provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
A. The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the
Township are hereby authorized to adopt the restated trust agreement
and any other agreements necessary for the Township's participation in
the Trust.
B. The restated trust agreement is on file for inspection and review at the
Township's offices at 43 Thornton Road, Glen Mills, PA 19342. The
restated trust agreement may be subsequently modified or amended in
accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such modifications or
amendments divert any of the trust funds from the purposes of the
Trust. The Township may withdraw from the Trust in accordance with
the restated trust agreement, including if the Board of Supervisors
determines the modifications or amendments are not in the best
interests of the Township.
A. Each participating employer must meet the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein;
B. Each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when due
as provided in the restated trust agreement or as otherwise established
by the Board of Trustees; and
C. Each participating employer complies with all other conditions of the
restated trust agreement.
§ 21-1 FIRE OFFICIALS § 21-5
19:19
§ 21-5. When effective.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
restated trust agreement and the participation of the Township in the Trust
pursuant to the terms of the restated trust agreement will be immediate.
§ 21-6. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the restated trust agreement.
§ 21-7. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees. Under the restated trust agreement, the Board of Trustees is
authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to
perform various services necessary for the administration of the Trust.
§ 21-8. Funds.
The funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 21-9. Insurance and benefits.
The Trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the Trust, if any.
§ 21-10. Compliance with terms.
As a condition of participating in the Trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the restated trust agreement.
§ 21-11. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the Trust.
§ 21-12. Authorization to take necessary action.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized to take
any and all such other actions as may be necessary or appropriate to
carry out the purposes of this article and comply with the requirements of
the attached restated trust agreement9 and any duly adopted amendments
thereto.
9. Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 21-5 CONCORD CODE § 21-13
19:20
§ 21-13. Term of agreement.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the Trust and
obligations under the restated trust agreement shall continue until
withdrawal from the Trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the restated trust agreement.
§ 21-14. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
§ 21-15. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and in the event that any
provision is held invalid, void, illegal, or unconstitutional by any court, it
is the intent of the governing body that such determination by the Court
shall not affect or render void the remaining provisions of this article. It is
the declared intent of the governing body that this article would have been
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the restated trust agreement incorporated by reference herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the Trust in accordance with the
restated trust agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated restated trust
agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the agreement are that i) funds
to implement the Township's obligations under the agreement shall
come from the normal and usual budgeted amounts for Township
employee compensation and employee benefits, and ii) no borrowing is
anticipated to be required.
E. The Trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the restated trust agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the Trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
G. The Trust, in accordance with the restated trust agreement, shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employees and dependents.
§ 21-13 FIRE OFFICIALS § 21-15
19:21
enacted if any provision subsequently declared to be void, invalid, illegal or
unconstitutional had not been included at the time of enactment.
§ 21-16. Rights and liabilities.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to affect any rights or liabilities
of the Township, or to affect any cause of action, existing prior to the
enactment of this article.
§ 21-17. Effective upon enactment.
This article shall become effective immediately upon its enactment.
§ 21-18. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 21-15 CONCORD CODE § 21-18
19:22
ARTICLE II
Pennsylvania Townships Health Insurance Cooperative Trust
[Adopted 1-5-2015 by Ord. No. 362]
§ 21-19. Agreement adopted.
§ 21-20. Purpose.
The participation of the Township in the Trust is authorized for the purpose
of obtaining high quality, cost-effective medical, prescription, dental, life,
disability and/or other employee welfare benefit insurance at a reasonable
cost to the Township and its employees.
§ 21-21. Conditions of participation.
As set forth in greater detail in the restated trust agreement and as
otherwise stated herein, the following conditions apply to the participation
of the Township in the Trust:
§ 21-22. Withdrawal.
The Township agrees to participate in the Trust and may withdraw for any
reason and in accordance with the restated trust agreement, provided that
it has fulfilled all its financial obligations to the Trust upon withdrawal.
A. The Chairman of the Board of Supervisors and Secretary of the
Township are hereby authorized to adopt the restated trust agreement
and any other agreements necessary for the Township's participation in
the Trust.
B. The restated trust agreement is on file for inspection and review at the
Township's offices at 43 Thornton Road, Glen Mills, PA 19342. The
restated trust agreement may be subsequently modified or amended in
accordance with its terms, but in no event shall such modifications or
amendments divert any of the trust funds from the purposes of the
Trust. The Township may withdraw from the Trust in accordance with
the restated trust agreement, including if the Board of Supervisors
determines the modifications or amendments are not in the best
interests of the Township.
A. Each participating employer must meet the admission and eligibility
requirements set forth therein;
B. Each participating employer agrees to pay all contributions when due
as provided in the restated trust agreement or as otherwise established
by the Board of Trustees; and
C. Each participating employer complies with all other conditions of the
restated trust agreement.
§ 21-19 FIRE OFFICIALS § 21-23
19:23
§ 21-23. When effective.
The effective date of the Township's agreement to and joinder in the
restated trust agreement and the participation of the Township in the Trust
pursuant to the terms of the restated trust agreement will be immediate.
§ 21-24. Delegation of powers.
Each participating employer delegates to the Board of Trustees the powers
enumerated in the restated trust agreement.
§ 21-25. Organizational structure.
The organizational structure of the Trust shall consist of a Board of
Trustees. Under the restated trust agreement, the Board of Trustees is
authorized to, among other things, enter into contracts with third parties to
perform various services necessary for the administration of the Trust.
§ 21-26. Funds.
The funds required for the operation of the Trust shall be provided by the
participating employers through scheduled appropriations as determined
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 21-27. Insurance and benefits.
The Trust is empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security, for employees of
the Trust, if any.
§ 21-28. Compliance with terms.
As a condition of participating in the Trust, the Township agrees to comply
with all of the terms and conditions in the restated trust agreement.
§ 21-29. Certified copy.
The Secretary of the Township shall provide a certified copy of this article
upon its enactment to the Board of Trustees of the Trust.
§ 21-30. Authorization to take necessary action.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township is hereby authorized to take any
and all such other actions as may be necessary or appropriate to carry
out the purposes of this article and comply with the requirements of the
attached restated trust agreement10 and any duly adopted amendments
thereto.
10.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 21-23 CONCORD CODE § 21-31
19:24
§ 21-31. Term of agreement.
The duration of the term of the Township's participation in the Trust and
obligations under the restated trust agreement shall continue until
withdrawal from the Trust by the Township in accordance with the terms of
the restated trust agreement.
§ 21-32. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors hereby specifically finds and determines as
follows:
§ 21-33. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and in the event that any
provision is held invalid, void, illegal, or unconstitutional by any court, it is
the intent of the Board of Supervisors that such determination by the court
shall not affect or render void the remaining provisions of this article. It is
A. The conditions of the intergovernmental cooperative agreement are set
forth in the restated trust agreement incorporated by reference herein.
B. The Township shall participate in the Trust in accordance with the
restated trust agreement until it withdraws by giving notice to the
Board of Trustees at least 90 days in advance to become effective on
either June 30 or December 31 of a given plan year; or in the case of an
initial year of participation in the Trust shall participate for a minimum
of one year.
C. The purpose and objectives of the intergovernmental cooperative
arrangement, including powers and scope of authority delegated to the
Board of Trustees, are set forth in the incorporated restated trust
agreement.
D. The manner and extent of financing of the restated trust agreement are
that i) funds to implement the Township's obligations under the
restated trust agreement shall come from the normal and usual
budgeted amounts for Township employee compensation and employee
benefits, and ii) no borrowing is anticipated to be required.
E. The Trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees pursuant to the
terms of the restated trust agreement.
F. All assets and property, real or personal, of the Trust shall be titled to,
acquired, managed, licensed or disposed of by the Trust, and its Board
of Trustees, in accordance with the terms of the restated trust
agreement.
G. The Trust, in accordance with the restated trust agreement, shall be
empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group insurance and
employee welfare benefits to be offered to participating employers for
their eligible employees and dependents.
§ 21-31 FIRE OFFICIALS § 21-33
19:25
the declared intent of the Board of Supervisors that this article would have
been enacted if any provision subsequently declared to be void, invalid,
illegal or unconstitutional had not been included at the time of enactment.
§ 21-34. Rights and liabilities.
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to affect any rights or liabilities
of the Township, or to affect any cause of action, existing prior to the
enactment of this article.
§ 21-35. Effective upon enactment.
This article shall become effective immediately upon its enactment.
§ 21-36. Statutory authority.
This article is being enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Cooperation Law, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180, as
amended, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 21-33 CONCORD CODE § 21-36
19:26
Chapter 29
MANAGER
§ 29-1. Creation of Office.
The Office of Township Manager is hereby created by the Township of
Concord.
§ 29-2. Appointment; removal.
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority the
Board of Supervisors. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Board
of Supervisors and he may be removed at any time by a majority vote of the
Board of Supervisors. At least 30 days before such removal is to become
effective, the Board of Supervisors shall furnish the Manager with a written
statement setting forth its intention to remove him.
§ 29-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of his office as
herein outlined.
§ 29-4. Bond.11
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
township, with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the Board
of Supervisors, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties, the
premium for said bond to be paid by the township. The amount of said bond
may be changed and determined from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 29-5. Manager's compensation.
The salary of the Township Manager shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 29-6. Powers and duties.
The Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Township, and
he shall be responsible to the Board of Supervisors as a whole for the proper
and efficient administration of the affairs of the township. The powers
and duties of administration of all township business shall be vested in
the Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by statute upon other
township officers. Subject to recall by ordinance enacted by the Board of
Supervisors, the powers and duties of the Township Manager shall include
the following:
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 21-36 MANAGER § 29-6
29:27
A. He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments.
B. He shall hire and, when necessary for the good of the service, shall
suspend or discharge any employee under his supervision, provided
that persons covered by the civil service provisions of the Second Class
Township Code12 shall be hired, suspended or discharged in accordance
with such provisions and provided, further, that the Manager shall
report, at the next meeting thereafter of the Board of Supervisors, any
action taken by authority of this subsection.
C. He shall have the power to fix wages and salaries of all personnel under
his supervision, within a range previously determined by the Board of
Supervisors.
D. He shall prepare and submit to the Board of Supervisors, before the
close of each fiscal year, a budget for the next fiscal year and an
explanatory budget message. In preparing the budget, the Manager or
an officer designated by him shall obtain, from the head of each
department, agency or board or any qualified officer thereof, estimates
of revenues and expenditures and such other supporting data as he
requires. The Manager shall review such estimates and may revise
them before submitting the budget to the Board of Supervisors.
E. He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Board of Supervisors.
F. He shall, in conjunction with the preparation of the yearly budget,
develop long-range fiscal plans for the municipality, such plans to be
presented annually to the Board of Supervisors for its review and
adoption.
G. He shall hold such other municipal offices and head such municipal
departments as the Board of Supervisors may from time to time direct.
H. He shall attend all meetings of the Board of Supervisors and its
committees with the right to take part in the discussions and he shall
receive notice of all special meetings of the Board of Supervisors and its
committees.
I. He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of the Board of
Supervisors and supply facts pertinent thereto.
J. He shall keep the Board of Supervisors informed as to the conduct of
township affairs; submit periodic reports on the condition of the
township finances and such other reports as the Board of Supervisors
requests; and make such recommendations to the Board of Supervisors
as he deems advisable.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 29-6 CONCORD CODE § 29-6
29:28
§ 29-7. Procedural limitations on Board of Supervisors.
Neither the Board of Supervisors nor its committees shall dictate or
influence or attempt to dictate or influence the hiring of any person to
or his discharge from municipal employment by the Manager or in any
manner take part in the hiring, suspending or discharging of employees in
the administrative service of the township, except as required by the civil
service provisions of the Second Class Township Code.14 Other than for the
purposes of inquiry, the Board of Supervisors or any of its members or any
of the Board's committees or its members shall deal with the administrative
service solely through the Township Manager, and neither the Board of
K. He shall submit to the Board of Supervisors, as soon as possible after
the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and the
administrative activities of the township for the preceding year.
L. He shall see that the provision of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the township are observed.
M. He may employ, by and with the written approval of the Board of
Supervisors, experts and consultants to perform work and to advise in
connection with any of the functions of the township.
N. He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed by statute upon
some other township officer.
O. He shall see that all money owed the township is promptly paid and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all the
township's claims.
P. He shall be the Purchasing Officer of the township and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provision of the Second Class
Township Code,13 all supplies and equipment for the agencies, boards,
departments and other offices of the township. He shall keep an
account of all purchases and shall, from time to time or when directed
by the Board of Supervisors, make a full written report thereof. He shall
also issue rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, governing the procurement of all municipal supplies and
equipment.
Q. All complaints regarding township services shall be referred to the
office of the Manager. He or an officer designated by him shall
investigate and dispose of such complaints, and the Manager shall
report thereon to the Board of Supervisors. Short-term complaints shall
be reported after having been satisfied. In the case of complaints
requiring more time, progress reports shall be filed biweekly.
13.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 29-6 MANAGER § 29-7
29:29
Supervisors nor any of its members nor any of the Board of Supervisors'
committees or its members shall give orders, publicly or privately, to any
subordinate of the Manager.
§ 29-8. Disability or absence.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the township, he
shall designate one qualified member of his staff to perform the duties of the
Manager during his absence or disability. The person so designated shall
not perform these duties for a period longer than two weeks without the
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
Chapter 35
OPEN SPACE COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 41.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
§ 35-1. Creation of Committee.
A committee to be known as the "Open Space Committee of Concord
Township" is hereby created and established.
§ 35-2. Membership; terms of office; compensation.
Said Open Space Committee shall consist of five persons, residents of the
Township of Concord, who shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Concord. The members shall serve for a term of one
year and until a successor shall be appointed by the Board of Supervisors
of Concord Township. Vacancies in such Committee occurring otherwise
than by expiration of said term shall be for the unexpired term and shall
be filled by the Board of Supervisors of Concord Township. The members of
the Open Space Committee shall serve without compensation. All persons
so appointed shall serve their full terms unless voluntarily resigned or
removed by the Board of Supervisors of Concord Township.
§ 35-3. Powers and duties.
Said Open Space Committee shall have the authority to identify properties
suitable as open space, conservation and wetland use and passive
recreation use, including hiking/bike trails, and to advise the Board of
Supervisors as to ways and means to expand and implement the Concord
Township Plan for Community Facilities contained in the Concord Township
Comprehensive Plan, February 2, 1988, and the public dedication of land
§ 29-7 CONCORD CODE § 35-3
35:30
pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code15 and Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 35-4. Organization; rules and regulations; annual report.
Said Open Space Committee shall elect its own Chairman and Secretary
and select all other necessary officers and may, with the prior approval of
the Board of Supervisors of Concord Township, retain necessary consultants
to assist it in carrying out the duties of the Open Space Committee. Said
Open Space Committee shall have powers to adopt rules and regulations for
the conduct of all business within the jurisdiction of the Committee. Said
Committee shall submit an annual report to the Board of Supervisors of
Concord Township, including an analysis of the open space, conservation,
wetland and passive recreation land in the township, with particular
references to the extent and adequacy thereof.
§ 35-5. Financial report.
An annual financial report, identifying receipts from all sources and all
expenditures, shall be submitted by the Open Space Committee to the Board
of Supervisors of Concord Township. The Board of Supervisors of Concord
Township shall have the right to inspect the books, records and accounts of
said Open Space Committee at any time and from time to time.
§ 35-6. Acquisition of lands.
Said Open Space Committee shall make recommendations to the Board
of Supervisors of Concord Township, if timely and appropriate, for the
acquisition and/or purchase of lands suitable for open space, conservation,
wetland use and passive recreation use, and contracts and agreements for
the acquisition and purchase thereof shall be entered into by the Board of
Supervisors of Concord Township.16
Chapter 41
PARK AND RECREATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open Space Committee — See Ch. 35. Subdivision and Land Development — See Ch.
160.
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
16.Editor's Note: Former Section 7, which immediately followed this section and which set
forth the terms of office of members of the former Open Space, Park and Recreation
Board, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I). The
former Open Space, Park and Recreation Board was combined with the Open Space
Committee to form the current Open Space Committee.
§ 35-3 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 41-1
41:31
§ 41-1. Creation of Board.
A Board to be known as the "Park and Recreation Board of Concord
Township" is hereby created and established.
§ 41-2. Appointment; terms of office; compensation.17
Said Park and Recreation Board shall consist of seven persons, residents
of the Township of Concord, who shall be appointed by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township of Concord, plus two ex officio members,
consisting of the Park and Recreation Director and a representative of the
Board of Supervisors. The members shall serve for terms of five years
or until their successors are appointed, except that the members first
appointed shall be appointed so that the terms of not more than two
members expire annually. Vacancies in such Board occurring otherwise than
by expiration of term shall be for the unexpired term and shall be filled
by the Board of Supervisors of Concord Township. The members of the
Park and Recreation Board shall serve without compensation. All persons
so appointed shall serve their full terms unless voluntarily resigned or
removed by the Board of Supervisors of Concord Township for dereliction
or neglect of duties.
§ 41-3. Powers and duties.
Said Park and Recreation Board shall have the authority to equip, operate
and maintain parks, recreation areas and facilities provided by the
Township of Concord and any lands that may be designated and set apart for
use as parks, playgrounds, playfields, gymnasiums, public baths, swimming
pools or indoor recreation centers.
§ 41-4. Organization; rules and regulations; annual report.
Said Park and Recreation Board shall elect its own Chairman and Secretary
and shall select all other necessary officers to serve for a period of one
year and may, with the approval of the Board of Supervisors of Concord
Township, select, employ and discharge all recreation personnel used to
carry out the provisions of this chapter. Said Park and Recreation Board
shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of all
business within the jurisdiction of the Board. Said Park and Recreation
Board shall submit an annual report to the Board of Supervisors of Concord
Township, including an analysis of the community parks, recreation areas
and facilities and leadership, with particular reference to the extent and
adequacy of the program and its effectiveness in view of the public
expenditures involved and the public needs to be met.
§ 41-5. Financial report.
An annual financial report, itemizing receipts from all sources and all
expenditures, shall be submitted by said Park and Recreation Board to the
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 41-1 CONCORD CODE § 41-5
41:32
Board of Supervisors of Concord Township. The Board of Supervisors of
Concord Township shall have the right to inspect the books, records and
accounts of said Park and Recreation Board at any time and from time to
time.
§ 41-6. Contracts of purchase and employment.
Said Park and Recreation Board shall have the right to enter into contracts
of purchase and employment related to the functions delegated to said
Board, provided that all such contracts shall be within approved budgetary
limitations and provided, further, that all advertising, conflict of interest
and other provisions of the Second Class Township Code18 shall be strictly
complied with by said Park and Recreation Board in every respect as if the
contract were entered into by the Township of Concord itself.
§ 41-7. Award of contracts.
The Board of Supervisors of Concord Township shall retain the power to
award and enter into contracts in excess of $1,000, even though such
contracts may be within the budgetary allocations to the Park and
Recreation Board. In all such contracts over $1,000 which are within said
budgetary allocation, bids shall be received by the Park and Recreation
Board as the committee designated by the Township Supervisors to receive
bids, and the Park and Recreation Board shall tabulate the bids or cause
them to be tabulated and shall make a recommendation to the Board of
Supervisors regarding award of the contract. If said award shall be made
by the Board of Supervisors in accordance with the recommendation of the
Park and Recreation Board, said contract shall constitute an authorization
for payment of the contract sum and related expenditures from the park and
recreation account at such time as sums due thereunder may become due
and payable.
Chapter 45
PENSIONS
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 41-5 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 41-7
41:33

ARTICLE I
Municipal Retirement System19
[Adopted 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 240]
§ 45-1. Enrollment in system.
Concord Township (the Township), being a member municipality of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the system), hereby elects to
change its member benefits in that System as authorized by the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, Act 15 of 1974, as amended, (the
law) and does hereby agree to be bound by all the requirements and
provisions of said law and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities. All references hereafter shall be based
on benefits negotiated between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Township under the provisions of Article IV of the law.
§ 45-2. Membership.
Membership in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System shall be
mandatory for all permanent, municipal employees of the Township.
Membership for elected officials and employees hired on a temporary or
seasonal basis is prohibited, as is membership for individuals paid only on a
fee basis.
§ 45-3. Credit for prior service.
Credit for prior service for original members is granted for each year or
partial year thereof that the member was employed by the Township from
original date of hire or the expiration of the member's probationary period
if one so existed. Benefits provided to members in the agreement dated July
6, 1999, shall accrue based on all credited service granted and earned in
accordance with this section.
§ 45-4. Payment of obligations.
Payment for any obligation established by the enactment of this article and
the agreement between the system and Concord Township shall be made
by the Township in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act,
Act 205 of 1984.20
§ 45-5. Acceptance of agreement.
As part of this article, the Township agrees that the system shall provide the
benefits set forth in the agreement between the Board and the Township
dated July 6, 1999.21 The enactment of this article by Concord Township
19.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 347, adopted 3-5-2013, amended the Municipal Pension Plan
contract, effective 12-1-2012, and repealed Ord. No. 269, adopted 4-2-2002.
20.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq., respectively.
21.Editor's Note: Said agreement is on file in the Township offices.
§ 45-1 PARK AND RECREATION BOARD § 45-5
41:35
is an official acceptance of said agreement and the financial obligations
resulting from the administration of said benefit package. The Township
hereby assumes all liability for any unfundedness created or which may be
created due to the acceptance of the benefit structure outlined in the abovereferenced
agreement.
§ 45-6. Intent.
The Township intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
Township plan and it shall become effective and specifically repeal
Township Resolution No. 4-1981 either immediately or on July 1, 1999,
which is the effective date of the amended agreement dated July 6, 1999,
between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System and Concord
Township, whichever is later.
§ 45-7. Filing of copies; effective date of membership in system.
A duly certified copy of this article and the referenced agreement shall
be filed with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Membership for the municipal employees
of Concord Township in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System
shall be effective the first day of January, 1981, with the revised plan
structure reflected in the agreement dated July 6, 1999, effective the first
day of July, 1999.
§ 45-5 CONCORD CODE § 45-7
41:36
Chapter 47
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 47-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Personnel
Administration Ordinance of 1986."
§ 47-2. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby the declared personnel administration policy of the Township of
Concord that:
§ 47-3. Drug and Alcohol Policy. [Added 2-4-1997 by Ord. No. 208]
A. Employment in the township government shall be based on merit and
fitness, free of personal and political considerations.
B. Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be
established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the
operation of the township government.
C. Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified
and compensated on a uniform basis and shall be adopted by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors of Concord Township and may be amended
from time to time by resolution.
D. A wage schedule shall be adopted by resolution and may be amended
from time to time by resolution.
E. Personnel rules and regulations shall be adopted by resolution and may
be amended from time to time by resolution.
F. Appointments, promotions and other actions requiring the application
of the merit principle shall be based on systematic evaluations.
G. High morale shall be maintained by fair administration of this chapter
and by every consideration of the rights and interests of employees,
consistent with the best interest of the public and the township.
H. Tenure of employees covered by this chapter shall be subject to good
behavior, the satisfactory performance of work, the necessity of the
performance of work and the availability of funds.
A. Policy objectives. The township has a desire to provide a safe workplace
for its employees and efficient service to the public. The township's
objective in adopting this Drug and Alcohol Policy is to comply with
applicable state and federal law and to help ensure that the workplace
is free from the adverse effects of drug and alcohol use and that
employees are fit to perform their job duties and report for work
regularly and on time.
§ 45-7 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 47-3
47:37
B. Regulations concerning testing. The United States Department of
Transportation (DOT) has established mandatory drug and alcohol
testing regulations that affect certain of the township's drivers and
driver applicants. The township is committed to complying with these
federal regulations and to applying certain of such federal regulations
to all township employees and employment applicants. Accordingly, the
following requirements shall apply to all employees who are required to
have a commercial driver's license (CDL) and to applicants for CDL
positions and, where indicated, to all township employees and
applicants for employment.
(1) Preemployment testing. All applicants for employment with the
township shall be tested for controlled substances before
beginning employment with the township. An applicant who tests
positive for controlled substances shall not be hired by the
township.
(2) Random testing. If the township does its own testing, then each
year CDL drivers holding a minimum of 25% of the average number
of CDL driver positions shall undergo random alcohol testing and
CDL drivers holding at least 50% of the average number of CDL
driver positions shall undergo random controlled substances
testing. If the township joins a testing consortium, then those
minimum percentages shall apply to the total pool of CDL drivers
whose employers are part of the consortium. The CDL driver may
be tested at any time during working hours, before, during or after
performing job duties, and the test will be unannounced.
(3) Reasonable-suspicion testing.
(a) The township shall require an employee to submit to an alcohol
and/or controlled substances test when the township has
reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee is under the
influence of alcohol and/or controlled substances or has
otherwise violated the regulations set forth in this Drug and
Alcohol Policy. When the township has reasonable suspicion to
believe that the employee is under the influence of alcohol and/
or controlled substances or has otherwise violated this policy,
the township shall be permitted to search the vehicle and
personal property of such employee during working hours or
whenever the employee is on the township's property or is at
his or her designated workplace. Reasonable suspicion must be
based on specific observations concerning the appearance,
behavior, speech or body odors of the employee. Township
supervisors or officials will be trained to recognize the
indicators of probable controlled substances or alcohol misuse.
The person who makes the determination that reasonable
suspicion exists shall not conduct the drug or alcohol test.
(b) Within two hours after the determination of reasonable
suspicion is made, the employee shall be tested for alcohol and/
§ 47-3 CONCORD CODE § 47-3
47:38
or controlled substances. If the alcohol and/or controlled
substances test is not administered within two hours after
the determination of reasonable suspicion is made, then the
township shall record why the test was not promptly
administered. Under no circumstances shall the employee be
tested for alcohol later than eight hours after the
determination of reasonable suspicion is made or for controlled
substances later than 32 hours after the determination of
reasonable suspicion is made.
(c) A written record shall be made of the observations leading to
an alcohol and/or controlled substances reasonable suspicion
test and shall be signed by the supervisor or township official
who made the observations within 24 hours of the observed
behavior or before the results of the alcohol or controlled
substances test are released, whichever is earlier.
(d) The township will not permit any employee to perform any
safety-sensitive duties after a reasonable suspicion
determination has been made and prior to receipt by the
township of final test results confirming that the employee is
not under the influence of controlled substances or alcohol as
established by the DOT regulations or other applicable law.
Depending on the availability of work, the township will
determine whether to reassign the employee to non-safetysensitive
work or to place the employee on leave without pay. If
the test results are negative for controlled substances and/or
alcohol as established by the DOT regulations or other
applicable law and if the employee had been placed on leave
without pay, then the employee will be paid for the time he
would have worked pending receipt of the test results.
(4) Mandatory postaccident testing.
(a) Within two hours after an accident, as defined herein, an
employee shall be tested for alcohol and controlled substances.
If an alcohol and controlled substances test is not administered
within two hours after the accident, the township shall record
why the test was not promptly administered. Under no
circumstances shall an employee be tested for alcohol later
than eight hours after the accident or for controlled substances
later than 32 hours after the accident.
(b) An accident is defined as involving:
[1] A fatality.
[2] The employee receiving a citation under state or local law
for a moving violation, which violation occurs during
working hours.
§ 47-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 47-3
47:39
[3] Bodily injury that requires a person to be transported
away from the scene for medical treatment.
[4] Damage to any vehicle that requires the vehicle to be
towed away from the scene by a tow truck or another
vehicle, or other substantial damage to any property.
[5] Any job-related incident involving the apparent violation of
a safety rule or standard, which did or could have resulted
in serious injury or property damage.
(c) An employee who is subject to postaccident testing shall
remain readily available for such testing or else may be
deemed by the township to have refused to submit to testing.
Refusal to submit to controlled substances testing will be
considered an act of insubordination, with disciplinary and
employment consequences. However, this availability
requirement does not require the employee to delay necessary
medical attention for himself, herself or others or to delay
obtaining assistance as needed due to the accident. If, as a
consequence of an accident, an employee is seriously injured
and cannot provide a specimen at the time of the accident, the
employee must provide the necessary authorization for
obtaining hospital records and other documents that will
indicate whether there were any controlled substances or
alcohol in his or her system at the time of the accident. After an
accident, an employee may not consume alcohol or any
controlled substances before being tested.
(5) Return-to-duty testing. Before an employee may, if at all, return to
duty after testing positive for alcohol or controlled substances, the
employee shall undergo a return-to-duty alcohol test which
indicates an alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 and a return-toduty
controlled substances test which verifies a negative result for
controlled substances as set forth in the DOT regulations or other
applicable law.
(6) Follow-up testing. An employee who returns to duty after testing
positive for the use of alcohol and/or controlled substances shall be
subject to unannounced follow-up testing for up to 60 months from
the date of the employee's return to duty. The employee shall be
subject to a minimum of six unannounced alcohol and/or controlled
substances tests during the first 12 months following his or her
return to duty. Follow-up tests may be conducted at any time during
working hours, before, during or after performing job duties.
(7) Testing procedures. Tests and testing procedures for alcohol and/or
controlled substances, including but not limited to blood and urine
testing, evidentiary breath testing and blood alcohol testing, shall
comply with applicable DOT regulations and other applicable law.
Controlled substances include but are not limited to cocaine,
§ 47-3 CONCORD CODE § 47-3
47:40
marijuana, opiates (including heroin), amphetamines,
phencyclidine (PCP) and prescription drugs that adversely affect
the driver's ability to safely operate a commercial motor vehicle
and any other substance defined as a controlled substance under
applicable law. Blood alcohol testing may be used in reasonable
suspicion and postaccident testing where an evidentiary breath
test (EBT) is not readily available. Blood alcohol testing may also
be performed if the employee is unable to provide sufficient breath
for a breath test.
C. Administration and recordkeeping.
(1) Notification of test results. The township will notify each
employment applicant (upon request) and each employee of the
results of alcohol and/or controlled substances tests of the
applicant or employee conducted pursuant to the DOT regulations
and other applicable law. Employees who test positive will also be
advised specifically as to what drug or the amount of alcohol that
was discovered.
(2) Recordkeeping. The township shall comply with the DOT's
recordkeeping regulations. All of the records relating to the
administration and results of the township's alcohol and controlled
substances testing program for its employees shall be maintained
for a minimum period of five years, except that individual negative
test results shall be maintained for a minimum of one year. At its
discretion, the township may delegate the recordkeeping and
reporting requirements to an outside agency or testing consortium.
(3) Medical Review Officer. The township will utilize a Medical Review
Officer who is a licensed doctor of medicine or osteopathy with
knowledge of drug abuse disorders to review drug test results. The
Medical Review Officer shall retain the reports of individual test
results for a minimum of five years.
(4) Access to test results and findings. No person may obtain the
individual test results retained by the township and the township's
designated Medical Review Officer, and neither the township nor
any Medical Review Officer shall release the individual test results
of any employee to any person, except to the tested individual, to
agents of the township, to persons to whom disclosure is necessary
for the orderly imposition of appropriate sanctions and as required
or permitted by law, without first obtaining written authorization
from the tested individual.
D. General regulations concerning use, possession and sale of alcohol or
controlled substances on the township's property.
(1) All employees shall be subject to discipline pursuant to this policy,
including but not limited to termination, for any of the following
actions, which are hereby prohibited:
§ 47-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 47-3
47:41
(a) Testing positive for controlled substances as set forth in the
DOT regulations or other applicable law;
(b) Testing positive for alcohol in a concentration equal to or above
the level of legal intoxication established by DOT regulations
or other applicable law;
(c) Using, possessing, selling or being under the influence of
controlled substances or alcohol while on duty;
(d) Refusing to submit to a test for controlled substances or
alcohol as permitted by the DOT regulations or other
applicable law or this policy;
(e) Using controlled substances or alcohol within four hours
before performing safety-sensitive functions;
(f) Using alcohol or controlled substances before the postaccident
tests are administered;
(g) Performing or allowing an employee to perform a safetysensitive
function with the knowledge that the employee is
under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances or has
used alcohol or controlled substances within four hours before
performing the safety-sensitive function;
(h) Refusing to consent to the township's request, upon reasonable
suspicion, to search the vehicle or personal property of any
employee during working hours or while the employee is on
the township's property or designated workplace;
(i) Failing to keep prescription drugs in their original container
identifying the drug, dosage, date of prescription and
physician;
(j) Failing to notify one's supervisor of any therapeutic drug use
prior to driving or performing a safety-sensitive duty that could
impair the employee's working ability or alertness; or
(k) Otherwise violating this policy, the DOT regulations or other
applicable law.
(2) Alcohol concentration of 0.02 to 0.039. An employee whose test
result shows a blood alcohol concentration of 0.02 to 0.039 shall be
removed immediately from safety-sensitive functions for 24 hours.
The township may suspend such employee without pay for this time
and may terminate the employee for any subsequent violation of
this policy. Any other employee whose test result shows a blood
alcohol concentration of 0.02 to 0.039 may be suspended without
pay for 24 hours.
(3) Violations of policy; disciplinary action.
§ 47-3 CONCORD CODE § 47-3
47:42
(a) An employee will be deemed to have violated this policy
whenever, among other things, the employee tests positive for
alcohol or drugs, regardless of whether a supervisor or anyone
else determines that the employee is impaired or that the
employee's job performance was adversely affected.
(b) An employee who tests positive will immediately be sent to a
substance abuse professional (SAP) for an examination. The
employee shall not be permitted to return to work until
authorized to do so by the SAP. During this time period, the
township may consider the employee to be suspended without
pay.
(c) An employee who tests positive must:
[1] Be examined by a SAP acceptable to the township;
[2] Comply with all recommendations of the SAP;
[3] Periodically submit reports from any person or group
designated by the SAP, confirming that the employee is
complying with any after care recommendations;
[4] Pass a return-to-work controlled substance and alcohol
test;
[5] Sign an agreement releasing all medical information
relating to controlled substances or alcohol use to the
township so that the township can determine whether the
employee can perform the job safely and providing for
follow-up testing upon demand for a period of 60 months
and, further, providing that the employee may be
immediately discharged for a second violation of this
policy.
(d) Any employee deemed to have violated this policy a second
time may be discharged.
(e) Anything in this policy to the contrary, notwithstanding if any
employee tests positive during postaccident testing or violates
Subsection D(5) or (6) of this policy, the township shall have
the option of immediately discharging the employee.
(4) Training program.
(a) The township will establish a training program for all
employees, which will address alcohol and controlled
substance issues and review the requirements under this
policy and the DOT regulations.
(b) The township will establish a training program for supervisors,
which will consist of at least 60 minutes of training on alcohol
§ 47-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 47-3
47:43
misuse and at least an additional 60 minutes of training on
drug use.
(5) Off-duty conduct. Employees are expected to refrain from engaging
in any off-duty or off-premises controlled substances or alcoholrelated
use and/or conduct which may affect their work
performance or which may cause adverse publicity to the township.
The township may discipline employees, up to and including
termination, for such off-duty conduct.
(6) Leave of absence.
(a) A permanent employee with at least one year of service shall
be permitted to take a leave of absence for the purpose of
undergoing treatment pursuant to an approved program for
alcoholism or drug abuse. The leave of absence must be
requested before the Commission of any acts subject to
disciplinary action.
(b) If relapse occurs and the employee (with at least one year of
service) comes forward voluntarily before the Commission with
any acts subject to disciplinary action, the employee will be
referred to a substance abuse professional for evaluation, and
the township will make any employment decisions on a caseby-
case basis in conjunction with the township's obligations
under the Americans with Disabilities Act, Family and Medical
Leave Act and other applicable law.
(c) Employees requesting to return to work from any leave of
absence for controlled substance or alcohol abuse shall be
required to submit to testing as provided herein. Failure to do
so will subject the employee to discharge without the receipt of
a prior warning letter.
E. Outside contractors.
(1) Any outside contractor working for the township who uses CDL
drivers to perform work for the township shall provide to the
township, prior to doing any work, a notarized affidavit certifying
that the contractor's employees covered by the DOT CDL
regulations are participating in a valid drug and alcohol testing
program and shall submit to the township a copy of the contractor's
most recent DOT reporting form setting forth test results.
(2) Third-party or contractor employees, while on the township's
property, will also be subject to this policy, with violations resulting
in removal from the premises.
F. Miscellaneous.
(1) The township reserves the right to add to, change or modify any
portion or all of this policy in its sole discretion and to terminate
§ 47-3 CONCORD CODE § 47-3
47:44
§ 47-4. Applicability.
The scope of personnel administration shall be all offices and positions of
the township and divided into the classified service and the exempt service.
Chapter 53
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning Officer — See Ch. 60.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
any employee at any time, except as those rights are restricted by
law. The township accepts no liability in the event of an alleged
breach of any of the policies or procedures set forth in this policy.
(2) This policy will be limited by any applicable federal or state law or
municipal ordinance. Any portion of this policy which directly
conflicts with such a law or ordinance will not be implemented but
shall be severable and shall not affect the validity and enforcement
of the remainder of the policy.
(3) This policy (and any accompanying document executed or
delivered pursuant to or in connection with the policy) is not
intended to and shall not confer any contractual or other rights or
claims in favor of the township's employees.
(4) Any failure to implement the policy or any part thereof and any
variation, addition or omission to the procedures set forth in the
policy shall not confer any contractual or other rights or claims in
favor of the employee not otherwise conferred by law. The
employee remains employed at will.
A. The classified service shall include all positions in the township service
that are not specifically placed in the exempt service by this chapter.
B. The exempt service shall include the following:
(1) All elected officials and members of boards and commissions.
(2) The Township Manager.
(3) Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without pay.
(4) Consultants and counsel rendering professional service.
(5) Such positions involving seasonal or part-time employment as may
be specifically placed in the exempt service by the personnel rules.
§ 47-3 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 47-4
47:45
§ 53-1. Title.
A commission, to be known as the "Planning Commission of Concord
Township," is hereby created and established.
§ 53-2. Membership; appointment; terms of office. [Amended
4-7-1969 by Ord. No. 49; 7-7-1970 by Ord. No. 56; 1-5-1998 by Ord.
No. 221; 7-7-2015 by Ord. No. 365]
Said Commission shall be composed of nine citizens of the Township of
Concord, who shall be appointed by the Township Supervisors and shall
receive compensation for attending hearings and for the performance of
their duties at a rate not to exceed $1,200 per annum, payable quarterly at
a rate of $100 per month, or at such compensation as may be established
by the Board of Supervisors by resolution. Commission members appointed
after July 1, 1970, shall serve for a term of four years or until their
successors are appointed and qualified, except that the terms of members
so appointed after July 1, 1970, shall be so fixed at the time of appointment
so that no more than three members shall be reappointed or replaced
during any future calendar year. Vacancies in the office of any member shall
be filled by the Township Supervisors for the unexpired term.
§ 53-3. Organization; rules and regulations. [Amended 1-5-1998 by
Ord. No. 221]
Said Planning Commission shall elect its own Chairman, Vice Chairman and
Secretary and shall create and fill such other offices as it may determine.
The Commission may make and alter rules for its procedure consistent with
ordinances of the Township and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
It shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings,
determinations, etc., which record shall be a public record.
§ 53-4. Report. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
Said Planning Commission shall annually make a report by March 1 to
the Township Supervisors of its transactions. Said Planning Commission
may also, from time to time, make recommendations to the Township
Supervisors with respect to any and all matters referred to in this section
and, in so doing, shall have regard for the present conditions and future
needs of the Township. Any plans or recommendations so submitted shall
not be effective or binding unless regularly approved and adopted by
ordinance or resolution of the Township Supervisors and, after such
approval and adoption, shall be subject to revision and change from time to
time as the Township Supervisors may deem expedient.
§ 53-5. Questions and proposals.
The Township Supervisors shall, from time to time, submit to the Planning
Commission any question or proposal relating to any of the matters referred
§ 47-4 CONCORD CODE § 53-5
47:46
to in § 53-4 hereof or any other matter relating to the growth and
development of the Township, including any plans or proposed plans for the
development of any particular section of the Township, and it shall be the
duty of said Planning Commission, in due course, to make a report with
respect to any such question or proposal, with its recommendation thereon.
Chapter 60
ZONING OFFICER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 53.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
§ 60-1. Creation of office.
The Office of Zoning Officer is hereby created by the Township of Concord.
§ 60-2. Appointment.
The Zoning Officer shall be appointed for an indefinite term by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors of the Township. The Zoning Officer shall serve
at the pleasure of the Board of Supervisors and he may be removed at any
time.
§ 60-3. Compensation.
The compensation of the Zoning Officer shall be as fixed from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 60-4. Powers and duties.22
The Zoning Officer shall administer Chapter 210, Zoning, in accordance
with its literal terms and shall not have the power to permit any
construction or any use or change of use which does not conform to said
chapter. He shall perform the duties specified by the Board of Supervisors
of the Township and imposed on him by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 53-5 ZONING OFFICER § 60-4
60:47
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 70
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Transient retail merchants — See Ch. 176.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
Zoning use approval — See Ch. 214.
§ 60-4 CONCORD CODE § 60-4
70:48
ARTICLE I
Display, Sale and Distribution of Obscene Materials
[Adopted 10-3-1995 as Ord. No. 198]
§ 70-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the authority granted in the Second Class Township Code23 to
prohibit nuisances; to promote the health, cleanliness, comfort and safety of
the citizens of Concord Township and the authority of political subdivisions
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; to enact local ordinances to
regulate, inter alia, the sale, distribution, display and exhibition of and
activities concerning obscene and other sexual material as provided for in
18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903(k) and as upheld by the United States District Court for
the Eastern District of Pennsylvania in Brown v. Pornography Commission
of Lower Southampton Township, 620 F.Supp 1199 (1985), the Township of
Concord enacts the following provisions.
§ 70-2. Prohibited acts; definitions.
A. Offenses defined. No person, knowing the obscene character of the
materials or performances involved, shall, within the Township of
Concord:
(1) Display or cause or permit the display of any explicit sexual
materials as defined in Subsection C in or on any window,
showcase, newsstand, display rack, billboard, display board,
viewing screen, motion-picture screen, marquee or similar place in
such manner that the display is visible from any public street,
highway, sidewalk, transportation facility or other public
thoroughfare; or in any business or commercial establishment
where minors, as a part of the general public or otherwise, are or
will probably be exposed to view all or any part of such materials;
(2) Sell, lend, distribute, exhibit, give away or show any obscene
materials to any person 18 years of age or older; offer to sell, lend,
distribute, exhibit or give away or show or have in his possession
with intent to sell, lend, distribute, exhibit or give away or show any
obscene materials to any person 18 years of age or older; or
knowingly advertise any obscene materials in any manner;
(3) Design, copy, draw, photograph, print, utter, publish or in any
manner manufacture or prepare any obscene materials;
(4) Write, print, publish, utter or cause to be written, printed,
published or uttered any advertisement or notice of any kind giving
information, directly or indirectly, stating or purporting to state
where, how, from whom or by what means any obscene materials
can be purchased, obtained or had;
23.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 70-1 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-2
70:49
(5) Produce, present or direct any obscene performance or participate
in a portion thereof that is obscene or that contributes to its
obscenity; or
(6) Hire, employ, use or permit any minor child to do or assist in doing
any act or thing mentioned in this subsection.
B. 24Definitions. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection E, the terms
used in this article shall have the meanings indicated in this subsection:
COMMUNITY — For the purpose of applying the contemporary
community standards in this article, the term "community" means the
state.
KNOWING — As used in Subsection A, the term "knowing" means
having general knowledge of or reason to know or a belief or ground
for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of the character
and content of any material or performance described therein which
is reasonably susceptible to examination by the person charged with
violation of this article.
MATERIAL — Any literature, including any book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, storypaper, bumper sticker, comic book or writing; or any
figure, visual representation or image, including any drawing,
photograph, picture, videotape or motion picture.
NUDE — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or showing
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion
thereof below the top of the nipple.
OBSCENE — Any material or performance, if:
PERFORMANCE — Any play, dance or other live exhibition performed
before an audience.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — In a sexual context, flagellation or
torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or a
mask or in a bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound
or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one who is nude or so
clothed.
The average person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest;
(1)
The subject matter depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct of a type described in this article; and
(2)
The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, educational or scientific value.
(3)
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 70-2 CONCORD CODE § 70-2
70:50
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or
descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including sexual intercourse, anal or oral sodomy and sexual
bestiality, and patently offensive representations or descriptions of
masturbation, excretory functions, sadomasochistic abuse and lewd
exhibitions of the genitals.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Any conveyance, premises or place
used for or in connection with public passenger transportation, whether
by air, rail, motor vehicle or any other method, including aircraft,
watercraft, railroad cars, buses and air, boat, railroad and bus terminals
and stations.
C. Dissemination to minors. No person shall knowingly disseminate, by
sale, loan or otherwise, explicit sexual materials to a minor. "Explicit
sexual materials," as used in this subsection, means:
(1) Materials which are obscene;
(2) Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture film,
videotape or similar visual representation or image of a person or
portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or
(3) Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however
reproduced, or sound recording which contains any matter
enumerated in Subsection C(2) or explicit and detailed verbal
descriptions or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual
conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is
harmful to minors.
D. Admitting minor to show. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly
to exhibit for monetary consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to
a minor an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a minor for a
monetary consideration to premises whereon there is exhibited a
motion-picture show or other presentation or performance which, in
whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic
abuse and which is harmful to minors, except that the foregoing shall
not apply to any minor accompanied by his parent.
E. Definitions. As used in Subsections C and D of this section, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HARMFUL TO MINORS — That quality of any description or
representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sadomasochistic abuse when it:
Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest
of minors;
(1)
Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community
as a whole with respect to what is suitable materials for minors;
and
(2)
§ 70-2 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-2
70:51
§ 70-3. Exemption.
Nothing in this article shall apply to any recognized historical society or
museum accorded charitable status by the federal government, any county,
city, borough, township or town library, any public library, any library of any
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of or reason to know or a
belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry
of both:
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing
of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — Flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is clad in undergarments or a mask or in bizarre costume,
or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual
intercourse, sexual bestiality or physical contact with a person's clothed
or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a
female, breast.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female
genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political,
educational or scientific value for minors.
(3)
The character and content of any material or performance
described herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by
the person charged with violation of this article; and
(1)
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake
shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the person
charged with violation of this article made a reasonable bona fide
attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
(2)
F. (R1e)quiring sale as a condition of business dealings. No person shall
knowingly require any distributor or retail seller as a condition of sale
or delivery for resale or consignment of any literature, book, magazine,
pamphlet, newspaper, storypaper, paper, comic book, writing, drawing,
photograph, videotape, figure or image or any written or printed matter
or any article or instrument to purchase; or take by consignment for
purposes of sale, resale or distribution any obscene literature, book,
magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, storypaper, paper, comic book,
writing, drawing, photograph, videotape, figure or image or any written
or printed matter of an obscene nature or any article or instrument of
an obscene nature.
§ 70-2 CONCORD CODE § 70-3
70:52
school, college or university or any archive or library under the supervision
and control of the commonwealth or a political subdivision.
§ 70-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or permits the
violation of any provision of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in this article.
§ 70-3 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-4
70:53

ARTICLE II
Establishments Serving Alcoholic Beverages
[Adopted 10-3-1995 as Ord. No. 199]
§ 70-5. Findings.
A. Certain businesses or commercial establishments located in the
Township of Concord dealing in alcoholic beverages provide adult
entertainment for their patrons, including but not limited to nude or
nearly nude dancing, and permit certain sexual conduct.
B. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Concord determines that
such activities and conduct in establishments dealing in alcoholic
beverages contribute to undesirable behavior and create disturbances
that are injurious to the citizens of the Township of Concord.
C. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Concord believes that this
article is necessary:
(1) To enhance the quality of life within the township;
(2) To promote a climate conducive to the harmonious growth and
development of the township and to the soundness of the economic
base of the township;
(3) To preserve and stabilize the township's neighborhoods;
(4) To protect property values;
(5) To prevent blight and the deterioration of the township's
neighborhoods; and
(6) To decrease the incidence of crime, disorderly conduct and other
secondary effects of adult entertainment when occurring in
establishments dealing in alcoholic beverages, which secondary
effects adversely impact on the health, safety and general welfare
concerns of the Township of Concord.
D. The Twenty-First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States of
America gives the states, including the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
(the "commonwealth"), broad powers to regulate alcohol and, in such
regulation of alcohol, confers more than the normal state authority over
public health, welfare and morals.
E. The commonwealth's broad powers under the Twenty-First Amendment
to regulate alcohol applies to, inter alia, alcoholic liquors, alcohol and
malt brewed beverages; amending, revising, consolidating and
changing the laws relating thereto; regulating and restricting the
manufacture, purchase, sale, possession, consumption, importation,
transportation, furnishing, holding in bond, holding in storage, traffic in
and use of alcoholic liquors, alcoholic and malt brewed beverages and
§ 70-5 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-5
70:55
§ 70-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOL — Ethyl alcohol of any degree of proof, originally produced by
the distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted with
or without water, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall include
synthetic ethyl alcohol but shall not mean nor include ethyl alcohol, whether
or not diluted, that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for
beverage purposes.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE —
the persons engaged or employed therein; and providing for local
option and repealing existing laws.
F. The commonwealth's broad powers under the Twenty-First Amendment
extend equally to establishments that are licensed by the
commonwealth to sell alcoholic beverages and to establishments that
are not licensed by the commonwealth which deal in alcoholic
beverages.
G. The commonwealth has delegated certain of its powers under the
Twenty-First Amendment to municipalities, cities, boroughs,
incorporated towns or townships of this commonwealth, including the
Township of Concord.
H. Among the certain powers of the commonwealth under the Twenty-First
Amendment delegated to the Township of Concord are the powers to:
(1) Prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages within township limits
pursuant to a vote of the local electorate; and
(2) Prohibit any and all amusements in establishments licensed by the
commonwealth to sell alcoholic beverages.
I. The commonwealth's power of prohibition under the Twenty-First
Amendment that has been delegated to the Township of Concord
includes the lesser power to regulate.
J. Nothing in the commonwealth's Liquor Code, 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.,
shall be construed to preempt the right of the Township of Concord to
enforce any local ordinances and codes dealing with health and welfare
issues.
Any liquor, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented or other alcoholic
beverage or combination of liquors and mixed liquor, a part of which
is spirituous, vinous, fermented or otherwise alcoholic, including all
drinks or drinkable liquids, preparations or mixtures, and reused,
recovered or redistilled denatured alcohol usable or taxable for
beverage purposes which contains more than 1/2 of 1% alcohol by
volume.
A.
§ 70-5 CONCORD CODE § 70-6
70:56
ESTABLISHMENTS DEALING IN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any
business or commercial establishment (whether open to the public at large
or where entrance is limited by cover charge or membership requirement),
including those licensed by the commonwealth for sale and/or service of
alcoholic beverages, and any bottle club; hotel; motel; restaurant;
nightclub; country club; cabaret; meeting facility utilized by any religious,
social, fraternal or similar organization; business or commercial
establishment where a product or article is sold, dispensed, served or
provided with the knowledge, actual or implied, that the same will be
or is intended to be mixed, combined with or drunk in connection or
combination with an alcoholic beverage on the premises of said business or
commercial establishment; or business or commercial establishment where
the consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted. A private residence,
whether permanent or temporary in nature, is not an establishment dealing
in alcoholic beverages.
PERSON — A natural person, association or corporation. Whenever used
in a clause prescribing or imposing a fine, imprisonment or both, the
term "person," as applied to an association, shall mean the partners or
members thereof and, as applied to corporation, shall mean the officers
thereof, except as to incorporated clubs, the term "person" shall mean such
individual or individuals who, under the bylaws of such club, shall have
jurisdiction over the possession and sale of alcoholic beverages therein.
§ 70-7. Prohibited acts.
Any malt or brewed beverage, beer, lager beer, ale, porter or similar
fermented malt beverage, containing 1/2 of 1% or more alcohol by
volume, by whatever name such beverage may be called.
B.
Any whiskey or alcoholic distillate from a fermented mash of grain,
capable of being used for beverage purposes.
C.
A. No person shall expose to public view his or her genitals, including,
without limitation, the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, even if covered; pubic area; vulva; anus; anal cleft or cleavage;
buttocks; or any simulation thereof in an establishment dealing in
alcoholic beverages. For purposes of this subsection, the term
"buttocks" shall include the area at the rear of the body which lies
between two imaginary lines running parallel to the ground when a
person is standing, the first or top such line drawn at the top of the
cleavage of the nates (i.e., the prominence formed by the muscles
running from the back of the hip to the back of the leg) and the second
or bottom line drawn at the lowest visible point of this cleavage or the
lowest point of the curvature of the fleshy protuberance, whichever is
lower, and between two imaginary lines on each side of the body, which
lines are perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines
described above and which perpendicular lines are drawn through the
point at which each nate meets the outer side of each leg. This article
would be violated, therefore, if any portion of this area is visible from
any vantage point.
§ 70-6 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-7
70:57
B. No female shall expose to public view any portion of the breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola, at its highest point, or
simulation thereof, in an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages.
This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human
female breast but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the
human breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, opaque leotard,
bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided that the areola is not
exposed or visible in whole or in part.
C. No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing
in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any person to expose to
public view his or her genitals, including, without limitation, the human
male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered; pubic area;
vulva; anus; anal cleft or cleavage; buttocks, as defined in Subsection A
hereinabove; or any simulation thereof within the establishment
dealing in alcoholic beverages.
D. No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment dealing
in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit any female person to
expose to public view any portion of her breasts, as defined in
Subsection B hereinabove, or any simulation thereof within the
establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages.
E. No person shall engage in and no person maintaining, owning or
operating an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer
or permit any sexual intercourse; masturbation; sodomy; bestiality; oral
copulation; flagellation; sexual act which is prohibited by law; the
touching, caressing or fondling of the female breast, as that term is
defined in Subsection B hereinabove, buttocks, as that term is defined
in Subsection A hereinabove, anus or genitals, including, without
limitation, the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
covered; or the simulation thereof within an establishment dealing in
alcoholic beverages.
F. No person shall cause and no person maintaining, owning or operating
an establishment dealing in alcoholic beverages shall suffer or permit
the exposition or availability of any graphic presentation, including
photographs, pictures or the projection of film, which depicts human
genitals, including, without limitation, the human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if covered; pubic area; vulva; anus; anal
cleft or cleavage; buttocks, as that term is defined in Subsection A
hereinabove; female breast, as that term is defined in Subsection B
hereinabove; sexual intercourse; masturbation; sodomy; bestiality; oral
copulation; flagellation; any sexual act prohibited by law; the touching,
caressing or fondling of the female breast, as that term is defined in
Subsection B hereinabove, buttocks, as that term is defined in
Subsection A hereinabove, anus or genitals, including, without
limitation, the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
covered; scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are
employed to depict or drawings are employed to portray any of the
prohibited activities described in Subsections A through F, inclusive,
§ 70-7 CONCORD CODE § 70-7
70:58
§ 70-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
hereinabove; or any simulation thereof within any establishment
dealing in alcoholic beverages.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or permits the
violation of any provision of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in this article.
§ 70-7 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-8
70:59

ARTICLE III
Adult Entertainment Businesses
[Adopted 11-7-1995 as Ord. No. 201]
§ 70-9. Purpose.
§ 70-10. Findings.
The Board of Supervisors finds:
A. Pursuant to the authority granted in the Second Class Township Code25
to prohibit nuisances, to promote the health, cleanliness, comfort and
safety of the citizens of Concord Township and to regulate the time of
opening and closing and the conduct of places of public entertainment,
amusement and recreation, the Township of Concord enacts this article
to minimize and control the adverse effects of adult entertainment
businesses and thereby to protect the health, safety and welfare of its
citizens, protect the citizens from increased crime, preserve the quality
of life, preserve the property values and character of surrounding
neighborhoods and deter the spread of blight.
B. The Board of Supervisors has determined that locational criteria alone
does not adequately protect the health, safety and general welfare of
the people of the township and that licensing is a legitimate and
reasonable means of accountability to ensure that operators of adult
entertainment businesses comply with reasonable regulations and to
ensure that operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to be
used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation.
C. The Board of Supervisors does not intend this article to suppress any
speech activities protected by the First Amendment but to enact a
content-neutral ordinance which addresses the secondary effects of
adult entertainment businesses.
A. And it adopts by reference the adverse secondary effects of adult
entertainment businesses presented in hearings and in reports and
adopted as part of Township Ordinance No. 200, enacted November 7,
1995.26
B. That the finding noted in Subsection A above raises substantial
governmental concerns.
C. That adult entertainment businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those
substantial governmental concerns.
D. That a reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the
25.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Zoning, §§ 210-119C, 210-127C, 210-136C, 210-144C,
210-152C, 210-238A(4) and 210-238E.
§ 70-9 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-10
70:61
§ 70-11. Definitions.
operators of the adult entertainment businesses. Further, such a
licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on
the operators to see that the adult entertainment business is run in a
manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and
employees, as well as the citizens of the township. It is appropriate to
require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator
of the adult entertainment business, fully in possession and control of
the premises and activities occurring therein.
E. That the removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient
lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual
activity occurring in adult theaters.
F. That requiring licensees of adult entertainment businesses to keep
information regarding current employees and certain past employees
will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by
facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by
preventing minors from working in such establishments.
G. That the disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the adult
entertainment business, where such information is substantially related
to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses,
will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
H. That it is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain
employees who may engage in the conduct which this article is
designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
I. That the fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been
convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption
that the applicant is likely to engage in that conduct in contravention of
this article.
J. That the barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses
for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct
which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
K. That the general welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the
township will be promoted by the enactment of this article.
A. The defined terms in Chapter 210, Zoning, § 210-152C, are hereby
adopted by reference and include the definitions of adult arcade; adult
bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store; adult cabaret; adult
motion-picture theater; adult theater; employee; escort; escort agency;
establishment; nude model studio; nudity or a state of nudity; person;
seminude or in a seminude condition; sexual encounter center; sexually
§ 70-10 CONCORD CODE § 70-11
70:62
oriented business; specified anatomical areas; specified sexual
activities; and substantial enlargement.
B. As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of or reason to know or a
belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry
of both:
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate an adult
entertainment business has been issued, as well as the individual listed
as an applicant on the application for a license, and in the case of
an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued
authorizing employment in an adult entertainment business.
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following offenses:
The character and content of any material or performance
described herein which is reasonably susceptible to examination by
a licensee or person;
(1)
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake
shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the licensee or
person made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true
age of such minor.
(2)
Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of
obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a
minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of
child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency
with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual
assault; molestation of a child; gambling; distribution of a
controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described
above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries,
for which:
Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;
(a)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense; or
(b)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions
are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of
(c)
(1)
§ 70-11 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-11
70:63
§ 70-12. License required; application requirements.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF AN ADULT
ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month
period.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on
the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant.
(2)
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
(2)
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
(3)
A. It is unlawful:
(1) For any person to operate an adult entertainment business without
a valid adult entertainment business license issued by the township
pursuant to this article;
(2) For any person who operates an adult entertainment business to
employ a person to work for the adult entertainment business who
is not licensed as an adult entertainment business employee by the
township pursuant to this article; or
(3) For any person to obtain employment with an adult entertainment
business without having secured an adult entertainment business
employee license pursuant to this article.
B. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
township.
C. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
article. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the township to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in
this article.
D. If a person who wishes to operate an adult entertainment business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as the
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate an adult entertainment
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license
as the applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following
§ 70-11 CONCORD CODE § 70-12
70:64
section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
E. The completed application for an adult entertainment business license
shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the
following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least 18 years of
age;
(b) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name
and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and submit a copy of the partnership
agreement, if any;
(c) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in
good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation and
qualified and authorized to conduct business in Pennsylvania,
the names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal
stockholders, the name of the registered corporate agent and
the address of the registered office for service of process.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the adult entertainment business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state
the adult entertainment business' fictitious name and submit the
required registration documents.
(3) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this
article and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved and the
date, place and jurisdiction of each.
(4) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has
had a previous license under this article or other similar adult
entertainment business ordinance from another municipality or
county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and
location of the adult entertainment business for which the permit
was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial,
suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person
residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or
an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is
licensed under this article whose license has previously been
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of
the adult entertainment business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation.
§ 70-12 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-12
70:65
(5) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds
any other licenses under this article or other similar adult
entertainment business ordinance from another municipality or
county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed
businesses.
(6) The specific classification of adult entertainment use license for
which the applicant is filing.
(7) The location of the proposed adult entertainment business,
including a legal description of the property, street address and
telephone number(s), if any.
(8) The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
(9) A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
(10) The applicant's driver's permit number, social security number and
or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number.
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
(12) A current certificate and straight-line drawing, prepared within 30
days prior to application by a registered land surveyor, depicting
the property lines, the property to be certified, and:
(a) Any of the following:
[1] A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is
used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.
[2] A public or private educational facility, including but not
limited to child day-care facilities, nursery schools,
preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private
schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle
schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary
schools, continuation schools, special education schools,
junior colleges and universities; the term "school" includes
the school grounds but does not include the facilities used
primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a
school.
[3] A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic
beverage control regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania;
[4] Any other adult entertainment use.
§ 70-12 CONCORD CODE § 70-12
70:66
(b) Located:
[1] Within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified:Within 800
feet of a boundary of a residential district, as defined in
Chapter 210, Zoning.
[2] Within 500 feet of:
[a] A public park or recreational area which has been
designated for park or recreational activities including
but not limited to park, playground, nature trails,
swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or
tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness
areas, or other similar public land within the township
which is under the control, operation, or management
of the township park and recreation authorities.
[b] An entertainment business which is oriented primarily
towards children or family entertainment.27
[3] Within 400 feet of the right-of-way line of United States
Route 1 (Baltimore Pike), Wilmington West Chester Pike
(Route 202) or Pennsylvania Highway Route 322
(Conchester Highway).
(13) If an applicant wishes to operate an adult entertainment business
which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of
less than 150 square feet of floor space, films, video cassettes,
other video reproductions or live entertainment which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the
applicant shall also comply with the application requirements set
forth in Subsection E(12).
F. Before any applicant may be issued an adult entertainment business
employee license, the applicant shall submit, on a form to be provided
by the township, the following information:
(1) The applicant's name or any other names (including stage names)
or aliases used by the individual;
(2) The applicant's age, date and place of birth;
(3) The applicant's height, weight, hair and eye color;
(4) The applicant's present residence address and telephone number;
(5) The applicant's present business address and telephone number;
(6) The date, issuing state and number of the applicant's driver's
license or other identification card information;
(7) The applicant's social security number; and
27.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 70-12 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-12
70:67
§ 70-13. Issuance of license.
(8) Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
G. The following shall be attached to the application form for an adult
entertainment business employee license, as provided above:
(1) A color photograph of the applicant, clearly showing the applicant's
face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by any
police department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints
shall be paid by the applicant.
(2) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the
five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant previously operated
or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, municipality,
state or country, any business or has ever had a license, permit or
authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended or has
had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation
or suspension, the applicant shall state the name and location of
the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
revoked or suspended and the name of the issuing or denying
jurisdiction and shall describe in full the reason for the denial,
revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation
or suspension shall be attached to the application.28
(3) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity, as defined in this article, and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved and the date, place and
jurisdiction of each.
A. Upon the filing of said application in a fully completed form for an adult
entertainment business employee license, the township shall issue a
temporary license to said applicant. The application shall then be
referred to the appropriate township official and/or consultant for an
investigation to be made on such information as is contained on the
application. The application process shall be completed within 30 days
from the date the completed application is filed. After the investigation,
the township shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a
preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following
findings is true:
(1) The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;
(2) The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 70-12 CONCORD CODE § 70-13
70:68
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as
defined in this article;
(4) The adult entertainment business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute,
rule or regulation or is prohibited by a particular provision of this
article; or
(5) The applicant has had an adult entertainment business employee
license revoked by the township within two years of the date of the
current application. If the adult entertainment business employee
license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is
immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension or
revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be
subject to appeal as set forth in § 70-18.
B. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the township that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified
criminal activity, as defined in this article, nor committed any act during
the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny
the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be
subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in § 70-14.
C. Within 30 days after receipt of a complete adult entertainment business
application, the township shall approve or deny the issuance of a
license to an applicant. The township shall approve the issuance of a
license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of
the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age.
(2) An applicant or a person with whom an applicant is residing is
overdue in payment to the township of taxes, fees, fines or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to
any business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
(4) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has
been denied a license by the township to operate an adult
entertainment business within the preceding 12 months or whose
license to operate an adult entertainment business has been
revoked within the preceding 12 months.
(5) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this
article.
§ 70-13 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-13
70:69
§ 70-14. Fees.
§ 70-15. Inspection.
(6) The premises to be used for the adult entertainment business has
not been approved by the Fire Marshal and the Building Inspector
as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(7) The license fee required by this article has not been paid.
(8) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with any of the provisions of this article.
D. The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
adult entertainment business and the specific classification of adult
entertainment use for which the license is issued. All licenses shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult
entertainment business so that they may be easily read at any time.
E. The Fire Marshal and the Building Inspector shall complete their
certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance
within 20 days of receipt of the application by the township.
F. An adult entertainment business license shall issue for the specific
classification of adult entertainment use as permitted by ordinance and
applied for.
A. Every application for an adult entertainment business license (whether
for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee of
$1,500.
B. In addition to the application and investigation fee required above,
every adult entertainment business that is granted a license (new or
renewal) shall pay to the township an annual nonrefundable license fee
of $750 within 30 days of license issuance or renewal.
C. Every application for an adult entertainment business employee license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable annual application, investigation and
license fee of $250.
D. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Township
Manager.
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the township,
including the Fire Marshal, Zoning Officer or other official and/or
consultant, to inspect the premises of an adult entertainment business,
for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is
occupied or open for business.
§ 70-13 CONCORD CODE § 70-15
70:70
§ 70-16. Expiration of license.
§ 70-17. Suspension of license.
The township shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it
determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
§ 70-18. Revocation of license.
B. A person who operates an adult entertainment business or his agent or
employee commits a violation of this article if he refuses to permit such
lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for
business.
A. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 70-12. Application
for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date,
and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the date of
expiration of the license will not be extended.
B. When the township denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent
to denial, the township finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became
final.
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this article;
B. Refused to allow an inspection of the adult entertainment business
premises as authorized by this article; or
C. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult
entertainment business premises.
A. The township shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in § 70-17
occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.
B. The township shall revoke a license if it determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
(2) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee knowingly operated the adult entertainment business
during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
§ 70-15 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-18
70:71
§ 70-19. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate an adult entertainment business under the authority of a license at
any place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 70-20. Location of adult entertainment businesses.
(5) A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation or other sex act to occur in
or on the licensed premises; or
(6) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the township, county or state
for any taxes or fees past due.
C. When the township revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year, and the licensee shall not be issued an adult entertainment
business license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the township finds that the basis
for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective.
D. After denial of an application or denial of a renewal of an application or
suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may
seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of
competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly
reviewed by the court.
A. A person commits a violation of this article if that person operates or
causes to be operated an adult entertainment business in any zoning
district other than LI Light Industry District, as defined and described
in Chapter 210, Zoning.
B. A person commits a violation of this article if the person operates or
causes to be operated an adult entertainment business:
(1) Within 1,000 feet of:
(a) A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is
used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.
(b) A public or private educational facility, including but not
limited to child day-care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools,
intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high
schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation
schools, special education schools, junior colleges and
universities; the term "school" includes the school grounds but
does not include the facilities used primarily for another
purpose and only incidentally as a school.
§ 70-18 CONCORD CODE § 70-20
70:72
(c) A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic
beverage control regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(d) Any other adult entertainment use.
(2) Within 800 feet of a boundary of a residential district as defined in
Chapter 210, Zoning.
(3) Within 500 feet of:
(a) A public park or recreational area which has been designated
for park or recreational activities, including but not limited to a
park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir,
athletic field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian/bicycle
path, wilderness area or other similar public land within the
township which is under the control, operation or management
of the township park and recreation authorities.
(b) An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards
children or family entertainment.
(4) Within 400 feet of the right-of-way line of United States Route 1
(Baltimore Pike), Wilmington-West Chester Pike (Route 202) or
Pennsylvania Highway Route 322 (Conchester Highway).
C. A person commits a violation of this article if that person causes or
permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or
transfer of ownership or control of an adult entertainment business
within 1,000 feet of another adult entertainment use.
D. A person commits a violation of this article if that person causes or
permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one
adult entertainment business in the same building, structure or portion
thereof or the increase of floor area of any adult entertainment business
in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another adult
entertainment business.
E. For the purpose of Subsection B of this section, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as
the part of the premises where an adult entertainment business is
conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a use listed in
Subsection B. Presence of a municipal, county or other political
subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and
applying the distance requirements of this section.
F. For purposes of subsection C of this section, the distance between any
two adult entertainment businesses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political
boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each
business is located.
§ 70-20 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-21
70:73
§ 70-21. Viewing rooms.
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment
business which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than
150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment
or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Upon application for an adult entertainment license, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises,
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more
managers' stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures
and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will
not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square
feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the North or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all
areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches. The township may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without the prior approval of the township.
(4) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least
one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain
video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more
managers' stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the managers' stations.
The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight
from the manager's station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the view area
specified in Subsection A(5) remains unobstructed by any doors,
§ 70-21 CONCORD CODE § 70-21
70:74
§ 70-22. Escort agencies.
§ 70-23. Nude model studios.
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as
an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application
filed pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section.
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than 5.0 footcandles,
as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the licensees to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
(10)No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
(11)No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
(12) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the
walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.
(13) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces with no rugs or carpeting.
(14) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of or permanently covered by
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48
inches of the floor.
B. A person having a duty under Subsection A(1) through (14) above
commits a violation of this article if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person commits a violation of this article if the person acts as an
escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18
years.
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
§ 70-21 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-23
70:75
§ 70-24. Public nudity.
§ 70-25. Prohibition against minors.
A person commits a violation of this article if the person knowingly allows a
person under the age of 18 years on the premises of an adult entertainment
business.
§ 70-26. Hours of operation.
No adult entertainment business may remain open at any time between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and between
1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays.
§ 70-27. Exemptions.
It is a defense to prosecution under § 70-24 that a person appearing in a
state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
B. A person under the age of 18 years commits a violation of this article if
the person appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the
premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under
this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a rest room not open
to public view or visible to any other person.
C. A person commits a violation of this article if the person appears in a
state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of
nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed
from the public right-of-way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa or mattress in
any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.
A. It shall be a violation of this article for a person who, knowingly and
intentionally, in an adult entertainment business, appears in a state of
nudity or depicts specified sexual activities.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for a person who, knowingly or
intentionally, in an adult entertainment business, appears in a seminude
condition, unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, shall
be at least 10 feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least
two feet from the floor.
C. It shall be a violation of this article for an employee, while seminude in
an adult entertainment business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any
patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any
gratuity to any employee while said employee is seminude in an adult
entertainment business.
§ 70-23 CONCORD CODE § 70-27
70:76
§ 70-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
A. By a proprietary school licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
C. In a structure:
(1) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for
viewing; and
(2) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
(3) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provision of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
§ 70-27 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 70-28
70:77
Chapter 76
ANIMALS
§ 70-28 CONCORD CODE § 70-28
70:78
ARTICLE I
Dogs Running At Large
[Adopted 5-7-1979 by Ord. No. 113]
§ 76-1. Responsibility of owner or custodian.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog, whether licensed
or not, to fail to keep such dog either confined within an enclosure from
which it cannot escape, firmly secured by means of a collar and chain or
other device so that it cannot stray beyond the premises of the owner or
custodian, under the personal control of and in close proximity to said
owner or custodian or, when engaged in lawful hunting, accompanied by an
owner or custodian.
§ 76-2. Running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog, at any time
whatsoever, to permit such dog to run at large or to cause any damage to
any buildings, lawns, shrubbery or any other real or personal property or to
cause any annoyance to persons in the Township of Concord. Failure of any
such owner or custodian to properly curb and restrain his dog shall subject
him to penalties provided under this article.
§ 76-3. Interference prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any officer in the
enforcement of this article, and it shall be unlawful for any person forcibly
to cut the leash of or to take such dog away from any officer having it in
his possession after having found it running at large unaccompanied by the
owner or custodian.
§ 76-4. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of a Constable of Concord Township or an Animal Control
Officer, to be appointed by the Board of Supervisors, to enforce this article
and to seize any dog allowed to run at large contrary to the provisions of
this article.
§ 76-5. Return to owner.
Where the owner or custodian is known, the enforcement officer may
deliver immediate possession of the dog to him or his representative,
subject to the following conditions:
A. The owner or custodian, in return for getting his dog back before
paying the penalty hereinafter specified, agrees to keep and hold it
thereafter in compliance with the terms of this article; and
B. The owner or custodian recognizes the violation of this article and
agrees to pay a penalty, in accordance with the fine schedule, to the
township at the Secretary's office within five days of said violation.
§ 76-1 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 76-6
70:79
§ 76-6. Reclamation of seized dogs.
If the enforcement officer is unable for any reason to deliver immediate
possession of the dog to its owner or custodian, he shall deliver the same
to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA), and notice
shall be given to the owner or custodian as soon as possible. The owner or
custodian may reclaim the same at the office of the SPCA upon complying
with that organization's rules, subject to the following conditions:
§ 76-7. Failure to pay penalty; abandonment of dogs.29
If the owner or custodian fails to pay the applicable penalty within the fiveday
period, he shall be subject to prosecution before a District Justice or
other court having jurisdiction, and be charged with violation of this article.
If the owner or custodian fails to claim the dog within three days following
seizure, it shall be considered abandoned, and subject to disposition in
accordance with the rules of the SPCA. Such abandonment shall not,
however, relieve the owner or custodian from the consequences of violating
this article.
§ 76-8. Disposal of dogs.
If the ownership of a seized dog cannot be ascertained because such dog
is not carrying any identifying license, such dog may be disposed of in
accordance with the rules of the SPCA.
§ 76-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206; 10-1-2013 by Ord. No. 35430]
A. The owner or custodian, in return for the release of his dog, before
paying the penalty hereinafter specified, agrees to keep and hold it
thereafter in compliance with terms of this article; and
B. The owner or custodian recognizes the violation of this article and
agrees to pay to the township, at the Secretary's office, the penalty as
prescribed in the fine schedule within five days following said release.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provision of this article shall make reimbursement
to the Township of Concord for any fees incurred in the transportation,
boarding and/or handling by the SPCA or by detention of the Animal
Control Officer, in addition to:
(1) A fine of $50 for the second offense in any one calendar year.
(2) A fine of $100 for the third and subsequent offenses in any calendar
year.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
30.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 76-9, Fines; fees, and renumbered
former § 76-10 as § 76-9.
§ 76-6 CONCORD CODE § 76-9
70:80
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Constable,
Animal Control Officer, Code Enforcement Officer or Township
Manager, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth and shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending a notice
of violation to the violator or violators by certified mail or by serving it
personally upon the violator or violators. The notice shall state at least
the following:
(1) A citation to the ordinance involved;
(2) The specific violations;
(3) The date and time, if appropriate;
(4) The amount of the civil penalty;
(5) The nature of the proceeding as being civil;
(6) The time within which the civil penalty is to be paid;
(7) The place of payment; and
(8) The consequences of failure to pay the civil penalty on or before the
due date.
E. In the event that the violator falls to pay to Concord Township the civil
penalty fine on or before the due date, Concord Township shall
commence a civil enforcement proceeding in a court having
jurisdiction.
§ 76-9 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 76-9
70:81
Chapter 79
BAMBOO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 127.
§ 79-1. Purpose.
The provisions of this chapter are enacted to control the planting, growing
or cultivating of bamboo in the Township of Concord so as to control the
introduction of bamboo in Concord Township as well as prevent the trespass
of existing bamboo onto neighboring properties by requiring effective
barriers.
§ 79-2. Regulations governing planting, growing or cultivation of
bamboo.
A. Subject to the exemptions set forth in this chapter, no person, property
owner, or tenant shall plant, cause to grow or cultivate any bamboo on
any lot or parcel of ground located in Concord Township, subject to the
following exceptions:
(1) The root system of the bamboo plants are entirely contained within
an aboveground planter, barrel or other container of such design,
material and location as to prevent the spread of the bamboo's root
system beyond the confines of the container in which it is
contained; or
(2) The root system is planted in the ground but is entirely contained
within a barrier, constructed in accordance with the following
specifications. Compliance with these specifications is subject to
inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(a) The barrier itself shall be composed of a high-density
polypropylene or polyethylene, with a thickness of at least 40
mils;
(b) The barrier shall be secured and joined together by stainless
steel clamps or stainless steel closure strips designed to be
used with such barriers;
(c) The barrier shall be installed at least 30 inches deep;
(d) At least three inches of the barrier must protrude above
ground level around the entire perimeter of the bamboo;
(e) The barrier shall slant outward from bottom to top.
§ 76-9 CONCORD CODE § 79-2
70:82
§ 79-3. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any land owner or possessor who, prior to the
effective date of this chapter, had planted or caused to grow any bamboo on
any property within the Township boundaries unless, upon determination of
the Code Enforcement Officer, any portion of such bamboo has been allowed
to grow upon or its roots, branches and/or stalks have extended onto or over
any public way or another's private property.
§ 79-4. Complaint; notice; order for removal; compliance.
Whenever a complaint is received by the Township regarding the
encroachment of any bamboo plant or root, or whenever the Township on its
own observations and inspections determines that there is an encroachment
of bamboo plants or roots onto the property of another, public street or
sidewalk, the Township shall give notice to the landowner or tenant in
possession of the property to remove the offending bamboo plant or root
system.
§ 79-5. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner or possessor of a property determined by any court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter shall be subject to pay a
fine of $100 per day for each day that the violation persists, as well as court
costs, legal fees and any other fees incurred by the Township to enforce this
B. Whether planted or growing in a container, as described herein, all
bamboo plants shall be located, trimmed and maintained so that no part
of the plant is closer than 10 feet to any property line.
A. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested,
properly addressed and with sufficient postage. Notice by certified mail
shall be deemed complete on the date of personal delivery. If the
certified mail is marked "refused," "unclaimed" or otherwise
undeliverable by the United States Postal Service, notice will be sent by
regular mail and by posting the notice on the property.
B. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation.
C. The notice shall state that the violation must be corrected within 30
days from the date of mailing or posting the property, whichever is later.
D. The notice shall state specifically what must be done by the responsible
party to correct the violation and come into compliance with this
chapter.
E. The notice shall state that failure to comply within 30 days will result in
the removal of the offending bamboo or root system by the Township
and that the responsible party will be billed for all costs incurred by the
Township. The Township may, in its discretion, elect to issue a citation
daily until such time as the offending bamboo or root system is
removed, and the notice should so advise the responsible party.
§ 79-2 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT § 79-5
70:83
chapter against the responsible party. Each day of a continuing violation
shall constitute a separate offense, for which a separate fine shall be levied.
Chapter 82
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Number of buildings — See Ch. 87.
Excavation and soil removal — See Ch. 98.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Plumbing — See Ch. 130.
Sewers — See Ch. 136.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 148.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 166.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
Zoning use approval — See Ch. 214.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A225.
§ 79-5 CONCORD CODE § 79-5
82:84
Part 1
[Adopted A9d-1o-p1t9io9n8 OBfy COordde. sNo. 22431]
ARTICLE I
CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code
§ 82-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the design,
fabrication, erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, location
and use of detached one- and two-family dwellings, their appurtenances
and accessory structures, the CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code,
1995 Edition, including Appendixes A, D, E and F, published by the Council
of American Building Officials, 5203 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, Virginia
22041, as amended by this article, is hereby adopted by reference thereto,
as the Building Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings of the Township of
Concord (hereinafter referred to as "the code").
§ 82-2. Definitions.
§ 82-3. Additions, insertions and deletions.
A. Wherever the word "municipality" is used in this code, it shall be held to
mean the Township of Concord.
B. Wherever the words "building official" are used in this code, they shall
be held to mean the Building Inspector or his assistants.
C. Wherever the words "Building Regulations Committee" is used in this
code, they shall be held to mean the Supervisors of Concord Township.
D. Wherever the words "this code" or "code" or "building code" are used in
this article, they shall be held to mean the CABO One and Two Family
Dwelling Code, 1995 Edition.
E. In Chapter 2, Section 202, add the term "group dwelling unit" as a use
group, which shall include dwelling units which house five or more
individuals who, because of age, mental, visual, physical or other
disability, must live in a supervised environment and may not be
capable of responding to an emergency situation without personal
assistance.
F. In Chapter 303, Table 301.2a, under the word "termite," insert the word
"yes" and add the following: "There is a history of termite damage in
Concord Township. Therefore, all residential buildings shall be
protected by using termite resistance wood or with environmentally
approved insecticides."
31.Editor's Note: This Ordinance Also Provided For The Repeal Of Former Ch. 82, Building
Construction, Adopted As Art. I, 7-5-1994 By Ord. No. 193, As Amended, And Art. II,
7-5-1994 By Ord. No. 194, As Amended.
§ 82-1 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 82-3
82:85
A. Said One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, 1995 Edition, hereby is
amended by deleting the following chapters and appendixes which are
covered under other ordinances of Concord Township:
(1) Chapter 29, Plumbing Administration.
(2) Chapter 30, Plumbing Definitions.
(3) Chapter 31, General Plumbing Requirements.
(4) Chapter 32, Plumbing Fixtures.
(5) Chapter 33, Water Heaters.
(6) Chapter 34, Water Supply and Distribution.
(7) Chapter 35, Sanitary Drainage.
(8) Chapter 36, Vents.
(9) Chapter 37, Traps.
(10) Chapter 38, Private Sewage Disposal.
(11) Appendix B, Engineered Procedure for Sizing Plumbing Vents.
(12) Appendix C, Detailed Procedure for Sizing the Building Water
Supply System.
B. Said Building Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 1995 Edition,
hereby is amended by amending the following chapters:
(1) Chapter 1, Section 111, Section 111.1, Permit required, add the
following:
111.1 Permit. Electrical wiring or equipment shall not be
installed within or on any building, structure or premises, nor
shall any alteration be made in any such existing installation
without first receiving approval and a permit from the building
official.
On completion of the rough-in of electric work and also on
completion of final electric work, inspection shall be by a thirdparty
inspection agency licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and approved by Concord Township. On completion
of field inspections, said agency shall issue an approved stamp of
acceptance to the contractor and shall further notify Concord
Township, in writing, within seven days.
(2) Chapter 4, Section 403, Footings, 403.1, General, add the
following: "Where reinforced concrete lintels are used in lieu of
step footings, the following shall apply: Hollow concrete cores
under the lintel shall be reinforced with two reinforcing rods onehalf-
inch diameter, and empty cores are to be filled solid with
mortar. The horizontal footing on the opposite end of the concrete
§ 82-3 CONCORD CODE § 82-3
82:86
lintel shall be reinforced with two reinforcing bars one-half-inch
diameter for a minimum of 10 feet. Bearing on horizontal footing
shall be a minimum of 16 inches."
(3) Chapter 4, Section 403.3, Insulated footings, add Note 7 to
concrete and masonry foundation details: "7. All wood sill plates on
steel shall be anchored with one-half-inch diameter bolts placed six
feet on center and not more than 12 inches from each end."
(4) Chapter 4, Section 404.1.1, Masonry and concrete wall
construction, add the following: "All basement walls of hollow
masonry units shall be a minimum of 12 inches thick. Eight-inch
hollow masonry units shall not be used for basement walls."
(5) Chapter 4, Section 404.3, Wood foundation walls, is hereby
amended to read:
404.3 Wood foundation walls. Wood foundation walls are not
permitted.
(6) Chapter 4, Section 409.3, Removal of debris, is amended to read:
409.3 Removal of debris. The under-floor grade shall be
cleaned of all vegetation and organic material and be further
covered with two inches of concrete.
(7) Chapter 6, Section 601.2, Requirements, add the following:
"Buildings with more than one family dwelling unit shall have a
fire- and party wall fire-resistance rating of not less than two
hours, in which there can be no penetration of any kind. Walls
shall have sufficient structural stability under fire conditions to
allow collapse of construction on either side without collapse of
the wall and shall be constructed of any noncombustible
materials that provide the required strength and fire-resistance
rating.
"Continuity of walls. Walls shall be continuous from the
foundation to one foot, six inches above the roof surface. Walls
separating more than one living unit shall extend eight inches
beyond the exterior wall of such living units.
"Combustible roofs. The wall is permitted to terminate at the
underside of the roof deck if the following conditions are met:
1. The wall is properly fire-stopped at the deck.
§ 82-3 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 82-3
82:87
2. The roof sheathing or deck is constructed of approved
noncombustible materials or of fire-retardant treated wood
for a distance of four feet (1,219 millimeters) on both sides
of the wall, or such roof sheathing or deck is constructed
with five-eighths-inch Type X gypsum board, supported
directly beneath the underside of the roof sheathing or deck,
using minimum two-inch ledgers attached to the sides of the
roof framing members, for a minimum distance of four feet
(1,219 millimeters) on both sides of the fire wall.
3. Combustible material does not exceed through the wall.
4. The roof covering has a minimum of a Class C rating."
(8) Chapter 6, Section 602.5.1., Drilling and notching top plate, is
amended to read as follows:
602.5.1 Drilling and notching - top plate. Stud partitions
containing plumbing, heating or other pipes shall be so framed
and the joists underneath so spaced as to give proper clearance
for the piping. Cutting and notching of the top and bottom plates
of bearing wall partitions or beams, girders and headers are
prohibited.
(9) Chapter 19, Section 1901.3.5, Duct insulation, amend the first
sentence to read as follows: "All duct work installed in
nonconditioned areas shall be insulated. Main air supply duct in
basements shall be insulated in accord with Section 1901.3.4. Any
branch supply ducts within 10 feet of the air-conditioning
evaporator shall be insulated accordingly."
(10) Chapter 1, Section 106.4, Penalty, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
106.4 Penalty.
1. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Article I
shall, upon summary conviction before any District Justice,
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 and the costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of the fine or costs, the violator
may be sentenced to the county jail for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
2. Whenever such person shall have been officially notified by
the Township of Concord or by other service of a summons in
a prosecution or in any other official manner that said person
is committing a violation of this Article I, each day that said
person shall continue such violation after such notification
shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine
or penalty. Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like
fines or penalties are now by law collected.
§ 82-3 CONCORD CODE § 82-3
82:88
ARTICLE II
BOCA National Building Code
§ 82-4. Adoption of standards by reference,
For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the design,
construction, alteration, enlargement, repair, demolition, removal,
conversion, use or maintenance of all buildings and structures, the BOCA
National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth Edition, published by the Building
Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., 4051 West Flossmoor
Road, Country Club Hills, Illinois, as amended by this article, is hereby
adopted by reference thereto as the Building Code of the Township of
Concord (herein referred to as "the code").
§ 82-5. Definitions.
§ 82-6. Additions, insertions and deletions.
Said BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth Edition, hereby is
amended as follows:
A. Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the building code, it shall
be held to mean the Township of Concord.
B. Wherever the words "building official" are used in the building code, it
shall be held to mean the Building Inspector or his assistants.
C. Wherever the words "Building Regulations Committee" are used in the
building code, it shall be held to mean the Supervisors of Concord
Township.
D. Wherever the words "code" or "building code" or "national code," are
used in this article, they shall be held to mean the BOCA National
Building Code/1996, Thirteenth Edition.
A. Section 101.1, Title, is hereby amended to insert the words "Township
of Concord."
B. Fees.
(1) Section 112.1 shall read as follows:
§ 82-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 82-6
82:89
112.1 General: A permit to begin work for new construction
alteration, removal, demolition or other building operation shall
be issued only after the fees prescribed in this section shall have
been paid to the Department of Building Inspection or other
authorized municipal agency, and an amendment to a permit
necessitating an additional fee because of an increase in the
estimated cost of the work involved be approved only after the
additional fee shall have been paid. Applicants for permits to be
used under this section shall pay at the time of application to the
Building Inspector the fee or fees prescribed from time to time by
the Supervisors of Concord Township by resolution. The valuation
of the proposed construction or work shall be based upon the
entire value of such construction or work. The Building Inspector
shall have the right to verify or correct the estimated value of
such construction or work.
(2) Section 112.3.1, Fee schedule, is hereby deleted in its entirety. Fees
shall be set forth from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors.
C. Section 116.4, Violation penalties, is amended to read as follows:
116.4 Violation penalties:
1. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Article II shall,
upon summary conviction before any District Justice, pay a fine
not exceeding $1,000 and the costs of prosecution; and, in default
of payment of the fine or costs, the violator may be sentenced to
the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
2. Whenever such person shall have been officially notified by the
Township of Concord or by other service of a summons in a
prosecution or in any other official manner that said person is
committing a violation of this Article II, each day that said person
shall continue such violation after such notification shall
constitute a separate offense punishable by a like fine or penalty.
Such fines or penalties shall be collected as like fines or penalties
are now by law collected.
D. Section 117.2 shall read as follows:
117.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the building after having been served with a stop
order, except such work as he is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not more
than $1,000.
E. Section 421.0, Swimming pools, is hereby deleted.
F. Section 1810.3.1 shall read as follows:
§ 82-6 CONCORD CODE § 82-6
82:90
1810.3.1 Plain concrete: In plain concrete footings, the edge
thickness shall be not less than eight inches (203 millimeters) for
footings on soil, except that for buildings of Use Group R-3 and
buildings fewer than two stories in height of Type 5 construction, the
required edge thickness shall be reduced to eight inches (204
millimeters), provided that the footing does not extend beyond four
inches (102 millimeters) on either side of the supported wall.
G. Section 1810.6, Forming of concrete, is amended by adding at the end
thereof the following: "In residential construction not over 35 feet in
height, precast concrete lintels may be used for step footings on
masonry block walls. Hollow cores under lintel must be filled with
mortar and two vertical reinforcing rods one-half-inch diameter,
inserted into the mortar-filled cores. The horizontal footing supporting
the opposite end of the lintel shall have two reinforcing rods one-halfinch
diameter for a minimum of 10 feet. Bearing on this footing shall be
16 inches. The width of lintels shall be equal to the width of wall."
H. Chapter 18, Section 1812.1, Design, add the following: "Wood
foundation walls are not permitted."
I. Section 1812.3.2, Thickness based on soil loads, unbalanced backfill
height and wall height, is amended by adding at the end thereof the
following: "All basement walls shall be a minimum of 12 inches thick;
eight-inch hollow masonry units cannot be used for basement walls."
J. Section 2305, Table 2305.2, Fastening Schedule, is amended by adding
the following to Item 2, Wall construction: "The sill plate on concrete,
masonry block or steel shall be anchored to the foundation wall or steel
beams with one-half-inch anchor bolts placed six inches on center and
not more than 12 inches from corners or ends. Bolts shall extend 12
inches into masonry and seven inches into concrete."
K. Section 2305.3.1, Solid lumber joists, is amended by adding at the end
thereof the following: "Bottom and top plates of bearing wall partitions
shall not be cut under any conditions. This shall also apply to beams,
girders and headers."
L. Section 3104.1 shall read as follows:
3104.1 General: The provisions of this section shall apply to tents,
membrane structures and other structures erected for a period of less
than 90 days.
A special temporary permit shall be secured from the Building Official
for all such installations.
No such structure shall be erected, during any calendar year, for a
period exceeding 90 days.
M. Section 3408.2, Applicability, is hereby amended to insert the following
date: "July 5, 1994."
§ 82-6 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 82-6
82:91
N. Said BOCA National Building Code/1996 is hereby amended by adding
thereto the following section, hereby designated "Section 122.0,
Administrative Technical Services," to read as follows:
SECTION 122.0 ADMINISTRATIVE/TECHNICAL/
ARCHITECTURALENGINEERING SERVICES
122.1 General: Where applications for unusual design or magnitude
of construction are filed for any residential, commercial, industrial or
institutional structure or where the application is for a structure to be
occupied by 50 persons or more, the Board of Supervisors of Concord
Township may employ administrative, technical, architectural and/or
engineering services to aid the building official in carrying out the
provisions of the building code, either as consultants on particular
matters or as regular employees of Concord Township. Any such
consultant or employee shall keep appropriate records and submit
reports as required by the Board of Supervisors of Concord Township
and/or the building official.
122.2 Building permit requirements: The use of such consultant
or employee shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors of
Concord Township prior to the issuance of the building permit and
shall be a requisite for the permit issuance.
122.3 Fees and costs: All fees and costs related to the performance
of services by such consultant or employee shall be borne by the
Township of Concord.
122.4 Inspection: All such consultants and/or employees shall have
the same rights and privileges to inspect and examine all buildings,
structures and sites as are given to the building official by the
building code.
122.5 Certificate of use and occupancy: Where the Board of
Supervisors of Concord Township has determined to employ
administrative, technical, architectural and/or engineering services,
either as consultants or employees, the certificate of use and
occupancy shall be used by the building official and the consultant
and/or employee.
§ 82-6 CONCORD CODE § 82-6
82:92
122.6 Site improvement completion: No certificate of use and
occupancy shall be issued for the occupancy of any commercial,
industrial or institutional structure or any structure to be occupied by
50 persons or more unless and until all building site improvements,
including those related to parking, lighting, landscaping, traffic and
stormwater management, have been completed and approved by the
Township of Concord. In lieu of the completion of such building site
improvements, as required, the township shall have the right to
accept from the owner financial security in an amount sufficient to
cover the costs of such building site improvements. Such financial
security, if accepted by the Township of Concord, shall be in the
amount and in the form as determined by the Township of Concord
pursuant to the provisions of Section 509 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended._
O. Said BOCA National Building Code/1996, Thirteenth Edition, is hereby
amended by deleting the following chapters and/or sections:
(1) Chapter 5, General Building Limitations.
(2) Section 3102.0, Signs, Sections 3102.1 through 3103.6.
(3) Section 3105.0, Canopies and Awnings, Sections 3105.1 through
3105.4.
(4) Chapter 29, Plumbing Systems (covered under other ordinances of
Concord Township).
P. Chapter 27, Section 2704.3, Final inspection and test, shall read as
follows:
2704.3 Final inspection and test: On completion of the rough-in of
electric work and also on completion of final electric work,
inspections shall be by a third-party inspection agency licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and approved by Concord Township.
On completion of field inspections, said agency shall issue an
approved stamp of acceptance to the contractor and shall further
notify Concord Township, in writing, within seven days.
Q. Chapter 28, Section 2805.2.3, Ducts, shall read as follows:
2805.2.3 Ducts: When air conditioning is used, all duct work
installed in nonconditioned areas shall be insulated. Main air-supply
duct in basements shall be insulated in accord with the mechanical
code listed in Chapter 35. Any branch supply duct within 10 feet of
the evaporator or furnace shall be insulated accordingly.
R. Section 2311.1, Required, add the following: "There is a history of
termite damage in Concord Township. Therefore, all residential
buildings shall be protected, utilizing termite-resistant wood and with
environmentally appropriate insecticides."
§ 82-6 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 82-6
82:93
§ 82-7. Construal of provisions.
Whenever any provision or requirement of the regulations of the
Department of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is
more stringent or stricter than a provision or requirement of this article, the
applicable provision or requirement of the regulations of said Department
of Labor and Industry shall supersede any such provision or requirement of
this article.
S. Chapter 9, Fire Protection Systems, Section 904.1, is amended to read
as follows:
904.1 Where required: Automatic fire-suppression systems shall be
installed where required by this code, and in the locations indicated
in Sections 904.2 through 904.11, and for Use Group B Business use
where the fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet (1,116m) in area.
T. Chapter 11, Section 1103.1, Exception 3, is amended to read as follows:
3. Detached one- and two-family dwellings, and their associated
sites and facilities, are not required to be accessible, except for
group homes in residential one- and two-family dwellings. A
group home is a building arranged for lodging for compensation,
with or without meals and occupied as a dwelling unit. This group
includes structures which house five or more individuals,
including supervision, who because of physical impairment,
including impaired memory, manual or speaking abilities, that
results in a functional limitation in gaining access to and using a
dwelling unit and are generally incapable of self-preservation and
require a supervised environment.
§ 82-6 CONCORD CODE § 82-7
82:94
Part 2
[AdopRteedgu1l2a-t5io-2n0 O0f0 CBoynOtrradc.t Noros. 254]
ARTICLE III
Registration
§ 82-8. Purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Concord, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania finds it to be in the best interest of the residents of Concord
Township that contractors who engage in construction activities in Concord
Township shall be required to register with the Township, pay a license
fee and secure a license from the Township prior to engaging in such
construction activities.
§ 82-9. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The duly appointed Code Enforcement
Officer of the Township of Concord, or his duly appointed Deputy, and shall
include the duly appointed Building Inspector, Deputy Building Inspector,
Fire Marshal, Deputy Fire Marshal, the Director of Public Works and the
Township Engineer.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — The erection, alteration, repair,
renovation, rehabilitation, demolition or removal of any building or
structure and the excavation, filling, grading and landscaping of lots in
connection therewith.
CONTRACT — An agreement, whether oral or written or contained in one or
more documents, between a contractor and an owner for the performance
of work, including all labor services and materials to be furnished and
performed thereunder.
CONTRACTOR — Any person who, as a prime contractor or as a
subcontractor, engages in construction activities in the Township of
Concord, including, without limitation, mechanical, electrical, blasting,
specialty, elevator, roofing, home improvement contractors, and earth
disturbance and grading contractors. The term shall not include any bona
fide employee of an owner of the premises where work is to be performed.
OWNER — Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in any building, structure or lot.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, trust association,
owner, contractor, salesman or other legal entity.
§ 82-10. Compliance with regulations.
No person may act as a contractor or engage in construction activities in
the Township of Concord, or hold themselves out to the public as doing
§ 82-8 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 82-10
82:95
such business or solicit such business in the Township of Concord, except in
compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 82-11. Administration and enforcement; certificate of insurance.
§ 82-12. Registration fee. [Amended 12-4-2007 by Ord. No. 320]
No contractor shall be registered and no license shall become effective
until the contractor pays to the Township a registration and license fee
in an amount established from time to time by resolution. All contractors
who are in good standing may be issued an annual renewal license on a
calendar-year basis beginning January 1 of each year upon application and
the payment of a license renewal fee as set from time to time by resolution.
§ 82-13. Registration and license required; decal.
Except as otherwise specifically exempted by the provisions of this article,
no person shall act in the capacity of contractor unless authorized to
do so by a valid registration and license issued in accordance with the
provisions of this article. A decal, to be supplied by the Code Enforcement
Officer, indicating that the contractor is currently registered and licensed,
shall be affixed to all motor vehicles used by the contractor in the course
of all construction activities in the township. The decal shall be located
on the outside of the motor vehicle at locations designated by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 82-14. Exceptions to registration requirements.
The following persons are not required to register with the township as a
contractor:
§ 82-15. Issuance, refusal and renewal of registration; insurance.
A. It is the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to administer and provide
for the enforcement of all the provisions of this article and specifically
to register and issue a license to all persons who are found to be duly
qualified under and who comply with the provisions of this article, and
to deny to register and issue a license to or suspend or revoke a
previously issued registration and license to any person who does not
so qualify or so comply.
B. A certificate of insurance shall be filed with the township prior to the
issuance of any license, evidencing the contractor's insurance coverage
of the type and in the amounts specified in § 82-15B of this article. Said
certificate shall contain a provision that the coverage provided shall not
be reduced, terminated, cancelled or nonrenewed without 30 days'
prior written notice to the township.
A. An individual who performs labor or services for a contractor for wages
or salary.
§ 82-10 CONCORD CODE § 82-15
82:96
§ 82-16. Grounds for revocation or suspension of registration and
license.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer shall act upon all applications for
registration within 30 days of receipt of a full and complete application.
If an application is denied, the applicant shall be so notified in writing.
The notification shall set forth the reason for the denial.
B. An applicant for any registration required by the provisions of this
article shall file a written application on a form supplied by the
township, which shall be signed and under oath. The application shall
require (among other items) the names of owners, partners, directors
and officers of the applicant, and the business street addresses and
trade names of the applicant, together with a certificate of insurance
written for not less than any limit of coverage specified under this
article. The contractor shall take out and maintain at his own expense,
during the life of the registration, public liability, property damage,
products liability and completed operations insurance. Said applicant
must provide a current certificate of insurance to the township written
for a minimum policy of $500,000 combined single limits covering said
requirements.
C. Any applicant for any registration shall comply with the statutory
requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pertaining to the
worker's compensation law.
D. Every registered contractor shall, within 10 days after a change in
control of ownership or management, or change of address or trade
name, notify the Code Enforcement Office of such change or changes.
E. The registration and license of all contractors shall expire on January 1
following the date of issue unless prior thereto the registration is
revoked or suspended. Upon payment of the annual registration fee, as
prescribed in § 82-12, prior to the expiration date, a registration and
license may be renewed for another year, and the authority to engage in
construction activities shall continue during said renewal year unless
and until it is revoked or suspended by the Board of Supervisors of
Concord Township.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer may, upon approval of the Board of
Supervisors, suspend or revoke any registration and license issued
under the provisions of this article where it is found that the contractor
has violated any provisions of this article or is performing or attempting
to perform any act prohibited by this article, or violates any provision of
the Code of the Township of Concord, Chapter 82.
B. A violation of any condition of a construction activity permit issued by
the Township of Concord shall be grounds for suspension or revocation
of the registration and license.
§ 82-15 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 82-16
82:97
§ 82-17. Standards for registration and license issuance or
continuance.
For the protection of the residents of the Township of Concord, no
registration or license, shall be issued or continued if already issued; in the
event that:
§ 82-18. Hearing.
C. Any violation of any of the provisions of this article upon the part of any
director, manager, partner, officer, salesman, agent or employee of a
contractor shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the
registration of the contractor unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of
the Board of Supervisors and Code Enforcement Officer that the
individuals engaged in the management of the contractor:
(1) Had no knowledge of the wrongful conduct; or
(2) Were, following the exercise of due diligence, unable to prevent the
violation.
A. The contractor or the management personnel of the contractor's
company has demonstrated a lack of ability or willingness to comply
with and/or abide by the provisions of the Code of the Township of
Concord.
B. The business transactions of the contractor demonstrate a practice of
failure to perform contracts or the manipulation of assets or accounts,
or fraud or bad faith.
A. The Board of Supervisors may suspend or revoke any registration and
license following a hearing. At least 10 days prior to the date set for the
hearing, the Code Enforcement Office shall notify the contractor in
writing of any charge made, and afford said contractor an opportunity
to be heard in person and by counsel in reference thereto. Such written
notice shall be served by delivery of the same to the contractor in
person or by certified mail to the business address of record of such
contractor. The hearing on such charges shall be at such time and place
as the Board of Supervisors shall prescribe.
B. If the Board of Supervisors shall determine that the contractor is guilty
of any violation of any of the provisions of this article, the contractor's
registration and license may be revoked or suspended for such period
of time as shall be determined by the Board of Supervisors.
C. If a person is refused a registration and license, the person may, within
10 days from the date the notice of refusal is mailed, request a hearing.
Said hearing must be held within 30 days from the date of the request
and the Board of Supervisors must render its decision within 20 days
following the hearing.
§ 82-16 CONCORD CODE § 82-19
82:98
§ 82-19. Registration limitations; nonapplicability.
The registration of a contractor and the issuance of a license pursuant to
this article shall not authorize the contractor to perform any particular type
of construction activity which is limited to qualified registration holders
under other provisions of state or local law; and no other permit or approval
for construction activities issued by Concord Township shall entitle a
contractor to perform construction activities unless and until the provisions
of this article are complied with.
§ 82-20. Violations and penalties.
§ 82-21. Severability.
If any part of this article is for any reason found to be illegal or invalid, such
illegality or invalidation shall not affect any of the remaining parts of this
article, which shall continue to be fully operative as if the illegal or invalid
part had not been enacted.
§ 82-22. Effective date.
This article shall become effective the 1st day of January 2001.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provisions of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager or Code Enforcement Officer, as appropriate, who shall follow
the enforcement procedure set forth in the Township Code, Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
§ 82-19 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 82-22
82:99
Chapter 87
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
§ 87-1. Definitions.
The word "building," as used in this chapter, shall mean any structure
used or intended to be used as a dwelling or place of business or industry,
including public buildings and places of worship, but shall not include any
accessory building located upon a lot where there is also a main building.
§ 87-2. Authority of Secretary.
The Township Secretary is hereby required to prepare a numbering plan
for the Township and to assign numbers to all lots and buildings located
therein, such numbers to be assigned in accordance with the system herein
prescribed.
§ 87-3. Numbering system.
A. Upon all streets extending east and west, the numbering system shall
commence at the eastern boundary of the township, with the number
"one" or an appropriate larger number for streets whose beginning
point extends beyond the township boundary, and shall increase
westwardly therefrom. The allotment of numbers shall be made as
nearly as practicable using or allotting separate numbers for each 40
feet for each side of street frontage. On all such streets, the odd
numbers shall be on the north side and the even numbers on the south
side thereof.
B. Upon all streets extending north and south, the numbering system shall
commence at the southern boundary of the township, commencing with
the number "one" or an appropriate larger number for streets whose
beginning point extends beyond the township boundary, and shall
increase northwardly therefrom. The allotment of numbers shall be
made as nearly as practicable using or allotting separate numbers for
each 40 feet for each side of street frontage. On all such streets, the odd
numbers shall be on the east side and the even numbers on the west
side thereof.
C. Upon all streets not running in a generally north-south or east-west
direction or in any way not conforming to the general pattern of street
arrangement in the Township, numbers shall be allotted by the
§ 82-22 CONCORD CODE § 87-3
82:100
§ 87-4. Assignment of numbers.
Numbers shall be assigned to all existing buildings in the township by the
Township Secretary as soon as possible after the adoption of this chapter,
and the Township Secretary shall thereupon send to the owner of every lot
upon which a building is located a written notice of the number assigned
to such building, directing that such number be affixed to such building
or elsewhere upon the property in the manner prescribed by this chapter
within 30 days of such notice. Every property owner who shall disregard
or fail to comply with such notice within the time specified therein shall be
guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 87-5. Display of numbers. [Amended 7-7-2015 by Ord. No. 365]
Numbers assigned to buildings in the Township according to the provisions
hereof shall be affixed to, painted upon or carved upon such building or
upon a permanent standard, base or support between such building and
the street upon which it fronts. Address numbers should be in Arabic
numbers and not in alphabetical letters. Each number shall be at least
four inches in height, shall be located a minimum of three feet above the
ground, and in such manner, and shall be of such color and material as
to be visible both day and night from the street and shall be constantly
maintained in complete and legible form. The property owner shall from
time to time reaffix or renew all numbers that shall not continue to conform
to the requirements of this section; provided, however, that in the case of a
building occupied by other than the owner thereof, the occupant, in addition
to the owner, shall be responsible for maintaining the number upon such
building as hereby required.
§ 87-6. Application procedure.
Whenever a building permit shall be sought for the erection of any building
in the township, the applicant shall, at the time of making such application,
apply to the Township Secretary for an assignment of an official number
or numbers to the building or buildings covered by such application. The
number or numbers so assigned by the Secretary shall be in conformity with
the requirements of this chapter for numbering existing buildings, shall be
affixed by the owner or builder thereof within 30 days after such assignment
and shall thereafter be maintained as herein required.
Secretary as nearly as practicable to accord using or allotting separate
numbers for each 40 feet for each side of street frontage and with
numbers used on neighboring streets running in approximately the
same direction. Streets ending at a cul-de-sac or dead end shall be
numbered starting with the low numbers at the intersecting street and
increase toward the cul-de-sac or dead end. On all such streets the odd
numbers shall be on the north or east side and the even numbers shall
be on the south or west side. [Amended 7-7-2015 by Ord. No. 365]
§ 87-3 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 87-7
82:101
§ 87-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
Chapter 90
CERTIFICATES OF USE AND OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 87.
Sewers — See Ch. 136.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
§ 90-1. Certificate required.
Any individual, partnership, corporation, governmental authority, company,
association, trust, joint venture, unincorporated association, or other entity
which owns improved residential or commercial real property situate within
the Township of Concord and who desires to sell or lease such property shall
first obtain a certificate of occupancy from the Office of Codes Enforcement
of Concord Township and provide a copy of such certificate to the buyer at
settlement or to the tenant at the time of commencement of the lease.
§ 90-2. Components of certificate.
The Township Office of Codes Enforcement shall, when appropriate,
pursuant to § 90-4 hereof, issue a certificate of use and occupancy which
shall contain the following certifications:
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine of
$600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this chapter, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord township.
D. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshall, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
A. A description of the Township zoning district classification applicable to
the property or leasehold;
§ 87-7 CONCORD CODE § 90-2
82:102
§ 90-3. Inspection of properties.
All properties being sold or leased will be inspected by the Township Office
of Codes Enforcement to:
B. A statement by the Office of Codes Enforcement that the uses currently
existing on the property or leasehold, as described by the owner or
lessor, comply with all provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance;32
and
C. A statement by the Office of Codes Enforcement that there are no
uncorrected violations of record of any ordinances, codes or regulations
of Concord Township or Concord Township Sewer Authority on the
property or leasehold.
A. Determine that all vertical curbs located on homeowners' sidewalks and
used as public walks are in compliance with all codes and regulations
and are not cracked, broken or dangerously uneven;
B. Determine that all properties and leaseholds are properly and clearly
marked with the address to assist emergency personnel;33
C. Determine that the seller or landlord has properly described the
existing uses and that those uses comply with all ordinances, codes and
regulations;
D. Determine that in commercial properties and all multifamily residential
buildings all emergency exits, auxiliary power, smoke and carbon
monoxide alarms are properly positioned and in good working order;
and in residential properties that all smoke alarms are properly
positioned and in good working order; and [Amended 3-1-2005 by
Ord. No. 291]
E. Determine if the property is in compliance with the Concord Township
Sewer Ordinance and all rules and regulations of the Township and the
Concord Township Sewer Authority relating thereto.34
F. Any commercial, residential or agricultural building located within 150
feet of a Township sewer line must connect to the Township sewer
system prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy regardless of
the condition of the on-lot sewage system. [Added 3-1-2005 by Ord.
No. 291]
G. Prior to the resale of any property within Concord Township, the sewer
lateral for that property shall be inspected and/or televised by the
Township. The property owner shall make all areas of the property to be
inspected and/or televised available to the Township upon the
Township's request. [Added 11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 338]
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Zoning.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Buildings, Numbering of.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Sewers.
§ 90-2 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 90-3
82:103
§ 90-4. Inspection violations.
Any violations discovered on a property or leasehold as a result of
inspection must be corrected prior to the issuance of any certificate of use
and occupancy. If the seller or landlord of the property cannot correct all
violations found on the property or leasehold, a certificate of occupancy may
be issued by the Office of Codes Enforcement only if the Township finds that
the following conditions will be sufficient to guarantee further compliance
and insure that no danger to the health and safety of the residents will be
posed by the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy:
(1) If the inspection determines that the sewer lateral is in an
unacceptable condition, the property owner shall be so notified in
writing and the sewer lateral shall be repaired or replaced by the
property owner, in accordance with the notice and the applicable
rules and regulations of the Concord Township Sewer Department.
All costs of repair and replacement shall be borne by the property
owner. The Township shall confirm by inspection and/or televising
that the sewer lateral has been satisfactorily repaired or replaced
once notified of the repairs or replacement by the property owner.
(2) The Township shall use best efforts to conduct the inspection and/
or televising by the least invasive and intrusive means possible.
However, in the event of any damage to the property caused by the
Township's inspection, the Township shall promptly repair or
restore the property to the reasonable condition in which the
property existed prior to the entry of the Township onto the
property, circumstances permitting.
(3) The cost of the lateral inspection shall be determined and
established by the Board of Supervisors from time to time, by
resolution.
A. The seller or landlord must place sufficient funds in an escrow account
to cover, in full, the cost of the required improvements and/or repairs.
The amount of the funds required to be deposited in escrow shall be
determined by the Office of Codes Enforcement;
B. The buyer or tenant may sign an agreement with seller by which the
buyer or tenant agrees to undertake the necessary improvements and
repairs. The buyer or tenant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of
the Township, that the buyer or tenant has the financial ability to
correct all of the violations, either by depositing funds in escrow or by
some other means acceptable to the Office of Codes Enforcement; and
C. All corrections, improvements and repairs must be completed within six
months from the date of the issuance of the certificate of use and
occupancy. An extension of time within which to complete such repairs,
corrections and improvements may be granted by the Township Board
of Supervisors upon good cause shown. If the required improvements
are not made within the six-month time period, or any extension thereof
§ 90-3 CONCORD CODE § 90-4
82:104
§ 90-5. Fees.
A fee for the issuance of the certificate of use and occupancy shall be
charged pursuant to the fee schedule authorized by the Board of
Supervisors and posted in the Office of Codes Enforcement.
§ 90-6. Application for issuance of certificate.
§ 90-7. Violations and penalties.
Failure of any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or
governmental unit to comply with the regulations of this chapter may result
in the following penalties:
§ 90-8. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Office of Codes
Enforcement.
granted by the Township Board of Supervisors, the Township will
pursue legal action against the buyer or tenant and will seek therein
recovery of all legal fees incurred by the Township in such proceedings.
A. An application for issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy shall
be submitted to the Office of Codes Enforcement at least two weeks
prior to the date of settlement or the commencement of the lease. The
application shall include the name of the seller or landlord and the
address of the property as well as a description of the current and
intended uses of the property or leasehold.
B. The Township will issue the certificate of use and occupancy as soon as
practicable but no later than two weeks after submission of the
application.
A. Each violation continuing for a separate day after notice by the
Township and each violation of any provision of this chapter shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation subject to a separate and
additional fine of $1,000; and
B. Any person or entity who violates or permits the violation of any
provision of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the
fine prescribed by this chapter, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees, incurred by Concord Township.
§ 90-4 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 90-8
82:105
Chapter 91
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Certificates of use and occupancy — See Ch.
90.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
§ 91-1. Election to administer and enforce.
Concord Township hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. § 7210.101
through § 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and all regulations
promulgated thereunder.
§ 91-2. Adoption and incorporation by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the Building Code of Concord Township.
§ 91-3. Methods for administration and enforcement; amendments
to the codes. [Amended 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 301]
Administration and enforcement of the code within Concord Township shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Board of
Supervisors of Concord Township from time to time by resolution:
A. By the designation of a Concord Township employee to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of Concord Township;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Concord Township;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of Concord
Township; and
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 90-8 CONCORD CODE § 91-3
82:106
§ 91-4. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Concord
Township Board of Supervisors in conformity with the requirements of the
relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board
of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 91-5. Effect on other regulations.
§ 91-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by Concord Township for the administrative and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be
established by the Board of Supervisors by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 93
DUMPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 142.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 190.
§ 93-1. Prohibited acts.
F. Exhibits A through I, containing amendments to the international codes
adopted by reference, are included at the end of this chapter.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Concord Township on or before July 1, 1999, and which
equal or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force
and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances, regulations and policies of Concord
Township not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Concord Township
not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or corporations to dump
ashes, rubbish, garbage, machinery, junk or any refuse matter
whatsoever within the limits of the Township of Concord; provided,
however, that nothing in this section shall deprive a resident from
dumping his or her own household trash or rubbish on their own
§ 91-3 DUMPING § 93-1
93:107
§ 93-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
Chapter 98
EXCAVATION AND SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Sewers — See Ch. 136.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 148.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
§ 98-1. Findings.
property after obtaining a permit from the Board of Supervisors on
locations approved by the Supervisors.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any property owner to permit
the dumping of any materials upon the ground in violation of the terms
of this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or corporations to set up,
establish or maintain an automobile dump or graveyard where old
automobiles are kept and stored either for business or for other
purposes.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine of
$600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this chapter, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshall, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
A. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Concord finds and
determines that extensive unregulated excavation, removal, relocation
§ 93-1 CONCORD CODE § 98-1
98:108
§ 98-2. Permission required.
No person shall excavate or otherwise remove any earth, soil, sand, gravel,
clay, rock or any other similar earth materials (herein referred to as "soil")
for sale or for use other than on the premises from which the soil shall be
taken without first having procured permission therefor from the Board of
Supervisors. This chapter shall not apply to the removal or sale of 1,000
cubic yards or less of soil incidental to the construction or alteration of
a building on any premises, provided that permission for such removal is
secured by the Building Inspector when the permit for the construction or
alteration of such building is secured.
§ 98-3. Application procedure.
The Board of Supervisors shall not consider any application for the removal
of soil from the premises for sale or otherwise unless and until the owner
of the premises shall first file with the Township Secretary a written
application requesting such permission, together with a map of the
premises prepared by a registered surveyor or engineer, showing the
contour lines and grades resulting from such intended removal of soil in
relation to the topography of the premises, and said proposed contour line,
proposed finished grades and an estimate of the amount of soil, in cubic
yards, to be removed, all of which shall be subject to the inspection and
approval of the Board of Supervisors. No such permission for soil removal
shall be issued until the proposed contour lines and grades have been
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 98-4. Hearing.
and filling of soil within the township can result in conditions
detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the populace.
B. Such unregulated practices can result in the following conditions in the
township:
(1) The presence of declivities and pits which retard the normal
drainage of surface water and provide breeding places for
mosquitoes and other harmful vermin.
(2) The permanent destruction of the plant-growing capability of land
from which the soil has been removed.
(3) The increased potential for the destruction by wind and water
erosion of land adjacent to premises stripped of soil.
(4) The depression of the market value of adjacent land for either
agricultural or development purposes because of the blighted
appearance of the denuded land.
C. Such soil-stripping practices will result in the destruction of the taxable
wealth of the township and retard the ability of the township to supply
necessary community services and facilities to its constituents.
§ 98-1 EXCAVATION AND SOIL REMOVAL § 98-4
98:109
§ 98-5. Removal of soil.
If permission to remove the soil shall be granted, the owner shall so conduct
the operations that there shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions
and in such a manner that the area shall be properly leveled off, cleared
of debris and graded to conform with the contour lines and grades as
approved by the Board of Supervisors. The soil removal operation shall not
be permitted within 60 feet of any property line other than a public street
or traveled right-of-way.
§ 98-6. Removal of topsoil.
The owner of the premises, when permission has been duly granted, shall
not remove from the premises the top layer of arable soil to a depth of eight
inches, but such top layer of arable soil to a depth of eight inches shall
be set aside for retention on the premises and shall be respread over the
premises when the rest of the soil has been removed, pursuant to grades
and contour lines approved by the Board of Supervisors, and seeded with
perennial grasses or other appropriate ground cover.
A. A hearing before the Board of Supervisors shall be granted to an
applicant for permission to remove soil within 30 days after the
applicant requests such a hearing. The Board of Supervisors, in
considering and reviewing the application and in arriving at its
decision, shall be guided and take into consideration the public health,
safety or general welfare, and particular consideration shall be given to
the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and land uses.
(6) Such other factors that may relate to the public health, safety or
general welfare.
B. If, after examining the application and the map provided for in § 98-3
and after the hearing in the event that a hearing is requested by the
applicant, the Board of Supervisors is of the opinion that the proposed
soil removal will not create conditions inimical to the public health,
welfare or safety and will not result in the creation of any sharp
declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems or
depressed land values nor create any drainage, sewerage problems or
other conditions of danger, then permission to remove the soil under
the terms of this chapter shall be granted.
§ 98-4 CONCORD CODE § 98-7
98:110
§ 98-7. Bond.
Before any permit or permission for soil removal shall be granted or issued,
the owner shall file with the Board of Supervisors a bond, in form and with
surety acceptable to the Township of Concord, in such amount as, in the
opinion of the Township Board of Supervisors, shall be sufficient to insure
the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 98-8. Permit required; fee.35
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed under the
provisions of this chapter, unless a permit therefor shall have been first
obtained as provided herein, and no excavation shall be made and no
soil shall be removed except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. At the time of application, a fee to the order of the Township of
Concord, Pennsylvania, shall be paid by the applicant for the permit for
removal of soil from the premises. Said fee shall be in an amount set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, as stated in the
application and certified on the topographical map. In the event of refusal
of the soil removal permit, the fee paid by the applicant shall be refunded,
except that all moneys and costs incurred by the Township of Concord for
engineering surveys and reports, inspection fees and legal fees shall be
retained by the Township, and the balance remaining shall be refunded to
the applicant, together with a statement of the costs and expenses incurred
by the township.
§ 98-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine of
$600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this chapter, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 98-7 EXCAVATION AND SOIL REMOVAL § 98-10
98:111
§ 98-10. Construal of provisions.
Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than those
of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter
shall prevail. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or
regulation impose greater restrictions than those of this chapter, the
provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall prevail.
Chapter 104
FIRE HYDRANT DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire officials — See Ch. 19.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
Zoning use approval — See Ch. 214.
§ 104-1. Authority to enter contract.
The Board of Supervisors is hereby authorized and empowered to enter
into a contract or contracts with Chester Water Authority and/or United
Water Bethel Company for the placing, replacing, operating, maintaining
and repairing of fire hydrants in the Township of Concord to be connected
to water mains, maintaining pressures approved by the Fire Insurance
Underwriters of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania along certain
highways, streets, roads and alleys within the Township to provide fire
protection service to and for the fire hydrant districts hereinafter
designated.
§ 104-2. Establishment of districts.
There is hereby created, designated and established within the township
fire hydrant districts, as shown and marked on a plan thereof made for the
township, designated as the "Township of Concord Fire Hydrant District
Map," prepared by Van DeMark & Lynch, Inc., and dated November 15,
1996 (being Sheet 1 of 15), which is attached hereto, made a part hereof
and marked Exhibit A,36 and said districts are designated thereon as
follows:
A. Chester Water Authority service area.
B. United Water Bethel Company service area.
36.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the township offices.
§ 98-10 CONCORD CODE § 104-3
104:112
§ 104-3. Assessment of costs.
The moneys necessary for fulfilling the contract obligations with Chester
Water Authority and/or United Water Bethel Company with respect to such
fire hydrants and such fire protection service shall be assessed as follows:
Chapter 112
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire officials — See Ch. 19.
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Plumbing code — See Ch. 130.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
A. The Township Supervisors, by resolution, shall annually assess or cause
to be assessed the cost and expense of such fire protection service by an
equal assessment upon all property, whether or not exempt from
taxation by existing law, abutting upon said highways, streets, roads
and alleys or portions thereof and upon property within 780 feet of any
fire hydrant in the district benefited thereby and/or connected to a
water main in the district, based upon the assessment for county
purposes. No such assessment shall be levied against any farmland or
land used as an aviation field or against other property in the district
not benefitted thereby.
B. Such assessment, including an amount equal to the cost of collection,
shall be collected in the same manner as taxes. The Township Tax
Collector shall receive the same commission as on the township tax.
The Township Treasurer shall receive all such assessments collected for
fire protection and shall keep the same in a separate account and shall
pay the same out only upon orders signed by the Chairman of the Board
of Supervisors, attested by the Township Secretary. The Township
Treasurer shall make a report to the auditors of the township annually.
§ 104-3 FIRE HYDRANT DISTRICTS § 104-3
104:113

ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 7-13-2004 by Ord. No. 28137]
§ 112-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Township of Concord, being marked and designated as the "International
Fire Code, 2003 Edition," as published by the International Code Council,
Inc., is hereby adopted as the fire prevention code of the Township of
Concord for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of the International Fire Code, 2003 Edition, Chapters 1 through
45, inclusive, and Appendixes B, D, E, F and G, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the
additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any, transcribed in § 112-2
of this article.
§ 112-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following provisions of the 2003 Edition of the International Fire Code
are hereby revised to read as follows:
A. Chapter 1, Section 101, GENERAL, Paragraph 101.1, Title.
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Fire Code of
Concord Township," herein after referred to as "this Code."
B. Chapter 1, Section 104, GENERAL AUTHORITY AND
RESPONSIBILITIES, Paragraph 104.1, Enforcement officer.
104.1. Enforcement Officer.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Fire Marshal and the
Deputy Fire Marshal to enforce the provisions of the fire prevention
code as herein set forth. The designated enforcement officer of this
code is herein referred to as the "Fire Code Official."
The Supervisors of Concord Township, from time to time by resolution,
shall appoint a Fire Marshal and a Deputy Fire Marshal, prescribe
their duties and responsibilities, and fix their compensation.
The duly appointed Fire Code Officials are hereby authorized to
enforce the provisions of this code and shall have the authority to
render interpretations of this code, and to adopt policies, procedures,
rules and regulations in order to clarify the application of its
provisions. Such interpretations, policies, procedures, rules and
regulations shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of
this code and shall not have the effect of waving any requirements
specifically provided for in this code.
37.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Ch. 112, Art. I, Fire
Prevention Code, adopted 10-4-1994 by Ord. No. 196, as amended.
§ 112-1 FIRE HYDRANT DISTRICTS § 112-2
104:115
§ 112-3. Construal of provisions.
That nothing in this article or in the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted
shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or
any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinances hereby repealed as cited
C. Chapter 1, Section 109, Paragraph 109.3, Violation penalties.
109.3 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Code Official,
or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall
be guilty of a summary offense punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
D. Chapter 9, FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS, Section 903, AUTOMATIC
SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
903.2 Where required.
Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures
shall be provided in the locations described in this section and in Use
Group B Business Use where the fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet
(1115M2).
Exception: Spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used
exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical
power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided
those spaces or areas are equipped with an automatic fire alarm
system and are separated from the remainder of the building by a wall
with a fire-resistance rating of not less than one hour and floor/ceiling
assembly with a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours.
E. Appendix B, FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS, Section
B103, MODIFICATIONS, Paragraph B103.1, Decreases.
B103.1 Decreases. The Fire Code Official is authorized to reduce the
fire-flow requirements for isolated buildings or a group of buildings in
rural areas or small communities where the development of full fireflow
requirements is impractical.
F. Appendix B, FIRE-FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS, Section
B103, MODIFICATIONS, Paragraph B103.2, Increases.
B103.2 Increases. The Fire Code Official is authorized to increase
the fire-flow requirements where conditions indicate an unusual
susceptibility to group fires or conflagrations. An increase shall not be
more than twice that required for the building under consideration.
§ 112-2 CONCORD CODE § 112-3
104:116
in § 112-4 of this article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affect by this article.
§ 112-4. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith, and especially
Ordinance No. 196, adopted October 4, 1994, are hereby repealed to the
extent of such inconsistency.
§ 112-3 FIRE HYDRANT DISTRICTS § 112-4
104:117
Chapter 115
HOUSEHOLD PETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 76. Zoning — See Ch. 210.
§ 112-4 CONCORD CODE § 112-4
115:118
ARTICLE I
Residential and Apartment Districts
[Adopted 6-5-2007 by Ord. No. 315]
§ 115-1. Kinds permitted; number restricted.
A. Farm animals, other than domestic animals customarily kept as
household pets, shall not be kept in residential or apartment districts.
B. Domestic pets shall be limited to a maximum of four pets per household
with a six-month exemption on such maximum limit of household pets
where a pet has had a litter.
§ 115-1 HOUSEHOLD PETS § 115-1
115:119
Chapter 120
MASSAGE AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 70.
§ 120-1. Purpose.
The Board of Supervisors of Concord Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, finds that to the detriment of the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the citizens of Concord Township, certain persons
attempt to disguise businesses promoting prostitution and related activities
as legitimate businesses offering therapeutic massage.
§ 120-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACCREDITED SCHOOL — Any school wherein the method, profession,
and work of massage is taught, which furnishes a statement of courses
offered, including anatomy and physiology, is accredited by a state unit
of educational accreditation, or by the American Massage and Therapy
Association, and furnishes a certificate or diploma of successful completion
of such course of study or learning.
APPLICANT — Any person applying for a license to render massage services
or to operate a massage establishment, and in addition thereto shall include
all partners in a general or limited partnership and all stockholders or
members of a corporation or limited liability company where the controlling
interest of the entity is held by five or fewer persons or legal entities.
EMPLOYEE — Any person over 18 years of age, other than a massagist,
who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage
establishment and received any compensation for his or her services.
MASSAGE — The manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing,
stroking, kneading, or tapping by hand, mechanical device, or other means.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any business establishment which provides
the service of massage, unless such business establishment is operated
by a medical practitioner, chiropractor or professional physical therapist
licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in connection with a
professional medical practice.
MASSAGIST — Any person trained at an accredited school, who, for any
consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage as defined
herein (the terms also includes a masseur or masseuse).
§ 115-1 CONCORD CODE § 120-2
120:120
PATRON — Any person over 18 years of age who receives massage under
such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay
money or give other consideration therefor.
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership, firm, association, jointstock
company, corporation, limited liability company, or combination of
individuals of whatever form or character.
PROSTITUTION — Engaging in sexual activity for consideration, including:
§ 120-3. License required.
No person shall engage in, carry out, provide or perform the business
of massage except in a massage establishment duly licensed under the
provisions of this chapter. Existing massage establishments shall submit
applications for the license required by this chapter hereunder, within 60
days of the enactment of this chapter.
§ 120-4. Exemption.
§ 120-5. Application to establish or maintain massage
establishment.
A. The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast;
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy; or
C. Homosexual and other deviate sexual relations.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA — Genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or
perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following
individuals while engaged in the performance of their respective
professions:
(1) Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical
therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective
professions in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
(2) Nurses who are licensed under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania;
(3) Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania except that this exemption
shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp and hair
of the customer or client for cosmetic or beautifying purposes; and
(4) Athletic trainers.
B. In any prosecution for violations of this chapter, the foregoing
exemptions shall constitute affirmative defenses.
§ 120-2 MASSAGE AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS § 120-5
120:121
A. Every applicant for a license to establish, maintain, operate or conduct
a massage establishment shall file an application, under oath, with the
Township and pay a nonrefundable annual license fee, which fee shall
be determined by the Board of Supervisors from time to time by
resolution. The application shall at a minimum provide the Township
with the following information:
(1) A detailed description of the services to be provided;
(2) The location(s) where the massage business will be located, its
mailing address and all telephone numbers listed to or providing
service or message for the massage establishment;
(3) The name, residence address and phone number of each applicant;
(a) If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company,
the name and residence address of each of the offers, directors
and members/shareholders together with the address of the
corporation, if different from the address of the massage
establishment; and
(b) If the applicant is a partnership (limited or general), the names
and residence address and phone numbers of each of the
partners and the address of the partnership itself if different
from the address of the massage establishment;
(4) The two previous business addresses used by the massage business
immediately prior to the proposed Concord Township address of
the massage establishment;
(5) Proof that the applicant, if an individual, is at least 21 years of age;
(6) The height, weight, hair and eye color and gender of any individual
applicant;
(7) Copy of photographic identification, such as a driver's license or
passport of each applicant;
(8) One front-face (portrait) two-inch by two-inch photograph of the
applicant, including a photograph of all officers, directors,
partners, members, and managing agents of any business entity
applicant;
(9) A statement of the business, occupation, or employment of the
applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the
application;
(10) The massage or similar business license history of the applicant,
whether such person, in previously operating in this or another
township or state, has had a business license revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or
occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;
§ 120-5 CONCORD CODE § 120-5
120:122
§ 120-6. Issuance of license.
The Township shall issue a license for a massage establishment after
approval by the Board of Supervisors, but only after all requirements for a
massage establishment or massagist permit have been met.
§ 120-7. Time of approval or denial of application.
The Township shall act to approve or deny an application for a license
hereunder within a reasonable period of time and in no event shall the
Township act to approve or deny the license later than 45 days from the date
said application is accepted by the Township. Every license issued under
this chapter shall expire one year from the date of the issuance, unless
sooner suspended or revoked.
(11) All summary, misdemeanor and felony criminal convictions of each
applicant, including the date of each conviction, the nature of the
crime and the place convicted;
(12) The name and address and one front-face (portrait) two-inch by
two-inch photograph of each massagist who is or will be employed
in the proposed massage establishment;.
(13) A copy of the diploma, certificate or other documentation
evidencing that each massagist has successfully completed the
curricula of an accredited school;
(14) The name and address of any massage establishment or other
similar business owned or operated by any person whose name is
required hereunder;
(15) A description of any other business proposed to be operated on the
same premises or adjoining premises owned or controlled by the
applicant;
(16) A signed authorization permitting the Township, its agents, and
employees to verify the applicant's information and the
qualifications of the applicant as set forth in the application; and
(17) Such other identification and information as may be reasonably
required by the Township in order to determine whether to issue
the license.
B. The application shall not be accepted by the Township until all of the
above required information has been provided to the Township and all
required fees have been paid. Any subsequent change in any of the
information provided hereunder must be reported in writing to the
Township within 10 days of said change.
§ 120-5 MASSAGE AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS § 120-8
120:123
§ 120-8. Posting of license.
Every license granted hereunder shall be conspicuously posted at or near
the interior entrance to the massage establishment.
§ 120-9. Registration of employees.
The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage
establishment shall maintain a written register of all persons employed at
any time at the massage establishment, including, but not limited to, all
massagists. Such register shall be available for inspection at the massage
establishment during regular business hours.
§ 120-10. Revocation or suspension of license.
Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Board of Supervisors after notice and a hearing, for good
cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this chapter are violated
or where any employee of the licensee, including any massagist, is engaged
in any conduct which violates any state or local laws or ordinances.
§ 120-11. Clothing and name tag requirements.
All employees, including massagists, shall wear clean, nontransparent outer
garments, covering all sexual or genital areas. Name tags for employees
and all massagists shall be worn and visible at all times.
§ 120-12. Persons under the age of 18 prohibited.
No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted in or on the premises of a
massage establishment, unless on lawful business.
§ 120-13. Hours of operation.
No massage establishment shall operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
§ 120-14. Inspection.
The Township or its authorized representatives may from time to time make
inspection of each massage establishment for the purpose of determining
compliance with this chapter.
§ 120-15. Unlawful acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, not a massagist, to perform, provide
or engage in a massage with any person in a massage establishment.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to
engage in prostitution.
§ 120-8 CONCORD CODE § 120-15
120:124
§ 120-16. Sale, transfer or change of location.
Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license
therefor shall immediately become null and void, except as approved as
provided in § 120-5. No license granted under this chapter shall be
transferrable.
§ 120-17. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of this chapter, upon conviction by the District
Justice, an individual or person shall be guilty of a summary offense and be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.
Chapter 124
NOISE DISTURBANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Violations and penalties — See Ch. 1, Art. II. Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 190.
§ 124-1. Unlawful conduct prohibited.
No person or occupant of any real estate shall carry on or permit to be
carried on any practice on his property which unreasonably interferes with
the quiet enjoyment and proper use of any property by the property owner
C. It shall be unlawful for any massagist or other person in a massage
establishment to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any
part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual
or genital area of any other person.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to
expose his or her sexual genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any
other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person in a massage
establishment to expose the sexual or genital area, or any portion
thereof, of any other person.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other
person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully
opaque covering, the sexual or genital area of his or her body.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a
massage establishment, knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about
such massage establishment, any agent, employee, or any other such
person under his control or supervision to perform any act or acts
prohibited by this chapter.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly allow any massage
establishment to be operated in violation of this chapter.
§ 120-15 NOISE DISTURBANCE § 124-1
124:125
or occupant of such property, or which creates or results in a hazard or a
nuisance on the property, and any such practice is hereby declared to be a
noise disturbance and unlawful.
§ 124-2. Prohibited uses and activities.
Without intending to limit or restrict the generality of the above definition
of and prohibition against unlawful conduct, the following acts and the
causing thereof are declared to be a noise disturbance and in violation of
this Chapter 124:
A. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio,
television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier,
automobile radio, automobile stereo, or any high-fidelity equipment or
similar device which produces, reproduces or amplifies sound:
(1) At any time in such manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
property boundary line or between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., so as to be plainly audible across a property boundary line;
(2) In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a property
boundary line or at 50 feet from such device, whichever is less,
when the device is operated in or on a motor vehicle or hand
carried on a public right-of-way or public space; or
(3) In such a manner and at a time which is generally considered to be
inappropriate and which unnecessarily disturbs the peace and
quiet of the immediate neighborhood.
B. Engaging in or permitting others to engage in building and construction
activities in a residential zoning district, or in areas adjacent to any
residential zoning district, or within 1,000 feet of any residential zoning
district between the hours of 9:00 p.m. prevailing time and 7:00 a.m.
prevailing time the following day, on weekdays and Saturdays or at any
time on Sundays or legal holidays, such that the sound and/or vibration
therefrom causes a noise disturbance across a residential property
boundary line. As used herein "building and construction activities"
shall include the erection, repair, renovation, demolition or removal of
any building or structure, and the excavation, filling, grading and site
work of lots in connection therewith.
C. Loading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates,
containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner
as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential property boundary
line. This subsection shall not apply to municipal or utility services in or
about the public right-of-way.
D. Using or exploding any fireworks, as that term is defined in the Act of
Assembly approved May 15, 1939, P. L. 134,38 its amendments and
38.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1271 et seq.
§ 124-1 CONCORD CODE § 124-2
124:126
§ 124-3. Certain conduct and sound exemptions.
The following conduct and the sounds produced therefrom are exempted
from the provisions of this chapter:
supplements, unless a permit shall first have been obtained as therein
provided, or the discharge of any firearms in such a manner as to
endanger the lives of persons or property within the Township.
E. For any person, firm or corporation to play, use or operate, for any
purpose whatsoever, on or upon a public street or thoroughfare in the
Township, any device known as a "sound truck," "loudspeaker" or
"sound amplifier" or radio or phonograph with a loudspeaker or sound
amplifier or any other instrument known as a "calliope" or any
instrument of any kind or character which emits therefrom loud and
raucous noises and is attached to any vehicle operated or standing upon
the streets or public places aforementioned.
F. Operating or permitting the operation of any off-the-road vehicle,
including any all-terrain vehicle, dirt bike, and/or snowmobile in areas
adjacent to residential districts or within 1,000 feet of any residential
district between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following
day on weekdays and Saturdays or at any time on Sundays or legal
holidays, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance
across a residential property boundary line.
A. Blasting under permit obtained from the Township Fire Marshal. Such
blasting may occur only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, unless specifically authorized by permit.
B. Sounds caused by the performance of emergency work or by the
ordinary and accepted use of emergency apparatus and equipment.
C. Sounds resulting from the repair or replacement of any municipal or
utility installation in or about the public right-of-way or all municipal
collections.
D. Sounds, not electronically amplified, created by organized school- or
church-related programs, activities and athletic and entertainment
events or other public programs, activities or events, other than motor
vehicle racing events, provided that such activities do not occur
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
E. Sounds made by warning devices operating continuously for three
minutes or less, except that in the event of an actual emergency the
time limitation shall not apply.
F. Agricultural equipment used in the course of farming; power mowers,
garden tractors and/or snowblowers when such operation of the same is
incidental to home, lawn or garden work or maintenance; or the ringing
of church bells or church chimes.
§ 124-2 NOISE DISTURBANCE § 124-4
124:127
§ 124-4. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 127
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 127-1. Maintenance of structures required.
§ 127-2. Maintenance of grounds required.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine of
$600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this chapter, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township
Code Enforcement Officer, Engineer, Manager, Zoning Officer, Building
Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire Marshal, as appropriate, who
shall follow the enforcement procedure set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties.
A. Every property and every part thereof, including but not limited to the
exterior walls, siding, roofs, windows, exterior doors, porches, shutters,
gutters and downspouts, awnings, exterior stairs and chimneys, and all
accessory structures, including fences, walkways, driveways, storage
sheds, pools and any accessory structure built upon or above the
ground, and every part thereof, shall be kept structurally sound and in a
state of good repair.
B. All exposed surfaces of the aforesaid buildings and structures which are
susceptible to decay shall be kept at all times painted or otherwise
provided with a finished protective coating sufficient to prevent
deterioration. Damaged materials must be repaired or replaced. Places
showing signs of rot, leakage, deterioration or erosion, weathering or
seepage are to be restored and protected.
C. The aforesaid buildings and structures shall also be maintained so that
the appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a
blight factor for adjoining property owners nor an element leading to
the progressive deterioration of the neighborhood.
A. Landscaping.
§ 124-4 CONCORD CODE § 127-2
127:128
(1) Shrubbery, lawns, hedges and other landscaping shall be
maintained and kept from becoming overgrown and unsightly or in
any state of neglect or disrepair.
(2) Lawns in excess of 10 inches in height constitute a violation of this
chapter.
B. Refuse.
(1) The grounds and exterior of the premises and all structures
thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances, unsanitary conditions
and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians or other
persons on or near the premises. Brush, weeds, broken glass,
obnoxious growths, garbage, trash, rubbish, abandoned
appliances, household furnishings, cars, boats and trailers, which
cars, boats and trailers or parts thereof are or have been junked,
abandoned, dismantled or are in a state of visible disrepair, and
debris of any description or nature shall be promptly removed from
any premises, lot, field or parcel of land. Holes, excavations,
breaks, projections and obstructions on the grounds shall be
promptly removed or repaired.
(2) Snow removal, landscaping and farming equipment must be stored
at designated areas located along the rear yard's building envelope
and must be adequately covered and/or screened.
C. Parking and maintenance of motor vehicles.
(1) Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or
unlicensed motor vehicle, tractor or motorized boat/trailer shall be
parked, kept or stored on any premises residential property and no
such vehicle shall be kept in a state of major disassembly, disrepair,
or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of
vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray
booth. In addition all vehicles must be parked on designated
impervious surfaces. Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted
to undergo major overhaul, including bodywork, provided that such
work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area
designed and approved for such purposes.
(2) Display for sale of any operated equipment such as, but not limited
to, motor vehicle, tractors or motorized boat/trailers, is prohibited
along areas of front or side yard.
D. Rodent harborage.
(1) All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from
harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes, which will not be
injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions
shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent
reinfestation.
§ 127-2 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 127-2
127:129
§ 127-3. Enforcement.
§ 127-4. Notification of violation; remedy required.
Prior to institution of proceedings before a court of proper jurisdiction
except in exigent circumstances, the Township Building Inspector or Code
Enforcement Officer shall cause a written notice containing the nature of
the violation to be served upon the owner and/or occupant of the property.
Service of the notice shall be made in person or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. In the event that service cannot be effectuated by
certified mail, service may be made by first-class mail with postage prepaid,
mailed to the last known address of the person to be served. Service
shall be deemed effective upon mailing, and the date of such mailing or
personal service shall be the beginning date for computation of the time
limits hereinafter established. Upon service of any notice of violation of this
chapter, the owner and/or occupant must correct the defective condition
within 30 days, or such further time as the Township official enforcing the
section shall agree, in writing.
§ 127-5. Hardship provisions.
(2) When firewood is stored adjacent to any building's exterior the
volume of firewood must be kept to a maximum of 1/3 cord or 42
cubic feet. The wood pile must also be elevated a minimum of six
inches above grade when not stored adjacent to a building or wood
piles must be located to the rear of the principal building and must
be covered and elevated six inches above ground.
A. The Township Manager, the Building Code Official or a representative
of either may enforce the provisions of this chapter, and, with the
approval of the Board of Supervisors, shall cause legal proceedings to
be instituted without prior notice to the landowner where the condition
of the premises poses a threat of imminent harm to the general public
or occupants.
B. If the nature of the condition found to exist on the property is such that
the general public or occupants are in danger, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall have the authority to order immediate repairs to be made
by the Township or an independent contractor under the direction of
the Township to render the condition safe. The property owner shall
promptly reimburse the Township for all such costs incurred by the
Township.
A. In the event an owner receives notice of a violation under § 127-4 of this
chapter and is unable to correct the defective condition within the
thirty-day period, the owner shall request a hardship hearing. A
hardship hearing shall be held by the Building Code Board of Appeals
within 30 days of receipt of the application, unless otherwise agreed
upon by the owner and the Township.
§ 127-2 CONCORD CODE § 127-5
127:130
§ 127-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding $1,000, plus attorney's fees and costs, for each day that
the violation continues after notice.
Chapter 128
RENTAL AND COMMERCIAL PROPERTY LICENSING AND
INSPECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 87.
Certificates of use and occupancy — See Ch.
90.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 91.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 127.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
Zoning use approval — See Ch. 214.
§ 128-1. Purpose. [Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 336]
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of residents of rental units, as well as employees and visitors of
commercial properties in the Township, by providing for annual licenses to
be issued after annual inspections by the Office of Property Safety, insuring
compliance with the requirements and standards set forth in the 2009
Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as well as with the
Code of Concord Township.
§ 128-2. Definitions.
B. The applicant must demonstrate that a hardship exists which makes
compliance with the notice of violation impossible. The Board of
Appeals, in its discretion, shall either deny the hardship request or
otherwise resolve the situation as is appropriate given the hardship.
C. No penalty prescribed under § 127-6 shall be pursued while a hardship
application is pending.
A. Where terms are not defined in this chapter but are defined in the
International Building Code, International Plumbing Code,
International Fire Code, International Mechanical Code or the ICC
Electrical Code, such terms shall have the meanings assigned to them
as stated in those Codes.
B. Where the following terms are used in this chapter, they shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 127-5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 128-2
127:131
APPEAL — A written notice addressed to the Concord Township UCC
Board of Appeals, to be filed at the Township Offices within 30 days of
any action or decision by the Concord Township Property Safety Officer.
APPROVED — In accordance with all laws and ordinances of the
Concord Township and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BASEMENT — A portion of any dwelling located partially underground
but having less than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS — The Board of Supervisors of Concord
Township.
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy.
BUILDING CODE — The Building Code of Concord Township.
BUSINESS (UNIT) — A room or group of rooms used for offices or a
retail use offering sales to the general public.
CELLAR — A portion of any building having half or more than half of
its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining
ground.
COMMERCIAL (UNIT) — Same as "business (unit)."
DUPLEX — Any family dwelling containing two dwelling units.
DWELLING — A building or structure which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for the use of one
or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with
cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EQUIPMENT — Any man-made object, not of a stationary nature, and
not a structure, located on any premises.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by
spraying, poisoning, fumigating or trapping; or by any other recognized
and legally approved pest elimination methods approved by the Public
Safety Officer.
FAMILY — A group of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption.
GARBAGE — Includes all vegetable and animal food wastes from the
preparation, cooking and serving of food; market wastes; and wastes
from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking, excluding bathrooms, water closet
compartments, laundries, foyers, pantries, communicating corridors,
stairways, closets, basement recreation rooms and storage spaces.
§ 128-2 CONCORD CODE § 128-2
127:132
HOTEL — A public house, providing lodging to the public, which opens
directly on a parking area.
INDUSTRIAL (UNIT) — A room, group of rooms or building used for
assembling, disassembling, fabricating, finishing, manufacturing,
packaging, repair or processing operations.[Added 5-10-2011 by
Ord. No. 336]
INFESTATION — The presence in or swarming or overrunning of a
dwelling or a part thereof, inside or outside, by insects or pests or the
presence of rodents or vermin in or outside the dwelling or any part
thereof.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any dwelling or part thereof containing
more than two dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Any person, including an owner or operator, living or
sleeping in a dwelling or rooming unit, or working in a commercial,
business or office unit.
OFFICE (UNIT) — A room or group of rooms used for conducting the
affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government.
OPENABLE AREA — The part of a window which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care, management or control
of any building or part of it in which dwelling units or commercial,
business or office units are let. For the purpose of this definition, a real
estate agent collecting the rent shall be presumed to be an operator.
Such presumption shall be overcome if said rental agent, within five
days receipt of notice of alleged violation, advises the Property
Inspector, in writing, that he has no authority to spend money to alter,
improve, manage or repair the premises involved and gives the correct
name and address of his principal.
OWNER — Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others,
holds legal or equitable title to any building, equipment or premises as
defined in this section. Beneficiaries under any trust or estate shall not
be deemed to hold legal or equitable title to any premises.
PERSON — Any individual firm, corporation, association or partnership
or any other legal entity.
PLUMBING CODE — The Plumbing Code of the Township of Concord
and all rules and regulations adopted thereunder.
PLUMBING or PLUMBING FIXTURES — Water-heating facilities, water
pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks,
installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed
clothes-washing machines, catch basins, drains, pumps, vents and other
similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water or
sewer lines.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings and
structures thereon, including the yard as defined hereinafter.
§ 128-2 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 128-2
127:133
§ 128-3. Administration and enforcement.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE — The 2009 Edition of the
International Property Maintenance Code.[Amended 5-10-2011 by
Ord. No. 336]
PROPERTY SAFETY OFFICER — The Township employee or consultant
designated by the Board of Supervisors to implement this chapter.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling or part thereof containing more
than one rooming unit in which space is let to one or more persons.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but
not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Includes all solid wastes having combustibles and
noncombustibles, such as cans and bottles, exclusive of garbage.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling containing no more than one
dwelling unit.
STORAGE (UNIT) — A building, structure, or portion thereof used for
storage.[Added 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 336]
SUPPLIED — Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator
at his expense.
UNFIT UNIT — Any unit not in accordance with the minimum standards
of this Code.
UNSAFE — Structurally unsafe or unsound, unstable, unsanitary,
inadequately provided with exit facilities, constituting a fire or health
hazard, unsuitable or improper for use or occupancy, constituting a
hazard to health or safety or public morals because of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment or otherwise
dangerous to life or property.
YARD — All grounds, lawns, courts, walks, driveways or other open
space constituting part of the same premises as a dwelling, and is
includable in the definition of "premises."
A. The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be the
responsibility of the Office of Property Safety, under the direct
supervision of the Township Manager and the Concord Township Board
of Supervisors.
B. The Concord Township Board of Supervisors shall annually approve
such rules and regulations, as well as fee schedules, as they deem
appropriate and necessary to enforce the purposes of this chapter. Such
fees and regulations shall be posted in the Township Offices.
C. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of an employee or
consultant retained by of Concord Township relating to this chapter
shall have the right to appeal, within 30 days by filing a written notice
with the Concord Township UCC Board of Appeals.
§ 128-2 CONCORD CODE § 128-4
127:134
§ 128-4. Licensing of properties.
A. No person shall operate or rent any property subject to the provisions
of this chapter without complying with the inspection and licensing
requirements of this chapter. The following types of structures and uses
are subject to the requirements of this chapter:
(1) Hotel rooms, motel rooms, rooming houses;
(2) Multifamily dwelling units;
(3) Single-family houses offered for rent;
(4) Commercial, industrial storage, business and office units.
[Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 336]
B. Every person applying for a license shall complete an application
available at the Township Offices and shall pay an annual license fee for
each rental unit as set forth in the Township's current fee schedule.39
Said license fee shall be issued for the calendar year or any part
thereof.
C. Every license shall conspicuously specify the maximum number of
occupants permitted to occupy the building/structure/room.
D. Every structure subject to the provisions of this chapter shall
conspicuously display the current license.
E. No license required under this chapter shall be transferable unless the
new owner or operator shall give notice, in writing, to the Township,
within 10 days after the change of ownership or rental interest. Such
notice shall include the name, address, phone number and e-mail
address of the person or persons succeeding to the ownership or
control of the licensed structure.
F. No license may be renewed or issued until an inspection of the premises
has been completed and approved.
G. Whenever any inspection required under this chapter reveals
conditions or practices existing in violation of the 2009 International
Property Maintenance Code or any later amended version, written
notice of the unacceptable conditions and practices shall be provided to
the owner or operator, with a direction to correct such conditions or
cease such practices by a date certain. The written notice shall also
include notice of the right to appeal and the method to perfect such
appeal.
H. Any person whose license has been suspended or who has received a
notice to correct conditions or to cease practices shall have a right to
appeal to the UCC Board of Appeals. Unless a written request for an
appeal has been filed with the Township, a license shall be
39.Editor's Note: A copy of the current fee schedule is on file in the Township offices.
§ 128-4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 128-4
127:135
§ 128-5. Inspections.
§ 128-6. Adopted Code standards. [Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No.
336]
The standards contained in the International Fire Code, the ICC Electrical
Code, the NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code, the NFPA 101 - Life Safety
automatically suspended on the date specified in the written notice as
the last date within which to correct the conditions noted therein to
bring the property into compliance. [Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord.
No. 336]
I. When a certificate of occupancy has been issued to the owner or
operator for the premises required to be licensed under this chapter, no
fee for a license under this chapter shall be charged during the 12
months immediately following the date of issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
A. The Office of Property Safety is hereby authorized and directed to make
annual inspections to determine conditions of properties subject to the
provisions of this chapter. For the purpose of making inspections,
employees of, or consultants retained by the Office of Property Safety
are authorized to enter, examine and inspect, at reasonable times, after
notice, all premises, buildings and units subject to this chapter, and, for
this purpose, the person in charge thereof shall provide access to any
part of such premises at reasonable times for such inspections.
[Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 336]
B. Inspections. Employees of, or consultants retained by the Office of
Property Safety shall carry and show adequate and complete
identification, and it shall be their duty to file in the offices of the
Township a list of each of the premises to be inspected that day. It shall
not be a violation of this chapter to refuse inspection until the owner,
occupant or person in charge of the premises has called the Township
offices to confirm the identification and purpose of the consultant/
employee's visit. No inspection shall be made except during hours when
the Township offices are open for public business.
C. The owner or occupant of every structure, office, building, or dwelling
unit subject to the chapter, or the person in charge thereof, shall, upon
written notice that entry could not be obtained, make the premises
open and available for inspection at a time set by the Office of Property
Safety and stated in the notice. If said time is not convenient to said
owner, occupant or person in charge, he/she shall promptly notify the
Township and set forth a date and time, within the Township office
hours, when an inspection may be made, but such time must be within
10 days of the Township notice. Failure to arrange a convenient time as
herein stated shall make said owner, occupant or person in charge
thereof subject to the civil enforcement provisions of this chapter.
[Amended 5-10-2011 by Ord. No. 336]
§ 128-4 CONCORD CODE § 128-6
127:136
Code and the International Plumbing Code, or the most recent editions
of these Codes as adopted by the Supervisors, are hereby adopted for all
properties subject to the requirements of this chapter. If a conflict exists
between any adopted code standard and any other standard contained
herein, the most restrictive standard shall govern.
§ 128-7. Enforcement; notices and orders.
Whenever the Office of Property Safety determines that there has been a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, notice of such violation
shall immediately be provided by first class mail, return receipt requested,
to the person or persons responsible therefor at the address set forth in the
license or the license application. Included in such notice shall be the date
by which remedial action must be taken, as well as an explanation of the
method and time within which to file an appeal.
§ 128-8. Appeals.
All appeals under this chapter shall be to the UCC Board of Appeals, in
accordance with the provisions and procedures as contained in the UCC.
Any person directly affected by notice or order issued under this chapter
shall have the right to appeal to the UCC Board of Appeals, provided that
a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the
decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be
based on a claim that the true intent of this chapter or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of
this chapter do not fully apply, or the requirements of this chapter are
adequately satisfied by other means.
§ 128-9. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Township, be subject to a fine up to $1,000 plus all
court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Township.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the District Justice determining that there has been a violation
further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person,
partnership or corporation violating the chapter to have believed that
there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to
have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. Thereafter,
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for such
violation shall be paid over to Concord Township.
§ 128-6 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 128-10
127:137
§ 128-10. Conflicts with other laws.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or other
provision of the Code of Concord Township existing on the effective date of
this chapter, the provision which establishes the more restrictive standard
for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the occupants
shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be
in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or the Code of Concord
Township existing on the effective date of this chapter which establishes a
lower restrictive standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the citizens, the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
to prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be
repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this chapter.
§ 128-11. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or illegal, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Board
of Supervisors of Concord Township hereby declares that it would have
passed this chapter, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
§ 128-12. When effective.
This chapter and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements and
matters established and adopted hereunder shall take effect and be in full
force and effect immediately from and after the date of its final passage and
adoption by the Board of Supervisors of Concord Township.
Chapter 130
(RESERVED)
Chapter 132
SALES, OUTDOOR AND SEASONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Transient retail merchants — See Ch. 176.
§ 132-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 128-10 CONCORD CODE § 132-1
130:138
§ 132-2. Limitations.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, association, corporation,
partnership or other business entity.
OUTDOOR AND SEASONAL SALES — Any temporary business of
selling and/or delivery by any person, whether as owner, agent,
consignee or employee, upon any street, sidewalk or private ground
within the Township of Concord, conducted at different times
throughout the year and often in advance of specific yearly holidays.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, "outdoor and seasonal sales" shall not
include:
(1) Any person, as defined herein, whether as owner, agent, consignee
or employee, who conducts a permanent business within the
Township: provided, however, that no such person shall be relieved
from the provisions of this chapter by reason of a temporary
association with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or
by conducting such a temporary or transient business in connection
with or as part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer.
(2) Any such person, as defined herein, who, as part of his permanent
business, conducts a temporary sidewalk sale in an area
immediately adjacent to or contiguous to the building where his
permanent business is conducted, provided that such sale is
operated in such a manner as to comply with any other provisions
of the Concord Township Code.
(3) A person, as defined herein, exhibiting goods for sale concurrent
with or as an adjunct to a group display, meeting or convention duly
authorized to be held inside a building and authorized and licensed
pursuant to the appropriate sections of the Code of the Township of
Concord.
(4) A person who sells his or her own property, which was not acquired
for resale, barter or exchange, when such activity is held on the
person's property, and when such person does not conduct such
sales more than twice during any calendar year, such as in the
commonly used term "garage sale."
A. Permits granted under this chapter shall be for a maximum of 14 days
(Type A) or 30 days (Type B), at the option of the applicant.
B. Outdoor sales shall not be conducted at any time before 8:00 a.m. or
after 9:00 p.m. on any day.
C. The total area of all signs used in connection with outdoor sales may not
exceed 16 square feet, and all use of any off-premises or illuminated
signs for such purposes is prohibited.
§ 132-1 SALES, OUTDOOR AND SEASONAL § 132-2
132:139
§ 132-3. Permit fee.
Any person, other than a 501(c) charitable or religious organization, who
desires to engage in outdoor sales as defined herein shall be required
to register with the Department of Code Enforcement of the Township of
Concord and to pay the registration fee in an amount as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The fees for a Type A permit
shall be lower than those for a Type B permit.
§ 132-4. Application procedure.
D. The sales display area must be located in such a manner as to allow at
least 12 feet of pedestrian walkway between the edge of the street and
the sales display area.
E. If a parking facility is to be shared with an existing permanent business,
then such use shall not reduce the parking available to the permanent
business to that which would be below the number of spaces required
by § 210-197 of the Zoning Code of the Township of Concord.
F. All proposed sales sites shall provide adequate, safe, egress and ingress
and parking, and the Department of Code Enforcement shall refer all
such applications to the Manager of the Township of Concord for a
determination as to whether the proposed outdoor business operation
would constitute a traffic safety hazard due to its proposed location.
A. The applicant must complete a Township application form, signed and
verified by the applicant, which application shall set forth:
(1) A detailed description of the kind and character of the business to
be licensed, including a detailed statement of the merchandise to
be sold or for which orders are to be solicited.
(2) The name and address of the person who owns and/or operates the
business to be licensed.
(3) A written confirmation, from the owner of the property to be used
in connection with the outdoor sales, of permission to use the
property for such purposes.
(4) A detailed description of the location or locations at which the
business is to be operated, including a plan showing, in square feet,
the area at the site to be devoted to the exclusive use of the
applicant's customers, as well as all required parking spaces.
(5) At least three business or banking references shall be provided
with the application.
(6) A certificate of insurance providing for minimum coverage in the
amount as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors for bodily injury and for property damage.
§ 132-2 CONCORD CODE § 132-4
132:140
§ 132-5. Issuance and exhibit of permit; appeals.
§ 132-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof by any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000, together with the costs of prosecution
for each violation of this chapter. Each day a violation exists shall constitute
(7) A refundable escrow deposit in an amount as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors to guarantee the cleanup
and restoration of the sales site to its pre-use condition, with such
deposit to be returned within two weeks following the completion
of such cleanup. In the event that the applicant fails to complete
such cleanup, the Township may cause the same to be done and
apply the escrow to the cost of such cleanup with both the seasonal
seller and the property owner to be jointly and severally liable for
such costs, whether or not covered by the escrow amount, which
shall not be considered to be a limit of their liability for such costs.
A. Upon receipt of such completed application and the prescribed fee, the
Code Enforcement Officer, if he shall find such application in order,
shall issue the permit required under this chapter, but no such permit
shall be issued if:
(1) The Township Manager has determined that the proposed outdoor
business operation will create a traffic safety hazard; and/or
(2) The proposed outdoor business operation constitutes a use, which
is not a permitted use under the applicable provisions of the Zoning
Code of the Township of Concord.
B. In the event that it is determined that any of the information supplied by
the applicant is incorrect or incomplete, or in the event that the
applicant violates any other provision of this chapter while operating
his seasonal sales business, the Code Enforcement Officer shall revoke
the previously issued permit. In case of any such revocation, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant in writing.
C. Every permit holder shall display such permit at the location or
locations where he is engaged in such business and shall exhibit such
permit, upon request, to all code officials.
D. Upon refusal or revocation of a permit, the applicant may appeal, in
writing, to the Board of Supervisors of the Township of Concord within
10 days after such refusal or revocation or within 30 days after filing a
completed application if no decision has been rendered; and the Board
of Supervisors shall thereupon afford the applicant an opportunity for
hearing, after which hearing the Supervisors may sustain the Code
Enforcement Officer's refusal or revocation or direct the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue or restore a permit.
§ 132-4 SALES, OUTDOOR AND SEASONAL § 132-6
132:141
a separate offense. Where there are multiple locations being operated under
a single permit and the same violation occurs at each location, then each
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 136
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 7, Art. II.
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Excavation and soil removal — See Ch. 98.
Plumbing — See Ch. 130.
Solid waste — See Ch. 142.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 148.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Water conservation — See Ch. 196.
§ 132-6 CONCORD CODE § 132-6
136:142
ARTICLE I
Operation and Maintenance of Sanitary Sewers
[Adopted 8-5-2004 by Ord. No. 28440]
§ 136-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
ABSORPTION AREA — A component of an individual or community
sewage disposal system where liquid from a treatment tank seeps into
the soil.
AUTHORITY — Concord Township Sewer Authority.
BAFFLE — The treatment tank appurtenance serving the purpose of
slowing the incoming sewage flow to facilitate solids settling.
BUILDING SEWER — The portion of the sewage drainage system of any
structure to a point five feet outside the structure.
BUILDING SEWER CLEANOUT — A cleanout on the building sewer just
inside or outside the building wall through which the sewer may be
cleaned.
BUILDING TRAP — A device, fitting or assembly of fittings installed on
the building drain to prevent circulation of air between the drainage
system of the building and the building sewer.
CESSPOOL — A hole dug or container installed on improved property
below the surface of the ground which is designed to collect and to
disperse and dispose of all liquids collected by the structure's on-site
sewage collection system.
CLEAN STREAMS LAW — The Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, 35 P.S.
§§ 691.1 through 691.101.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Township employee(s)
charged with the enforcement of all Township ordinances, codes and
regulations relating to health, safety and the appearance and
maintenance of properties throughout the Township, and the inspection
of properties in the Township for purposes of the issuance of permits,
licenses and certificates of occupancy.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure intended to be used
wholly or in part for the purposes of carrying on a trade, business or
profession or for social, amusement, religious, educational, charitable
or public uses.
COMMUNITY ON-LOT SEWAGE SYSTEM (COLDS) — A system of
piping, tanks or other facilities, whether publicly or privately owned,
serving two or more lots and collecting, treating and disposing of
sewage into a soil absorption area or retaining tank.
40.Editor's Note: This article provided for the repeal of former Art. I, adopted 12-6-1988 by
Ord. No. 166, as amended, which article consisted of §§ 136-1 through 136-11.
§ 136-1 SEWERS § 136-1
136:143
COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM — A sewage facility, whether publicity
or privately owned, for the collection, treatment and/or disposal of
sewage from two or more lots or two or more equivalent dwelling units.
CONCORD TOWNSHIP SEWER AUTHORITY - INSTALLED SEWER
LINES — Sewer lines installed by Concord Township Sewer Authority
as distinguished from those sewer lines, mains, laterals, pumps
stations, etc., installed by developers and subsequently accepted for
dedication by Concord Township Sewer Authority.
DOMESTIC STRENGTH WASTE — Sewage of the strength that is
normally discharged from a residence, i.e., toilet wastes and kitchen
wastes. All other wastes of any form will be considered "industrial
wastes" and are subject to rules and regulations covering industrial
waste.
EATING OR DRINKING PLACE — Any establishment where food,
foodstuff or beverages are served or provided for human consumption,
with or without charge, including among others, hotels, restaurants,
cafes, cafeterias, clubs, boardinghouses, ice cream parlors, soda water
or soft drink fountains, and bars or taverns.
FOOD OR BEVERAGE MANUFACTURING, PROCESSING AND
MERCHANDISING ESTABLISHMENTS — Any establishment where
food, food products and beverages are manufactured, processed,
packaged or bottled, or sold for consumption off the premises of the
seller, including among others, bakeries, beverage distributors,
bottlers, candy and confectionery manufacturers, dairies, frozen-foodlocker
plants, wholesalers and retailers, and operators of vending
machine services.
FRESH-AIR VENT — A direct connection leading from the building trap
to the outer air.
GREASE TRAP — A device installed in a sanitary waste pipe for the
purpose of collecting grease and preventing it from continuing to travel
in the waste piping system. Grease traps may be installed internally,
in the inside of a building at the various grease-producing plumbing
fixtures and equipment, or they may be installed externally, outside of
the building.
GRINDER PUMP — A submersible, electric motor-driven pump capable
of macerating all material found in normal domestic sanitary sewage,
including reasonable amounts of objects such as plastics, sanitary
napkins, disposable diapers and the like, to a fine slurry and pumping
this material through a small-diameter discharge pipe. The grinder
pump shall be housed in a vented, watertight enclosure.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within the Township
upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and
from which structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be
or may be discharged.
§ 136-1 CONCORD CODE § 136-1
136:144
INDIVIDUAL ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A collection
of piping, tanks and other facilities privately owned, for collecting,
treating and disposing of sewage from one lot. These facilities shall
include retaining tanks, soil absorption areas, individual spray fields
and individual stream discharge systems and all appurtenances.
INDIVIDUAL RESIDENTIAL SPRAY IRRIGATION SYSTEM — An
individual sewage system which serves a single dwelling and which
treats and disposes of sewage using a system of piping, treatment tanks
and soil renovation through spray irrigation.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE SYSTEM — A system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving a single lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in
whole or in part into the soil or into waters of this Commonwealth or by
means of conveyance to another site for final disposal.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure intended to be used
wholly or in part for the manufacturing, fabricating, processing,
cleaning, laundering or assembly of any product, commodity or article,
or from which any process waste, as distinct from domestic strength
sewage, shall be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or water
borne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business enterprise or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct
from domestic strength sanitary sewage. Industrial sewage must be
treated by the owner of the premises to domestic waste strength and
composition.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any room, group of rooms,
building(s) or other enclosure which does not constitute a commercial
establishment, a dwelling unit, or an industrial establishment.
LATERAL, AUTHORITY-OWNED — The piping extending from the
public sewer to the right-of-way or easement line adjacent to any
property. This lateral is owned and maintained by the Authority.
LATERAL, PRIVATELY OWNED — That portion of piping extending
between the point of connection at the Authority-owned lateral and the
building sewer. This lateral is and shall be owned and maintained by the
property owner.
LIQUID WASTE — Sewage pumped from septic tank cesspools, holding
tanks, privies and nontoxic biodegradable industrial waste liquids.
MALFUNCTION — The failure of any part, component or appurtenance
of a sewage disposal system which results in the backup of sewage into
a building or the discharge of untreated or partially treated sewage to
the surface of the ground or the waters of the Commonwealth.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Concord.
§ 136-1 SEWERS § 136-1
136:145
OFFICIAL PLAN — The current comprehensive Act 53741 sewage
facilities plan of Concord Township as adopted by the Board of
Supervisors and as may be amended and revised from time to time.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of any property located in Concord Township.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — The person or persons appointed or
designated by the Township for the purpose of enforcing Township
ordinances, codes and regulations as related to plumbing.
PRIVATE DWELLING OR LIVING UNIT — A any structure intended to
be occupied as a whole by one family or an apartment intended to be
occupied by one family or any other one-family living unit.
PUBLIC SEWER — All facilities owned and operated by the Authority
for the collection, transportation, treatment or disposal of sanitary
sewage.
RETAINING TANK — A watertight receptacle, whether temporary or
permanent, which receives and retains sewage and is designed and
constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site.
The term includes but is not limited to:42
SANITARY SEWAGE — The liquid carrying domestic-strength
household and toilet wastes from residences, business buildings,
institutions, and commercial and industrial establishments.
SEPARATOR — A device installed in a sanitary waste pipe for the
purpose of separating and collecting oily and/or flammable wastes,
sands, heavy solids, glass, rags, feathers and/or other similar materials,
which may have a detrimental effect on the operation of the sewer
CHEMICAL TOILET — A permanent or portable nonflushing toilet
using chemical treatment in the retaining tank for odor control.
(1)
HOLDING TANK — A tank, whether permanent or temporary, to
which sewage is conveyed by a water-carrying system.
(2)
PRIVY — A tank designed to receive sewage where water under
pressure is not available.
(3)
INCINERATING TOILET — A device capable of reducing waste
materials to ashes.
(4)
COMPOSTING TOILET — A device for holding and processing
human and organic kitchen waste, employing the process of
biological degradation through the action of microorganisms to
produce a stable, humus-like material.
(5)
RECYCLING TOILET — A device in which the flushing medium is
restored to a condition suitable for reuse in flushing.
(6)
41.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 750.1 et seq.
42.Editor's Note: See also Art. II, Retaining Tanks.
§ 136-1 CONCORD CODE § 136-1
136:146
§ 136-2. Sanitary sewer system and appurtenances.
This section applies to all facilities for collecting, pumping, transporting,
treating and/or disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, situated
system or sewage treatment facility and preventing them from
continuing to travel in the waste piping system.
SEPTAGE TRANSPORTER — An individual, company or corporation
licensed to and engaged in the business of removing liquid sewage
waste as defined herein and disposing of said waste in an approved
manner.
SEWER MANAGER — Any person who may, from time to time, be
placed in general charge of the sewer system.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities owned and operated by the Authority
for the collection, transportation, treatment or disposal of sanitary
sewage.
SPRAY IRRIGATION SYSTEM — Any system, whether publicly or
privately owned, designed, constructed and operated for the purpose of
collecting, treating and disposing of sewage using a system of piping,
treatment tanks and soil renovation utilizing spray land application.
STREAM DISCHARGE SYSTEM — Any system designed and permitted
to collect and treat sewage and discharge treated effluent to a
watercourse, swale or storm sewer.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Concord, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
TREATMENT TANK — A watertight tank designed to retain sewage
long enough for satisfactory bacterial decomposition of the solids to
take place; the term includes but is not restricted to the following:
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
improvements, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed
water, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels of conveyance of
surface and underground water or any of their parts.
SEPTIC TANK — A treatment tank that provides for anaerobic
decomposition of sewage prior to its discharge to an absorption
area.
(1)
AEROBIC SEWAGE TREATMENT TANK — A mechanically aerated
treatment tank that provides aerobic biochemical stabilization of
sewage prior to its discharge to a stream or absorption area.
(2)
B. Word usage. All other words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings set forth in the Pennsylvania Code, Title 25, Chapter
73, Standards for Sewage Disposal Facilities, of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
§ 136-1 SEWERS § 136-2
136:147
in or adjacent to the Township of Concord and owned, maintained and
operated by the Township or the Concord Township Sewer Authority.
§ 136-3. Community sewerage systems.
This section applies to all community sewerage systems located in the
Township of Concord, including systems privately owned and publicly
owned and including stream discharge systems and community on-lot
systems.
§ 136-4. Water conservation.
A. Any and all sanitary sewer systems and appurtenances in the Township
of Concord shall be designed, installed, operated and maintained in
accordance with and pursuant to rules and regulations adopted, from
time to time, by Concord Township, the Concord Township Sewer
Authority, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
and the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
B. A certified copy of all such rules and regulations adopted by the
Concord Township Sewer Authority shall be filed with the Township for
informational purposes within 30 days after their adoption by the
Authority and available for review during business hours.
A. Any and all community sewerage systems located in the Township of
Concord, now existing or hereafter established, shall be designed,
installed, operated and maintained in accordance with and pursuant to
rules and regulations adopted from time to time by Concord Township,
the Concord Township Sewer Authority and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
B. A certified copy of all such rules and regulations adopted by the
Concord Township Sewer Authority shall be filed with the Township for
informational purposes, within 30 days after their adoption by the
Authority and available for review during business hours.
A. No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any
residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational,
governmental or public building or structure of any kind which is
constructed or remodeled, and in which plumbing, water piping or
water fixtures are to be installed, extended or altered in any way, and
for which construction a permit is required to be obtained from
Concord Township (or would be required but for an exemption from a
permit requirement for public or governmental agencies) unless the
new, extended or altered plumbing, water piping and other water using
fixtures therein conform to the requirements and standards of this
article.
§ 136-2 CONCORD CODE § 136-4
136:148
B. All persons shall be encouraged not to permit any water furnished by
Chester Water Authority or other purveyor of water to run to waste in
any gutter or other impervious surface.
C. Each resident or property owner of the Township of Concord not subject
to the application of this article is urged to install fixtures which will
reduce the quantity of water required to flush toilets and to reduce the
flow rates of showers and faucets by employing measures and
observing the standards set forth in Subsection D herein.
D. Buildings or structures which are subject to the application of this
article shall be bound by the following specifications:
(1) Water closets operated by flush tanks (water-saving water closets)
having an average consumption over 6.0 Lpf (1.6 gpf), but not
exceeding 13.2 Lpf (3.5 gpf) when tested per the test procedures
contained in ASME A112.19.6.
(2) Water closets and urinals operated by flushometers:
(a) Low-consumption water closets having an average
consumption of 6.0 Lpf (1.6 gpf) or less when tested per the
test procedures contained in ASME A112.19.6.
(b) Low-consumption urinals having an average consumption of
3.8 Lpf (1.0 gpf) or less when tested per the test procedures
contained in ASME A112.19.6.
(3) Showerheads. Showerhead discharge rates shall not exceed 2.5
gpm when tested per the test procedures contained in ASME
A112.18.1-2000.
(4) Sink faucets.
(a) Kitchen sink faucet discharge rates must comply with the
maximum flow rates as indicated within table 4 of ASME
A112.18.1-2000 when tested per the test procedures set forth
in table 4 of ASME A112.18.1-2000.
(b) Residential lavatory sink faucet discharge rates must comply
with the maximum flow rates as indicated within table 4 of
ASME A112.18.12000 when tested per the test procedures set
forth in table 4 of ASME A112.18.1-2000.
(c) Nonresidential lavatory faucets shall be either self-closing or
metering faucets as described below:
[1] Self-closing faucets must comply with the maximum flow
rates as indicated within table 4 of ASME A112.18.1-2000
when tested per the test procedures set forth in table 4 of
ASME A112.18.1-2000.
§ 136-4 SEWERS § 136-4
136:149
§ 136-5. Design and installation of capped sewers.
All owners of land intended to be improved and developed shall, as part
of final approval of the improvement or development, agree to design and
install a capped sewer system for connection to and becoming part of the
sewer system of the Concord Township Sewer Authority if the sewer system
has not yet been completed in the area of the development.
[2] Metering faucets shall be field adjustable and set so that
the discharge quantity complies with the maximum flow
rates as indicated with in table 4 of ASME A112.18.1-2000
when tested per the test procedures set forth in table 4 of
ASME A112.18.1-2000.
(5) Blowout toilets and urinals. Replacement of blowout toilet and
urinal fixtures with like-type fixtures may be granted by the
Township upon request where adequate justification of special
need is provided.
(6) Pressure-reducing valve. Where the service water pressure to a
building is expected to exceed 60 psi, a water-pressure-reducing
valve with strainer shall be installed just downstream of the
building's main valve so as to be accessible. The valve shall provide
for pressure adjustment within the range of 40 to 60 psi. The valve
shall conform to the requirements of product standard ASSE 1003.
Exemptions to this subsection are service lines to sill cocks, outside
hydrants and main supply risers to buildings where pressure from
the mains does not exceed 60 psi at the fixture branches or at
individual fixtures.
E. Any person(s) may apply to the Township of Concord for an exception
from the terms of this subsection, which exception may be granted in
the discretion of the Board of Supervisors upon proof that some other
device, system or procedure will save as much or more water as those
set forth herein, or that those set forth herein cannot be complied with
without undue hardship.
F. The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, modify, add to or
remove from the standards and restrictions set forth herein.
A. Capped sewers shall be required to be installed in accordance with all
Authority regulations. The sewers shall be installed in their entirety,
including capped laterals for each lot extended to the right-of-way or
easement line. When capped sewers are provided, on-site sewage
facilities shall also be provided. Capped sewers shall be accepted for
dedication at such time as the Authority deems practical. Until such
time, capped sewers shall remain privately owned by the developer or
homeowners' association pursuant to the rules and regulations of the
Concord Township Sewer Authority.
§ 136-4 CONCORD CODE § 136-5
136:150
§ 136-6. Use of sewers required.
B. The capped sewer system shall be in accordance with the applicable
Township and Sewer Authority specifications and standards. Routing
and limits of the sewer to be installed shall be as approved by the
Authority. Laterals will be a minimum of four inches in diameter and
will be installed to the right-of-way line. All laterals will have a cleanout
installed at the end. A manufactured cap of the type intended for use
with the type of pipe being installed will be used to seal the end of the
lateral. The developer will submit to the Authority a sketch of each
lateral showing the location and depth of the end of each lateral.
C. A certified copy of all specifications and standards for capped sewers
adopted by the Concord Township Sewer Authority shall be filed with
the Township for informational purposes and shall be available for
review during business hours.
A. Connection requirements.
(1) The owner of any property whose principal building(s) is/are within
150 feet of the Concord Township Sewer Authority - installed sewer
lines shall connect with and use the sewer system in such manner
as the Authority may require within 60 days after notice to such
owner from the Township, to make such connection, for the
purpose of discharge of all normal domestic-strength sanitary
waste from such property, subject to such limitations and
restrictions as shall be established herein or otherwise shall he
established by this Township or the Authority from time to time,
(a) Any residential property owner who is directed to connect to
the Township sewer system may, within 30 days of receipt of
the notice to connect, apply in writing to the Board of
Supervisors of Concord Township for permission to delay the
required connection.
(b) The Board of Supervisors of Concord Township will, upon
receipt of a timely written request for a delay in connecting to
the Concord Township Sewer Authority sewer system,
promptly schedule a public hearing to consider the residential
property owner's request.
(c) The Board of Supervisors of Concord Township may, by
majority vote at the conclusion of the public hearing, grant a
residential property owner's request to delay, for a specified
period not to exceed two years, the mandatory connection to
the Township sewer system referred to in subsection A(1)
above until the happening of one of the following:
[1] Sale or voluntary or involuntary transfer of the property or
any portion of the property;
§ 136-5 SEWERS § 136-6
136:151
[2] Failure or malfunction of the property's on-site sewage
system, or
[3] The expiration of the extension period granted to the
property owner by the Board of Supervisors by majority
vote at the public hearing on the extension request.
(d) In considering the request for an extension filed by a
residential property owner, the Board of Supervisors shall take
into consideration:
[1] Any recent major expenditures to an on-site sewage
system;
[2] The financial holdings of the residential owners; and
[3] The financial burden an extension would place on the
Concord Township Sewer Authority.
(e) The Board of Township Supervisors may, after a hearing, if the
owner of the improved property establishes substantial
hardship precluding immediate connection to the sewer
system and establishes that the current on-site sewage
disposal system is functioning properly, extend the period
within which the connection to the sewer system must be made
for up to 24 months. Any such extension granted by the Board
of Supervisors shall be applicable only to the original applicant
and shall be rendered void upon the sale or transfer of the
property or any portion thereof.
(2) No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used or maintained at any time upon any improved
property which has been connected to the sewer system or which is
required under this section to be connected to the sewer system.
Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle in existence shall be abandoned and shall be cleansed
and filled, and any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank
or similar receptacle not so abandoned and cleansed and filled shall
constitute a nuisance, and such nuisance may be abated by the
Township as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such
improved property, such expense to include the Township's
attorney fees.
(3) All such holding vessels or receptacles shall be decommissioned at
or before the time that the connection is made to the sewer system
and shall be accomplished as follows:
(a) All existing residue shall be pumped out by a licensed septage
transporter and be removed for off-site disposal. Under no
circumstances may the residue be introduced into the new
sewer line.
§ 136-6 CONCORD CODE § 136-6
136:152
(b) The vessel or receptacle's bottom shall be broken after all
residue has been removed and its lid collapsed into the vessel
or receptacle. The volume must then be filed with A-1 type
stone mix.
(c) All conduits leading from the vessel or receptacle shall be
disconnected and all openings shall be similarly filled.
(d) All existing fields shall then be abandoned, but no structures of
any kind, including sheds, garages or other accessory uses,
may be erected over the filled vessels or abandoned fields.
(4) No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
may at any time be connected with the sewer system.
(5) The notice to an owner by the Township to make a connection to the
sewer system shall consist of a written or printed document or
letter addressed to the record owner of the improved property
requiring connection in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and specifying that such connection shall be made within
60 days from the date such notice is given. Such notice may be
issued at any time after a sewer is in place which can receive and
convey normal domestic strength waste for treatment and disposal
from the particular property. Such notice shall be served upon the
owner either by personal service or by registered mail or by such
method as at the time may be provided by state law.
(6) If the owner of any property whose principal building is within 150
feet of the sewer system, after 60 days notice in accordance with
this section, shallt fail to connect such property and/or fail to pay
the required fees and/or fail to use the sewer system as required,
the Township may cause such property to be entered upon and
connected to the sewer system as provided by law. The Township
shall collect from such owner the actual costs and expenses
incurred in such work.
(7) Where connection to the sewer system is made by the Township
after notice to the owner, the Township shall immediately upon
completion of the work send an itemized bill for the cost of the
construction of such connection to the owner of the improved
property to which such connection has been made. Such bill shall
be payable within 30 days of receipt. In case of neglect or refusal
by the owner of such improved property to pay such bill within such
time, or to enter into a written installment agreement with the
Township to pay such bill in 12 monthly or four quarterly
installment payments, the Township shall, within six months of the
completion of the sewer connection, file a municipal lien against
the property for all costs associated with the sewer connection, the
same to be subject in all respects to the general law provided for
the filing and recovery of municipal liens.
§ 136-6 SEWERS § 136-6
136:153
§ 136-7. Grinder pump connections.
§ 136-8. Separators and grease traps.
B. Any and all connections of improved property to the sewer system
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be in accordance
with and pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted from time to
time by the Authority.
C. A certified copy of all such rules and regulations adopted by the
Authority shall be filed with the Township, for informational purposes,
within 30 days after adoption by the Authority, and available for review
during business hours.
A. General.
(1) The owner of any improved property that wants to utilize a grinder
pump to discharge sanitary sewage to the sewer system as a
replacement of an existing grinder pump facility or as an initial
installation must receive permission from the Concord Township
Sewer Authority prior to installing the grinder pump.
(2) Installation shall be performed only by qualified personnel who
shall be named in the Concord Township Sewer Authority
application for the connection permit.
(3) The owner of the improved property that wants to utilize a grinder
pump shall obtain a plumbing permit from Concord Township and
shall provide evidence that the following information has been
supplied to the Sewer Authority for review and approval:
(a) The manufacturer's detail sheet for the proposed grinder
pump;
(b) A pump curve for the proposed grinder pump;
(c) A copy of the manufacturer's installation instructions; and
(d) A plan of the proposed connection, which depicts all
information that would be required for the Sewer Authority to
determine if the grinder pump would function as it is intended,
including but not limited to the location of the building or
structure that is being connected, the elevation of the existing
building sewer and the lateral and the proposed routing of the
discharge piping.
(4) The design, installation, repair and maintenance of the grinder
pump shall be in accordance with the requirements prescribed by
the Concord Township Sewer Authority.
B. Maintenance of grinder pump. The property owner shall be responsible
for maintenance and repair of the grinder pump system from the pump
to the cleanout at the Authority-owned lateral.
§ 136-6 CONCORD CODE § 136-8
136:154
A. Application to existing and future owners.
(1) The provisions of this section are intended to apply to all existing
and future users of the sewer system. Existing users shall have 90
days from the adoption of this article to construct such facilities
and take such measures as may be necessary to bring their
establishments in conformance with this article.
(2) Future users of the sewer system shall be in compliance with this
article at the time connection is allowed to the system.
B. Separators and grease traps not required. Neither separators nor
grease traps are required for residences. If, however, groups of
residences utilize a common kitchen facility or dining facility, then the
provisions of this section shall be applied.
C. Information. All users currently connected to the sewer system and all
future users who apply for connection to the sewer system in the future
are required to provide information and documentation to the Authority
sufficient so that the Authority may determine whether a separator or
grease trap is required.
D. Prohibited wastes. The following wastes are prohibited from being
deposited into any sewer system:
(1) Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease,
garbage with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension,
animal guts or tissues, paunch, manure, bones, hair, hides, spent
lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood,
plastics, solvents, gasoline, antifreeze, oil-based paints, tar,
asphalt, residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel,
lubricating oil, mud, glass grindings, polishing wastes, fur, ashes,
incinerator residue, dredged spoil, solid waste, construction
materials, rock, sand, cellar dirt, feathers, wood, tar, cinders,
medical waste or any other harmful chemicals.
(2) No residential, commercial or industrial property which is
connected to the sewer system may discharge any surface water
from sump pumps, gutters, drains, downspouts, air-conditioning
condensate lines, or any other similar source into the sewer
system. All privately owned laterals must be maintained so as to
minimize the infiltration of groundwater into the sewer system.
E. Grease trap.
(1) Grease traps shall be provided pursuant to the Authority's
specification rules and regulations when, in the opinion of the
Authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing floatable grease in such amounts as to cause
§ 136-8 SEWERS § 136-8
136:155
obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the
operation of any public or private wastewater treatment facilities.
In general, grease traps shall be required at all eating and drinking
places and food or beverage manufacturing, processing and
merchandising establishments.
(2) All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. All systems shall be designed,
constructed and operated in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications.
(3) Grease traps shall be equipped with devices to control the rate of
water flow so that the manufacturer's rating is not exceeded. The
minimum capacity of a grease trap shall be such that the grease
retention capacity measured in pounds of grease shall be at least
two times the total flow-through rating measured in gallons per
minute.
(4) All grease traps shall be from a manufacturer with a minimum of
five years of experience in the manufacturing of grease traps and/
or shall conform to the Plumbing and Drainage Institute (PDI)
standard G101.
F. Separators.
(1) Separators shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Authority,
they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing oil, sand, any flammable wastes, or any other harmful
ingredients in such amounts as to cause obstruction to the flow in a
sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities.
(2) At separators shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. All systems shall be designed,
constructed and operated in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications.
(3) Separators required. At repair garages, gasoline stations with
grease racks, grease pits, or work racks, and at factories where oily
and flammable liquid wastes are produced, separators shall be
installed into which all oil-bearing, grease-bearing, or flammable
wastes shall be discharged before emptying in the building
drainage system or other point of disposal.
(4) Separation of liquids. A mixture of treated or untreated light and
heavy liquids having various specific gravities shall be separated in
an approved receptacle.
(5) Design of oil and liquid separators. Separators shall be designed as
provided below:
§ 136-8 CONCORD CODE § 136-8
136:156
(a) Overall requirements. Oil separators shall have a depth of not
less than two feet below the invert of the discharge drain. The
outlet opening of the separator shall have not less than an
eighteen-inch water seal.
(b) Garages and service stations. Where automobiles are serviced,
greased, repaired, washed or where gasoline is dispensed,
separators shall have a minimum capacity of six cubic feet for
the first 100 square feet of area to be drained into the
separator. Parking garages in which servicing, repairing, or
washing is not done, and in which gasoline is not dispensed,
shall not require a separator. Areas of commercial garages
which are used for storage of automobiles only are not
required to be drained through a separator.
(6) Sand separators. Separators for sand, grit, and similar heavy solids
shall be so designed and located as to be readily accessible for
cleaning and shall have a water seal of not less than six inches.
Sand and grit separators shall be required at all locations where
cars or trucks are washed and shall have a minimum capacity of
500 gallons at such locations.
(7) Laundries. Commercial laundries shall be equipped with
separators having a wire basket or similar device, removable for
cleaning, that will prevent passage into the drainage system of
solids 1/2 inch or larger in size, string, rags, buttons, or other
materials detrimental to the public sewage system.
(8) Bottling establishments. Bottling plants shall discharge their
process wastes into a separator which will provide for the
separation of sugar, broken glass or other solids, before
discharging waste into the drainage system.
(9) Slaughterhouses. Slaughtering room and dressing room drains
shall be equipped with approved separators. The separator shall
prevent the discharge into the drainage system of feathers,
entrails, and any other materials that could potentially cause
clogging.
(10) Venting of separators. Separators shall be so designed that they
will not become air bound if tight covers are used. Each interceptor
or separator shall be vented when subject to loss of trap seal.
G. Costs.
(1) The owner of each improved property shall be responsible for all
costs associated with the installation, operation, maintenance and
replacement of separators and/or grease traps. These costs shall
include the cost of properly disposing of the accumulated material.
(2) If a separator or grease trap at an improved property was not
installed or malfunctions due to lack of maintenance, lack of
§ 136-8 SEWERS § 136-8
136:157
§ 136-9. Maintenance of individual on-lot sewage disposal systems.
In accordance with and pursuant to the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act, as amended, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., the Pennsylvania
Solid Waste Management Act, as amended, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.,.
and Title 25, Chapter 73, of the Pennsylvania Code, "Standards for On-
Lot Sewage Treatment Facilities, and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection, the Township of Concord has
determined that registration and regular maintenance of individual on-site
sewage disposal systems will help prevent malfunctions, extend the life of
such system(s), reduce the necessity for installation of community sewer
systems thus saving expense to the homeowner and the Township, and
protect the waters of the Commonwealth.
cleaning or for any other reason and such lack of installation or
failure shall cause blockages, sewage back-ups, sewage overflows
or in any other manner damages or interferes with the operation of
the sewer system, then the owner of the improved property shall
be responsible to pay for all costs required to repair and clean the
Authority's sewer system. Such costs shall include, but shall not be
limited to cleaning costs, pumping costs, engineering costs, legal
fees and administrative costs.
H. Inspection.
(1) The Authority shall have the right to inspect the grease traps and/
or separators to ensure that the systems are in working order and
that the systems are being properly maintained and cleaned. The
Authority shall have the right to inspect the cleaning records at the
time the inspection occurs.
I. Maintenance and records. The owner of an improved property which
utilizes a grease trap and/or separator shall at all times keep the system
in good working condition. The traps or separators shall be cleaned
periodically to keep them in good working order. All traps and
separators shall be cleaned at least once every three months. The
records shall include the date of disposal, the means of disposal, the
name and signature of the person responsible for supervising the
cleaning of the separators and grease traps and the proper disposal of
the accumulated material. Annually the owner shall transmit a copy of
the cleaning records to the Authority. Records of each cleaning shall be
maintained by the establishment for a period of three years.
J. Disposal of accumulated material. All materials which are accumulated
by the separators and/or grease traps shall be properly disposed of by
the owner. Under no circumstances shall accumulated material be
allowed to enter into the sewer system. Any removal and hauling of the
collected materials not performed by owner's (owners') personnel must
be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
§ 136-8 CONCORD CODE § 136-9
136:158
A. All owners of individual on-site sewage disposal systems with a stream
discharge, now in existence or hereafter installed, shall, within 60 days
of the effective date of this article, register with Concord Township and
secure a permit. No such permit shall be issued except upon receipt by
the Township from the owner of evidence that the owner possesses a
valid permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection for a stream discharge and copies of all sewage tests
conducted of the system during the preceding year.
B. All owners of existing individual on-site sewage disposal systems with
no stream discharge shall register with Concord Township within six
months of the effective date of this article on forms to be provided by
the Township, registering as a minimum the precise location on the lot
of all elements of the sewer system and the name and address of the
last septage transporter used by the owner to pump the sewer system.
C. All owners of individual on-site sewage disposal systems with no stream
discharge installed after the effective date of this article shall obtain a
valid permit from the Township prior to and as a requirement for the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
D. All owners of single-family residences utilizing an individual on-lot
sewage disposal system shall have the septic tank(s) pumped at least
once every two years. This service must be performed only by a septage
transporter licensed by Concord Township.
E. All owners of multifamily residences utilizing an on-lot sewage disposal
system shall have the septic tank pumped at least once every year. This
service must be performed only by a septage transporter licensed by
Concord Township.
F. All other property owners utilizing an on-lot sewage disposal system
shall have the septic tank(s) pumped at least once a year or on a
schedule approved in writing by the Concord Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer. The service must be performed only by a septage
transporter licensed by Concord Township.
G. Where an on-lot sewage disposal system, in the opinion of the Township
Sewage Enforcement Officer, exhibits signs of malfunction, the owner
shall cause the septic tank(s) to be immediately pumped by a licensed
septage transporter. The property owner shall contact the Concord
Township Sewage Enforcement Officer to coordinate the repair, if
possible, of the malfunction or the replacement of the system with a
new, on-lot sewage disposal system if repair is not feasible. Failure of a
property owner to promptly have a septic tank(s) pumped after notice
by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer shall constitute a
violation of this article.
§ 136-9 SEWERS § 136-10
136:159
§ 136-10. Septage transporters.
All septage transporters serving customers within the boundaries of
Concord Township shall be registered and licensed by the Township of
Concord.
§ 136-11. Septage transporter reporting requirements.
All septage transporters shall maintain written records of all properties
serviced in Concord Township.
§ 136-11.1. Permits; fees.
All permits required by this article shall only be issued upon application
made in writing to the Township or Sewer Authority, as applicable; in such
form as may be prescribed by the Township for a permit and upon payment
of a permit fee in an amount established by the Township or the Authority,
as applicable, from time to time.
A. Registration shall consist of annually completing and submitting an
application form to the Township together with the required insurance
documentation and a check payable to Concord Township in the amount
set forth in the Township fee schedule.
B. Any septage transporter who fails to file the quarterly reports required
by this article shall have 10 days after notice by the Township to cure
the failure to file a timely report. If the failure is not cured within the
ten-day period, the septage transporter's license shall be immediately
revoked.
C. All vehicles used for pumping of liquid waste shall be equipped so as to
insure that each tank or receptacle pumped shall be thoroughly cleaned
to remove all solids and scum.
D. No septage transporter registered as such in Concord Township shall
alter, repair, replace or enlarge any part of any on-lot sewage disposal
system without a permit issued by the Concord Township Sewage
Enforcement Officer.
E. All septic tanks must be pumped out by a licensed septage transporter
through the main tank access. No person shall pump the contents of any
tank out through the inspection port nor shall they alter or enlarge the
inspection port to create a larger diameter opening.
A. The required records shall include the property owner(s) name and
address, the site address, the date of service and the amount of gallons
pumped.
B. All registered septage transporters shall file with the Township a
quarterly report listing all properties serviced within the Township
during the period, which reported shall include the information
required by § 136-11A.
§ 136-10 CONCORD CODE § 136-11.2
136:160
§ 136-11.2. Retaining tanks.
The owner of an improved property that is approved to and does utilize a
retaining tank shall:
§ 136-11.3. Violations and penalties.
§ 136-11.4. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of
this article shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the Township
or the Authority by either seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief from
a court of competent jurisdiction. The Township or the Authority shall be
entitled to an award of all counsel fees incurred in such civil action to abate
the nuisance.
A. Maintain the retaining tank in conformance with all Township
ordinances, the provisions of any applicable laws and the rules and
regulations of the Authority and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and
B. Permit only licensed septage transporters to collect, transport and
dispose of the contents of any retaining tank.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of
$1,000 for each violation.
B. Each violation for each separate day after notice from the Township and
each violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a separate
and distinct violation, subjecting the owner(s) of the property to fines of
$1,000 for each day the violation(s) continues.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in enforcement
proceedings commenced by Concord Township, pay the fines
prescribed by this article, plus all court costs, including all reasonable
attorney fees, incurred by Concord Township or the Sewer Authority.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Code
Enforcement Officer, Sewage Enforcement Officer, Public Works
Director, Fire Marshal, or the designated Township agent as
appropriate.
E. Enforcement of this article may also be accomplished by an action in
equity brought in the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County. The
defendant(s) in such an action shall be liable for all court costs,
including all reasonable attorney fees incurred by Concord Township or
the Sewer Authority.
§ 136-11.2 SEWERS § 136-11.5
136:161
§ 136-11.5. Severability.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality,
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any remaining provisions, sentences,
clauses, sections, or parts of this article. It is hereby declared as the intent
of the Board of Supervisors that such remainder shall be and shall remain
in full force and effect.
§ 136-11.6. Repealer.
All Township ordinances, including the prior Ordinance No. 166 of 1988,43
as amended, and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
hereof, are hereby repealed and rescinded.
§ 136-11.7. When effective.
This article shall take effect five days after the date of its enactment by the
Board of Supervisors of Concord Township.
43.Editor's Note: Said ordinance adopted former Ch. 136, Art. I.
§ 136-11.5 CONCORD CODE § 136-11.7
136:162
ARTICLE II
Retaining Tanks
[Adopted 6-4-1991 by Ord. No. 178]
§ 136-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use and
maintenance of retaining tanks designed to receive and retain sewage,
whether from residential or commercial uses, when and where permitted
by the Official Sewerage Plan of the township, and it is hereby declared
that the enactment of this article is necessary for the protection, benefit
and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this
municipality.
§ 136-13. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Sewer Authority of the Township of Concord.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any real property within the township upon
which there is erected or is planned to be erected a structure intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure sewage shall or may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any real property located in the township.
MUNICIPALITY — Concord Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation
or other group or entity.
RETAINING TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives and retains
sewage and is designed and constructed to facilitate ultimate disposal of the
sewage at another site. The term includes but is not limited to the following:
CHEMICAL TOILET — - A permanent or portable nonflushing toilet
using chemical treatment in the retaining tank for odor control.
A.
HOLDING TANK — A tank, whether permanent or temporary, to which
sewage is conveyed by a water-carrying system.
B.
PRIVY — A tank designed to receive sewage where water under
pressure is not available.
C.
INCINERATING TOILET — A device capable of reducing waste
materials to ashes.
D.
COMPOSTING TOILET — A device for holding and processing human
and organic kitchen waste, employing the process of biological
degradation through the action of microorganisms to produce a stable,
humus-like material.
E.
§ 136-12 SEWERS § 136-13
136:163
SEWAGE — Any substance that contains any of the waste products or
excrement or other discharge from the bodies of human beings or animals,
and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or inimical to the
public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic
water supply or for recreation, or which constitutes pollution under the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.).
§ 136-14. Rights and privileges granted.
The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake within the
township the control and methods of retaining tank sewage disposal and the
collection and transportation thereof.
§ 136-15. Rules and regulations.
§ 136-16. Rates and charges.
The Authority shall have the right and power to fix, alter, charge and collect
rates, assessments and other charges in the area served by its facilities at
reasonable and uniform rates, as authorized by applicable law.
§ 136-17. Exclusiveness of rights and privileges.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a retaining tank shall be done solely by or under the direction
and control of the Authority, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at
such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Authority.
§ 136-18. Duties of improved property owner.
The owner of an improved property that utilizes a retaining tank shall:
RECYCLING TOILET — A device in which the flushing medium is
restored to a condition suitable for reuse in flushing.
F.
A. The Authority is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules
and regulations concerning sewage which it may deem necessary from
time to time to effect the purposes herein.
B. All such rules and regulations adopted by the Authority shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the
township and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Maintain the retaining tank in conformance with this article or any
ordinance of this township, the provisions of any applicable law and the
rules and regulations of the Authority and any administrative agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Authority or its agents to collect, transport and dispose
of the contents therein.
§ 136-13 CONCORD CODE § 136-19
136:164
§ 136-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
§ 136-20. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation
of § 136-18 above shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by the
municipality or the Authority by either seeking appropriate equitable or
legal relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provision of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, or Sewage Enforcement Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing
Inspector or Fire Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the
enforcement procedure set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No.
221]
§ 136-19 SEWERS § 136-20
136:165
Chapter 138
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 136-20 CONCORD CODE § 136-20
138:166
ARTICLE I
Residency Restrictions
[Adopted 5-29-2007 by Ord. No. 312]
§ 138-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD-CARE FACILITY — A licensed day-care center, licensed child-care
facility or any other child-care services facility exempt from licensing
pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — The area of land or water available and
accessible for use by the public and residents of the Township which is
restricted from future development for the purpose of protecting natural
features or for providing recreational opportunities for the residents of
the Township. "Open space" generally includes such land or area of land
that is regulated, maintained or owned by the Township or by community
associations, and may include steep slopes, floodplains and other significant
features to be preserved.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building and related facilities used for
educational, social, cultural or recreational activities.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE — A place where a person lives, abides, lodges,
or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Any land, or tract of land,
or facility used for passive or active recreation, including any playground,
park, skate parks, athletic fields or any other facility owned or operated
by the Township or any other governmental agency, including the Garnet
Valley School District, the County of Delaware or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
SCHOOL — Any educational building or facility that provides educational
services to a minor child, as defined by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, including any public or private facility.
SEX OFFENDER — Any person, over the age of 18 years, who has been
convicted of any sexual offense or crime as defined in 42 Pa. C.S.A. § 9795.1,
including, but not limited to, kidnapping where the victim is a minor,
institutional sexual assault, indecent assault, incest, prostitution and
related offenses, sexual abuse of a child, unlawful contact with a minor,
sexual exploitation of a minor, rape, involuntary deviate sexual intercourse,
sexual assault, and aggravated indecent assault. "Sex offender" shall also
include any individuals convicted of any attempt to commit offenses as
enumerated herein.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE — A place where a person lives, abides, lodges,
or resides for a period of less than 14 days in the aggregate during any
calendar year, which is not the person's permanent address or place where
the person routinely lives, abides, lodges, or resides and which is not the
person's permanent residence.
§ 138-1 SEX OFFENDERS § 138-1
138:167
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Concord, including its residents and all land
within its territorial boundaries.
§ 138-2. Restrictions enumerated; time limit for compliance.
§ 138-3. Notice to move.
Any sex offender who resides on a permanent or temporary basis within 500
feet of any school, childcare facility, common open space, community center,
public park or recreational facility shall, within 45 days of receipt of written
notice of the sex offender's noncompliance with this article, move from said
location to a new location, but said location may not be within 500 feet
of any school, child-care facility, common open space, community center,
public park or recreational facilities within the Township. It shall constitute
a continuing violation for each day beyond the 45 days the sex offender
continues to reside within 500 feet of a school, child-care facility, common
open space, community center, park or recreational facilities. Furthermore,
it shall be a violation for each day that a sex offender shall move from one
location in the Township to another that is within 500 feet of any school,
child-care facility, common open space, community center, public park or
recreational facilities.
§ 138-4. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to any person or sex offender who has
established a residence prior to the date of adoption of this article, and shall
not apply if the school, childcare facility, open space, community center,
public park or recreational facility within 500 feet of sexual offender's
residence or lodging was established subsequent to the establishment of
this sex offender's residence or lodging. The provisions of this § 138-4 shall
A. It shall be unlawful for any sex offender or other person over the age of
18 years who has been convicted of a violation which requires
registration pursuant to 42 Pa. C.S.A. § 9791, et seq., or who has been
convicted of a violation which requires registration in another
jurisdiction, to reside, lodge, abide or live within 500 feet of any school,
child-care facility, open space, community center, public park or
recreational facility in the Township.
B. For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the
distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer
property line of the residence or lodging of the sex offender to the
nearest outer property line of the school, child-care facility, open space,
community center, public park or recreational facility.
C. Such person who resides or lives within 500 feet of any school, childcare
facility, open space, community center, public park or recreational
facility in the Township shall have 60 days from the receipt of written
notice of the prohibition set forth herein to move. Failure to move to a
location which is in compliance with this section within that time period
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 138-1 CONCORD CODE § 138-4
138:168
not apply to any person or sex offender who has established a residence or
lodging, and then relocates to a difference residence or lodging within the
Township after the adoption of this article.
§ 138-5. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days and a fine not exceeding $1,000 for each violation, in
addition to the costs of prosecution and attorney's fees.
§ 138-6. Enforcement.
All agencies and authorities within the Township, including, but not limited
to, the Pennsylvania State Police, have full authority to enforce this article,
and impose such fines and other penalties as necessary and appropriate.
§ 138-7. Inclusion of provisions in Code.
It is the intent of the Board of Supervisors of Concord Township that the
provisions of this article shall become and be made a part of the Code of the
Township and the sections of this article may be renumbered or relettered
and the word "ordinance" may be changed to "section" or "article" or other
appropriate word or phrase in order to accomplish the intention of the
Board.
§ 138-4 SEX OFFENDERS § 138-7
138:169
Chapter 142
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping — See Ch. 93.
Sewers — See Ch. 136.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 190.
§ 138-7 CONCORD CODE § 138-7
138:170
ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Disposal
[Adopted 1-4-1988 by Ord. No. 158]
§ 142-1. Findings.
A. The municipality (as hereinafter defined) finds it necessary to regulate
the collection of municipal solid waste (as hereinafter defined)
generated within its boundaries in order to protect the public health,
safety and welfare of its taxpayers and residents.
B. Act No. 180 of July 12, 1972, 53 P.S. § 481 et seq.,44 authorizes a
municipality to enter into joint cooperation agreements with other
municipalities in the exercise or in the performance of their respective
governmental functions, powers or responsibilities.
C. The Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980, as amended,
35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq. (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"),
authorizes a municipality to require by ordinance that all municipal
wastes generated within its jurisdiction shall be disposed of at a
designated facility.
D. Pursuant to the provisions of the Act, the Delaware County Council has
caused to be prepared the Delaware County Solid Waste Management
Plan of 1985, which was reviewed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, revised and is dated December, 1986 (the
County Plan), which recommends that for the foreseeable future, the
solid waste from this municipality be disposed of by means of regional
facilities authorized by the county, the Delaware County Solid Waste
Authority and/or the Authority's contractor (hereinafter collectively
referred to as the "county").
E. The County Plan, in February, 1987, received preliminary approval from
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), with
final DEP approval conditional upon the county obtaining such
municipal adoptions of the County Plan as may be necessary for its
implementation.
F. The County Plan concludes that a county-wide solid waste disposal
system should include a resources recovery plant or plants located
within the county because it would be the most environmentally sound
and cost-effective method of disposing of municipal solid waste within
the county.
G. In order to obtain the environmental, economic and public benefits from
the plant or plants as discussed in the County Plan, it is necessary that
commitments be obtained from the local municipalities within the
44.Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177. See now 53
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 2301 to 2315, inclusive.
§ 142-1 SEX OFFENDERS § 142-1
138:171
§ 142-2. Definitions.
county as to the use of the plant or plants for the disposal of municipal
solid waste from such municipalities.
H. The Township of Concord has full authority under the applicable laws to
provide for the management of municipal solid waste within its
boundaries as hereinafter provided.
I. The form of this article has been approved by the county and it has been
or will be included in the county's Solid Waste Management Plan, which
has been or will be filed with the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
J. The county agrees to assist in the implementation of the County Plan
but only after this article has been enacted by a sufficient number of
municipalities in the county to make the construction of such plant or
plants as proposed in the County Plan feasible.
K. Under the Act, any municipality with a population density in excess of
300 persons per square mile or which has a solid waste disposal
problem must develop a solid waste management plan to be approved
by DEP but may, at its option and with the county's agreement, delegate
this duty to the county.
L. This municipality has delegated this aforesaid duty to the county, and
the county has accepted this responsibility.
A. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
COLLECTOR — Any person collecting or transporting municipal solid
waste for owners or occupants of property in the municipality, including
the municipality itself if it undertakes the collection of municipal solid
waste directly, and any business or institution within the municipality
which generates municipal solid waste and uses its own employees and
equipment for the collection and transport of the waste.
CONTRACTOR — One or more contractors with whom the county or
the Delaware County Solid Waste Authority (hereinafter referred to as
"Authority") contracts for construction and operation of the proposed
resource recovery plant or plants or other solid waste facilities.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Concord.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid or
semisolid material generated in residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities, and other
solid waste which is within the definition of the term "municipal solid
waste" as set forth in the Solid Waste Management Act, 35 P.S.
§ 6018.101 et seq., and which the county, Authority, or contractor,
by its ordinance or regulations, is willing to accept at the plant, but
excluding any liquid waste or sludge, all wastes which are defined
§ 142-1 CONCORD CODE § 142-2
138:172
§ 142-3. Prohibited acts.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person
to accumulate upon any property in this municipality any municipal solid
waste or to dispose of it except in accordance with this article and other
applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
§ 142-4. County/Authority operations and charges.
The municipality has been advised by the county that the Solid Waste Plan
proposes to provide for a plant or plants which will be operated efficiently
and economically by the contractor and/or by the county and in accordance
with all applicable laws and regulations and, also, that the contractor and/
or the county will impose reasonable charges, which will be uniform among
all classes of users of the plant or plants.
§ 142-5. Operations by registered collectors. [Amended 9-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 368]
Except as it pertains to municipal solid waste collected directly by this
municipality, all collectors of municipal solid waste generated within the
municipality shall be registered by the municipality and shall be responsible
for collecting municipal solid waste from properties in the municipality
pursuant to a contract between them and the municipality and/or contracts
between them and the owners or occupants of properties.
§ 142-6. Disposal at designated site. [Amended 9-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 368]
All collectors shall deliver and dispose of all municipal solid waste collected
within the municipality at the solid waste facility designated by the county,
subject to such reasonable regulations for the operation thereof as may
by existing or future federal or state law or regulations as hazardous
waste or industrial residual waste, any waste which may be marketable
and which is intentionally segregated for purposes of recycling and
materials specifically excluded under applicable county ordinances.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
governmental entity, with the exception of the county, Authority, or
designated contractor.
PLANT — The energy and/or material recovery facility or facilities,
transfer station or solid waste plants owned by the county or Authority
or contractor, including all associated property and equipment.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any site owned and operated by the county,
the Authority or its designated contractor for the purpose of transfer,
processing or disposal of municipal solid waste, including landfills,
resource recovery plants and transfer stations.
B. Certain terms used herein are also defined in § 142-1, Findings.
§ 142-2 SEX OFFENDERS § 142-6
138:173
be established by the county and/or contractor. Delivery and disposal at
any other place shall be a violation of this article and cause for revocation
of the collector's registration, except in special circumstances approved in
advance by the municipality and the county and/or contractor. All collectors
shall comply in their operation with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations pertaining to the collection and transportation of municipal
solid waste.
§ 142-7. Private dumps, transfer stations and landfills.
No person shall use or permit to be used any property owned or occupied
by him within the municipality as a public or private dump, transfer station
or landfill for municipal solid waste, whether generated within the
municipality or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the
municipality.
§ 142-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
§ 142-9. Abatement of nuisance.
In addition to the remedies provided in § 142-8 herein, any continued
violation of this article or other applicable law which shall constitute a
nuisance in fact or which in the opinion of the governing body of this
municipality shall constitute a nuisance may be abated by proceeding
against the violation in a court of equity for relief.
§ 142-10. Rules and regulations. [Amended 9-1-2015 by Ord. No.
368]
The collection of municipal solid waste in the municipality and the disposal
thereof shall be subject to such further reasonable rules and regulations
as may from time to time be promulgated by the governing body of the
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provision of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
penalties.
§ 142-6 CONCORD CODE § 142-10
138:174
municipality, including, but without limitation, regulations as to the form
of registration application, the amount of fee to be charged for said
registrations and the terms of the registrations and registration issuance
procedures; provided, however, that no such rules and regulations shall be
contrary to the provisions of this article, the County Solid Waste Plan or
applicable law.
§ 142-11. Amendments; contract.
The municipality reserves the right to amend this article or repeal it at any
time; provided, however, that the requirement for use of the designated
solid waste facility for disposal of municipal solid waste from the
municipality shall not be amended or repealed without the prior express
written approval of the county during the term of the contract between
the county (or Authority) and contractor providing for the construction
and operation of the plant, which contract shall have a term of 25 years.
For the purposes of securing the contractor's financing, such requirement
shall be deemed to be a contract between the county, the contractor and
the municipality, which the municipality (subject to the terms of the joint
cooperation agreement set forth below) agrees to enforce so that the
municipal solid waste from the municipality will be available to provide a
source of energy for the plant. If the municipality is not now a collector but
in the future it becomes a collector, it agrees to deliver all municipal solid
waste so collected to the plant.
§ 142-12. Joint cooperation agreement.
A. The municipality agrees to deliver or cause to be delivered during the
term of this agreement all municipal solid waste, as defined herein,
generated within the municipality for disposal at a facility designated
by the county.
B. The county agrees to accept for disposal all such municipal solid waste
described in Subsection A above upon completion and commencement
of operation of the plant in accordance with a contract, containing
terms satisfactory to the county, with the contractor providing for
construction and operation of the plant.
C. The term of this agreement shall be for a period of 25 years, and said
term shall commence on the date when the county advises the
municipality that the plant is operational. The municipality, at its
option, may terminate this agreement with 30 days' written notice to
the county in the event that the municipality will incur substantial costs
over and above the costs generally accepted by the other municipalities
in delivering municipal solid waste to the county during the term of this
agreement, provided that the municipality has first obtained final
approval from the Department of Environmental Protection for its own
plan under the Act45 or an approval from the Department for a
modification that brings the municipality under another plan that has
45.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 142-10 SEX OFFENDERS § 142-12
138:175
§ 142-13. Adoption of Solid Waste Management Plan.
already obtained final approval. It is understood, however, that (upon
any such termination of this agreement by the municipality) the county,
the Authority and/or the county's contractor shall be relieved of any
responsibility to accept and dispose of municipal solid waste generated
within the municipality. It is further understood that any such
termination of this agreement by the municipality shall constitute a
repeal, whether express or implied, of § 142-13 of this article.
D. The county shall hold harmless and defend the municipality from any
suit, claim or action challenging the legality of this article against the
municipality. In the event that any such suit, claim or action is brought
against the municipality, the municipality shall authorize the county,
through its designated legal counsel, to defend against the same, and
the municipality shall cooperate with the county in said defense and
shall give the County Solicitor notice of any such suit, claim or action
within five days of the municipality's receiving notice thereof.
A. The DEP has recommended that the requirements of the Solid Waste
Management Act46 can best be accomplished on a county-wide basis.
B. The municipality, by formal resolution dated April 3, 1984, authorized
the county to prepare the Solid Waste Management Plan on the
municipality's behalf.
C. The county, through the staff of its Public Works Department, its
Planning Commission and Charles M. Harris and Associates, Inc.,
Consulting Engineers, prepared a ten-year plan for solid waste
management.
D. The appropriate municipal officials of this municipality have reviewed
the findings and recommendations of the Solid Waste Management Plan
as it affects this municipality, have found the Plan acceptable and have
recommended that the Plan be adopted.
E. The municipality, accordingly, hereby accepts and adopts the Solid
Waste Management Study prepared by the county as the ten-year plan
for solid waste management required by the Act.
F. The county is hereby authorized to submit the Plan to the DEP for the
final approval on behalf of the municipality.47
46.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
47.Editor's Note: Former Section 15, Effective date, which immediately followed this section
and which provided for the prevention of solid waste disposal until the completed
construction of the plant, was deleted 1-5-1991 by Ord. No. 221.
§ 142-12 CONCORD CODE § 142-13
138:176
ARTICLE II
Registration of Collectors
[Adopted 1-4-1988 by Ord. No. 159]
§ 142-14. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
COLLECTOR — Any person collecting or transporting municipal solid waste
for owners or occupants of property in the municipality, including the
municipality itself if it undertakes the collection of municipal solid waste
directly, and any business or institution within the municipality which
generates municipal solid waste and uses its own employees and equipment
for the collection and transport of the waste.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Concord.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom
or office waste, and other material, including solid or semisolid material,
generated in residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
establishments and from community activities, and other solid waste which
is within the definition of the term "municipal solid waste" as set forth in
the Solid Waste Management Act, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq., and which the
county, Authority or contractor, by its ordinance or regulations, is willing
to accept at the plant, but excluding any liquid waste or sludge, all wastes
which are defined by existing or future federal or state law or regulations
as hazardous waste or industrial residual waste, any waste which may be
marketable and which is intentionally segregated for purposes of recycling
and materials specifically excluded under applicable county ordinances.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
governmental entity.
§ 142-15. Registration required; contract. [Amended 9-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 36848]
Except as it pertains to municipal solid waste collected directly by this
municipality, all collectors of municipal solid waste generated within the
municipality shall be registered by the municipality and shall be responsible
for collecting municipal solid waste from properties in the municipality
pursuant to a contract between them and the municipality and/or contracts
between them and the owners or occupants of property.
§ 142-16. Delivery and disposal. [Amended 1-5-1991 by Ord. No.
221]
All collectors shall deliver and dispose of all municipal solid waste collected
within the municipality in accordance with the provisions of Article I, Solid
Waste Disposal, and any amendments thereto or replacements thereof.
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance also changed the title of this article from "Licensing of
Collectors" to "Registration of Collectors."
§ 142-14 SEX OFFENDERS § 142-17
138:177
§ 142-17. Issuance of registration; fee. [Amended 1-5-1991 by Ord.
No. 221; 9-1-2015 by Ord. No. 368]
No collector of municipal solid waste shall collect municipal solid waste
from properties within the municipality unless and until he, she, or it shall
have first registered with the Township for such purpose and shall have paid
the required registration fee. Said registration fee shall be established from
time to time by the municipality by resolution. Said registration shall be
issued by the Secretary of the Township, or other duly designated Township
personnel, subject to general regulations governing permits, and all such
registrations shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in which
issued, subject to prior revocation by the Township. Each registration shall
pertain to only one collector and the vehicles used by that collector solely
for that collector's collection of municipal solid waste.
§ 142-18. Maintenance of vehicles; registration.
All collectors shall keep and maintain proper and suitable covers upon
all receptacles or motor vehicles used in the collection of municipal solid
waste and shall at all times effectively prevent any such municipal solid
waste from being deposited upon the streets, highways or other property
within the municipality. All such motor vehicles shall be registered in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall carry the current Pennsylvania
motor-vehicle inspection sticker and shall be in good working order and
repair.
§ 142-19. Rules and regulations. [Amended 9-1-2015 by Ord. No.
368]
The collection of municipal solid waste in the municipality and the disposal
thereof shall be subject to such further reasonable rules and regulations as
may from time to time be promulgated by resolution by the municipality,
including, but not limited to, regulations as to the form of registration
application required by each collector, the amount of the fee to be charged
for registration, the term of such registration, registration issuance
procedures, registration revocation procedures, and the imposition of fines
and penalties by the Township.
§ 142-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provision of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
§ 142-17 CONCORD CODE § 142-20
138:178
§ 142-21. Revocation of registration. [Amended 9-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 368]
In addition to the remedies provided in § 142-20 herein, the municipality
may, upon 10 days' notice to the collector of a violation of any provision of
this article, revoke and/or suspend any registration issued to the collector
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in this article.
§ 142-20 SEX OFFENDERS § 142-21
138:179

ARTICLE III
Recycling
[Adopted 6-4-1991 by Ord. No. 179]
§ 142-22. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
BIMETALLIC CONTAINERS — Empty food or beverage containers of steel
and aluminum.
BUSINESS(ES) — The legal owner, occupant or lessee of a commercial,
industrial or cooperative enterprise, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, institution or trust or a governmental entity that engages in
any form of business or governmental activity which does not have curbside
collection of municipal waste.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes and those multiple dwelling residential
buildings containing more than three dwelling units.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals, that include but are not limited to fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
FERROUS CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin-coated steel food or beverage
containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear glass. Excluded
are brown and green glass, plate glass, automotive glass, blue glass and
porcelain and ceramic products.
GRASS CLIPPINGS — The material bagged or raked during or after cutting
of a lawn, field or similar grassed area.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional and municipal establishments and
in residences.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Small quantities of hazardous waste
(as defined by Act 9749) available to a person or entity on a retail basis, such
as pesticides, certain paints, aerosol cans and fertilizers.
49.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 142-22 SEX OFFENDERS § 142-22
138:181
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, such as churches, hospitals, schools, day-care centers and
nursing homes.
LANDLORD — Any individual or organizational owner who rents and/or
leases residential units, commercial space or industrial complexes.
Landlords own the properties in question and deal directly with their
tenants or lessees.
LEAD-ACID BATTERIES — Includes but shall not be limited to automotive,
truck and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves from trees, bushes and other plants, garden
residue, shrubbery and tree trimmings, but not including grass clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded are all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MIXED PAPER — All types of paper combinations, such as colored paper,
carbonless forms, ledger paper, colored paper envelopes, mixtures of highgrade
office paper, and the like.
MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any properties having four or
more dwelling units per structure, and shall include all residential
properties under condominium ownership.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by the
municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities,
including school facilities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities,
and any sludge not meeting the definition of the term "residual or hazardous
waste" in Act 9750 from a municipal, commercial or institutional watersupply
treatment plant, MULTIFAMILY treatment plant or air-pollution
control facility. The term does not include source-separated recyclable
materials.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly used as newsprint and
distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and opinions,
containing advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly
excluded are glossy advertising inserts often included with newspapers.
NONCURBSIDE RESIDENT(S) — Residents of a multifamily residential unit
where provision is made to collect and dispose of waste through collective
dumpsters.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees and occupants of residences or commercial
or institutional establishments.
50.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 142-22 CONCORD CODE § 142-22
138:182
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers.
Due to the large variety of types of plastic, the recycling regulations may
stipulate specific types of plastics which may be recycled.
PRIVATE HAULER — Any registered private hauler collecting, removing, or
transporting solid waste and recyclable materials to a processing center or
as otherwise disposed.[Amended 9-1-2015 by Ord. No. 368]
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Source-separated recyclable materials,
including materials listed in Section 1501 of Act 101 of 1988 (the
Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Recycling, Planning and Waste Reduction
Act),51 and materials identified by the municipality to be recycled.
RESIDENT(S) — The legal owner, occupant or lessee of a single-family
residential unit in Concord Township that has curbside collection of
municipal wastes or of any other type of multifamily residential unit,
including but not limited to townhomes, duplexes, condominiums and
apartments whose multifamily unit has curbside recycling of municipal
waste. Also classified as "resident" will be any business professional who
operates a low-scale profession from his/her personal residence.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS — Any occupied single- or two-family dwelling
located within the Township.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Concord, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed. The
term does not include source-separated recyclable materials or material
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection for beneficial use.
§ 142-23. Establishment of program.
The Township of Concord hereby establishes a resource recovery program
for the mandatory separation and collection of municipal solid waste from
all persons, residences and commercial and institutional establishments in
the Township. Collection of the materials to be recycled shall be made
at least twice monthly by licensed private haulers and delivered to an
approved recycling facility for processing and disposal. The program shall
include a sustained public information and education program by the
Township pursuant to the provisions of Act 101 of 1988.52
§ 142-24. Rules and regulations.
The Manager of the Township of Concord or his designated agent is hereby
authorized and empowered to establish and promulgate regulations on
the manner, days and times of collection of recyclable materials and the
51.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.1501.
52.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 142-22 SEX OFFENDERS § 142-24
138:183
bundling, handling, location and time of placement of such materials for
collection and regulations governing composting.
§ 142-25. Separation; placement for removal.
A. Any person or the occupant or owner of any residential dwelling within
the Township who shall place for disposal, removal or collection the
following named items shall do so in strict conformity with the following
requirements, in addition to any other applicable regulations:
(1) Clear glass and aluminum cans shall be kept separate from other
refuse and recyclables and from each other and shall be collected
by a licensed private hauler. Individual household units shall
separate and prepare these materials for collection in the manner
prescribed by regulations and shall thereafter place these
materials in separate containers, as hereinafter prescribed, to be
placed at the curbside to be collected at least twice monthly by a
licensed private hauler.
(2) Newspapers shall be kept separate from other refuse and
recyclables and shall be collected by a licensed private hauler.
Individual household units shall separate and handle materials for
collection in the manner prescribed by regulation and shall
thereafter place these materials by the curbside to be collected at
least twice monthly by a licensed private hauler.
(3) Leaf/garden waste (compostable materials, excluding grass
clippings) shall be kept separate from other refuse and recyclables
and shall be composted on the property or transported to an off-site
compost facility.
B. The owners and occupants of multifamily housing properties shall
establish a program for the separation, storage and collection of
recyclables in accordance with the requirements of Act 101 of 1988,53
and shall make private arrangements with a licensed private hauler. As
a minimum, the recyclable materials to be separated shall include clear
glass, aluminum cans and newspapers.
C. The owners and occupants of commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments shall establish a program for the separation, storage
and collection of recyclables in accordance with the requirements of
Act 101 of 1988. As a minimum, the recyclable materials to be
separated shall include high-grade office paper, clear glass, aluminum
cans, newspapers and corrugated paper.
D. All receptacles for recyclable materials required herein from residential
dwellings shall be supplied by the Township to the occupant or owner of
the premises and placed prior to collection at the curbside where they
shall be readily accessible to the collector. The occupant or owner shall
53.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 142-24 CONCORD CODE § 142-25
138:184
§ 142-26. Ownership of recyclable materials. [Amended 9-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 368]
All recyclable solid waste placed by any person for collection by a registered
private hauler pursuant to this article and any regulations hereunder shall
become the property of the registered private hauler at the time of
placement at the curbside and shall remain the property of the registered
private hauler until accepted by an approved recycling facility.
§ 142-27. Other means of disposal.
Any person may donate or sell municipal solid waste to any person, firm or
corporation, whether operating for profit or not, provided that the receiving
person, firm or corporation shall not collect such donated recyclable
materials from the collection point of a residence.
§ 142-28. Registration required; fee. [Amended 1-5-1991 by Ord.
No. 221; 9-1-2015 by Ord. No. 368]
Pursuant to the registration requirements established by Article II,
Registration of Collectors, § 142-17, all private haulers collecting solid
waste and recyclable materials shall obtain an annual registration from the
Township. Said annual registration fee shall be established from time to
time by the Township by resolution.
§ 142-29. Recordkeeping. [Amended 9-1-2015 by Ord. No. 368]
All duly registered private haulers shall keep records of the quantities of
solid waste and recyclable materials collected in the Township. The records
shall include the weight of the total quantities of solid waste materials and
recyclable materials and other information as required by the Township
to fulfill the Township's responsibility to make accurate and timely reports
keep all receptacles clean and in good condition for safe handling.
Receptacles or other items to be disposed of shall be placed outside
after 6:00 p.m. of the day immediately preceding the day of collection.
After collection, any empty containers shall be moved from curbside
promptly but not later than 7:00 p.m. of the day of collection.
E. Compulsory separation. Clear glass, aluminum cans and newspapers
which are prepared for recycling, as defined in this article, shall not be
intermingled or otherwise mixed with other forms of solid waste. The
Township/registered private hauler reserves the right to refuse to
collect from individual household units recyclable materials which are
intermingled with nonrecyclable materials. [Amended 9-1-2015 by
Ord. No. 368]
F. Composting. Leaf/garden waste (compostable materials, excluding
grass clippings) shall be kept separate from other refuse and
recyclables and shall be composted on the property or transported to an
off-site compost facility.
§ 142-25 SEX OFFENDERS § 142-29
138:185
to the DEP or any other governmental agency of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or federal government. Written reports shall be provided to
the Township on report forms provided by the Township and shall be
submitted quarterly, received by the Township not later than the 20th day of
the month following the end of the previous quarter or three-month period.
§ 142-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
§ 142-31. Contracts.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provision of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
A. General rule. Nothing in this article shall be construed to interfere with
or in any way modify the provisions of any contract for municipal waste
disposal, processing or collection in force in the Township upon the
effective date of this article.
B. Renewals. No renewal of any existing contract upon the expiration or
termination of the original term thereof and no new contract for
municipal waste disposal, processing or collection shall be entered into
after the effective date of this article unless such renewal or such
contract shall conform to the applicable provisions of this article.
§ 142-29 CONCORD CODE § 142-31
138:186
ARTICLE IV
Precollection and Post-Collection Requirements for Trash and
Recycling Collection
[Adopted 10-2-2012 by Ord. No. 342]
§ 142-32. Precollection practices.
A. Refuse containers.
(1) Refuse containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee,
occupant of the premises or the private trash hauler.
(2) Containers shall be made of non-water-absorbent material and of
sufficient strength to prevent breakage of the containers by
weather, animals or upset and shall be equipped with lids of
nonabsorbent material. Such containers shall be watertight and
prevent the entry of flies. Refuse containers shall be maintained in
a sanitary condition at all times.
(3) No person shall permit the accumulation of any residue of liquids
or solids on the bottom or sides of refuse containers. The interior of
such containers shall be kept clean by thoroughly rinsing and
draining as often as necessary.
B. Storing of refuse.
(1) Public places. No persons shall place any refuse in any street, alley
or other public place, or upon any private property whether owned
by such person or not, within the Township unless it is deposited in
proper containers for collection. No person shall throw or deposit
any refuse of any kind in any stream or other body of water.
(2) Unauthorized accumulation. Any unauthorized accumulation of
refuse on any premises or the failure to remove refuse or rubbish
containers once the trash/garbage has been collected is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any
existing accumulation of refuse or the said container(s) within 48
hours of the receipt of notice from the Township Manager to
remove such refuse or container(s) shall constitute a violation of
this article.
(3) Refuse must be wrapped or bagged in a manner to prevent spillage,
odors, fire and health hazards (e.g., attraction and breeding of
insects, rodents and the like) in addition to being put in containers.
(4) Scattering of refuse. No persons shall case, place, sweep, or
deposit anywhere within the Township any refuse in such a manner
that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk, alley, sewer, or other public place, or into any occupied
premises within the Township.
§ 142-32 SEX OFFENDERS § 142-32
138:187
§ 142-33. Placement of refuse.
§ 142-34. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner or possessor of a property determined by any court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this article shall be subject to pay
a fine of $100 per day that the violation persists, as well as court costs,
legal fees, and any other fees incurred by the Township to enforce this
article against the party. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute
a separate offense for which a separate fine shall be levied.
(5) No person shall accumulate trash or garbage longer than seven
days. No person shall place trash or garbage at a curbside or
pickup point sooner than 24 hours before the scheduled collection
time.
A. All refuse containers shall be properly stored within the owners'
premises until the designated pickup days when the containers must be
brought to the curb.
B. All refuse from a dwelling unit or dwelling unit structure shall be placed
for curb collection at the curb of the street closest to the applicable
dwelling unit or dwelling unit structure.
C. Refuse and/or refuse receptacles of whatever nature must not be placed
at or along the sidewalk, gutter, curb, or roadway of the Township
before sundown of the evening before the day the trash is to be
collected.
D. All empty refuse receptacles of whatever nature shall be removed from
the collection site at or along the sidewalk, gutter, curb, or roadway
promptly following the collection of refuse.
E. Donation dropoff bins, used for the receipt of donations, including, but
not limited to, clothing and household items, shall not be installed,
erected, placed, and/or constructed in any district in Concord
Township. [Added 7-7-2015 by Ord. No. 365]
§ 142-32 CONCORD CODE § 142-34
138:188
Chapter 144
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 144-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
SPECIAL EVENT — Any outdoor activity, show, contest, carnival, gathering,
or meeting, other than regularly conducted church and school activities,
which occurs upon nonresidential property, including but not limited to
social gatherings, special appearances, promotional activities, footraces
and bicycle races.
§ 144-2. Prohibited structures.
No tents or other removable structures may be erected without prior
authorization from the Pennsylvania Department of Licenses and
Inspections and Concord Township.
§ 144-3. Permit required.
No special event may be advertised or conducted without first having
obtained a special event permit from the Township of Concord.
§ 144-4. Permit fee.
The permit fee shall be in an amount set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors, as stated in the application.
§ 144-5. Application for permit.
An application for a special event permit shall be submitted no later than 45
days prior to the proposed event to the Department of Code Enforcement
with a nonrefundable payment in an amount to be established from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors. The following information
shall be included in the application:
A. Description;
B. Name, address and telephone number of the sponsoring organization or
individual;
C. Proposed date, location and hours of operation;
D. Schedule of proposed events;
E. An outline of security, traffic, crowd control, sanitation measures and
such other necessary preparations as the event might require (subject
to review by the Fire Marshal and Township Manager).
§ 142-34 SPECIAL EVENTS § 144-5
144:189
§ 144-6. Standards for denial of permit.
Reasons for denial of a special event permit may include but not be limited
to:
§ 144-7. Time limit for decision.
The Department of Code Enforcement shall act upon an application for
a special event within 15 days after filing thereof. If the application is
disapproved, a notice shall be mailed to the applicant, within 15 days after
the filing date and shall include the reasons for denial of the permit and the
procedure for appeal.
§ 144-8. Repeat interval of special event.
A special event may not be held more often than every three months,
regardless of a change in location.
§ 144-9. Notice to officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of the special event permit, the Department
of Code Enforcement shall send a copy of the permit to the following:
F. A letter from the property owner authorizing such activity, if the owner
is not the sponsor of the event.
A. The special event would interrupt the safe and orderly movement of
vehicular traffic on streets or commercial parking lots so as to create a
real and present danger to the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the Township of Concord.
B. The special event will create a real and present danger to the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township of Concord by
preventing fire-fighting equipment, ambulance service, rescue vehicles
or other public safety vehicles from reaching any property in the
Township of Concord.
C. The special event will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses or
residents or will require the diversion of public employees such that
their absence from their usual assignments would pose a danger to the
residents of Concord Township.
D. The application contains incomplete or inaccurate information.
E. The applicant fails to comply with the terms of this chapter, including
failure to remit all fees.
F. The special event poses a danger to the general health, safety or
welfare of the Township's residents.
A. Township Manager.
B. Board of Supervisors.
§ 144-5 CONCORD CODE § 144-9
144:190
§ 144-10. Sanitation and cleanup.
The applicant shall have the sole responsibility of clearing the special event
location of any rubbish and debris and returning it to its pre-event condition
within 12 hours of the conclusion of the event. If the applicant fails to do
so, the Township shall arrange such cleanup, and the entire cost of such
cleanup shall be charged to the applicant.
§ 144-11. Revocation.
§ 144-12. Appeals procedure.
Any applicant whose special event permit application has been denied or
revoked may appeal the decision of the Department of Code Enforcement to
the Township Board of Supervisors by filing a written notice of such appeal
with the Township Manager within five days after receipt of the notice of
denial or revocation. The Township Board of Supervisors shall set a hearing
date within 15 days of receiving the notice of appeal. At such hearing, the
applicant is entitled to be heard and present evidence on his/her behalf.
The Township Board of Supervisors shall determine whether the denial or
revocation of the permit was justified.
§ 144-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity which violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $500, plus costs of prosecution. Each
day such a violation is committed or permitted to continue after notice from
C. Township Solicitor.
D. Fire Marshal.
E. Director of Public Works.
F. Township Engineer.
G. Township Secretary.
A. Reasons for revocation of a special event permit include but are not
limited to:
(1) Application contained incomplete or inaccurate information;
(2) Applicant fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the
permit;
(3) Applicant fails to arrange for or pay all fees; and
(4) Disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency exists.
B. Revocation of a special event permit may be appealed in the same
manner as an appeal from a denial of a permit.
§ 144-9 SPECIAL EVENTS § 144-13
144:191
the Township shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such hereunder.
Chapter 148
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Excavation and soil removal — See Ch. 98.
Sewers — See Ch. 136.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
Water conservation — See Ch. 196.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
Zoning use approval — See Ch. 214.
§ 144-13 CONCORD CODE § 144-13
144:192
Part 1
Stormwater[ RAduonpotffe,d E1r2o-s3io-1n9 A8n5dB SyeOdirmd.e Nntoa. t1io4n6 ]Regulations
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 148-1. Goals.
This chapter is designed to regulate stormwater runoff, erosion and
sedimentation to protect and preserve surface water and groundwaters
of the Township and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of
Township residents.
§ 148-2. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are as follows:
§ 148-3. Land disturbance activities.
The land disturbance activities covered by this chapter shall be as follows:
A. To maintain (or improve) year-round flows and water quality in all
streams and watercourses of the Township.
B. To control runoff, erosion and sedimentation as close to the location
where it is induced as is possible.
C. To maximize recharge of groundwater and encourage storage of rainfall
to sustain groundwater supplies and stream flows.
D. To limit the use of stormwater structures which will present
maintenance problems and to encourage the design of structures which
will permit multiple uses including recreation.
E. To ensure that the short- and long-term financial obligations of the
Township for stormwater management programs, facilities and
corrective actions are minimized.
F. Within the framework of the above objectives, to make the scope and
procedures of this chapter clear to those affected by it, to make
compliance with its requirements reasonable and to gain the awareness
and support of the residents and property owners within Concord
Township for attaining these objectives.
A. Subdivision and land development activities.
B. Construction of separate or additional impervious or semi-pervious
surfaces (driveways, parking lots, additions to buildings, etc.).
C. Farming operations.
D. Logging and woodcutting.
E. Nursery and sod operations.
§ 148-1 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-3
144:193
§ 148-4. Scope.
Hereinafter in Concord Township, no land or waterway shall be used or
modified, no earth shall be disturbed, stripped or moved and no structure or
other impervious surface shall be built or extended without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
§ 148-5. Construal of provisions.
F. Outdoor storage.
G. Earthmoving which is not part of any of the above.
H. Rock quarrying.
A. Permits and approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of responsibility for securing required permits for work to be
done which is regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or
ordinance. This chapter shall not preclude the inclusion in such other
permit or more stringent requirements concerning regulation of
stormwater and erosion.
B. In particular, this chapter is designed to work in concert with Chapter
160, Subdivision and Land Development, and Chapter 82, Building
Construction, Article II, Building Code. Any applicant for approval
under either chapter shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 148-3 CONCORD CODE § 148-5
144:194
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 148-6. Definitions.
The definitions of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows (see also
Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development, and Chapter 210, Zoning,
for additional applicable definitions):
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activities and natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural processes alone.
ALLUVIAL SOIL — Consisting of or formed from material such as gravel,
sand, silt or clay deposited by flowing water and showing little or no
modification of the original material by soils forming processes.
ANTECEDENT CONDITIONS — The specified characteristics of the land
surface (e.g., meadow) prior to a proposed disturbance or prior to a rainfall
event (e.g., amount of moisture in the soil); the basis for calculating
increases in runoff attributable to the disturbance or storms which must be
controlled.
BERMS — Well-compacted earthfill ridge.
CFS — Cubic feet per second.
CISTERN — A reservoir or tank for storing water.
DBH — The diameter of a tree at breast height, usually measured 3.5 feet
from the ground surface.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
against which stormwater management facilities shall be designed to
protect, measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., fifty-year storm) and
duration (e.g., twenty-four-hour).
DETENTION BASIN — A structure designed to retain or detain runoff in
order to increase the time of concentration or to reduce the maximum
discharge rate of runoff from a developed area.
DISTURBED AREA — An area subject to earthmoving activity.
DIVERSION TERRACE — A channel or ditch and a ridge constructed across
a sloping land surface on the contour or with predetermined grades to
intercept and divert surface runoff before it gains sufficient volume and
velocity to create harmful erosion.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted to use private land to
facilitate the flow of water, within which the owner shall erect no permanent
structures but may use the land in any other way not inconsistent with the
grantee's rights.
EARTHMOVING ACTIVITY — Activity resulting in the movement of earth or
the stripping of vegetative cover from the earth.
§ 148-6 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-6
144:195
ENERGY DISSIPATOR — A concrete or stone structure designed to reduce
the velocity and force of a concentrated stream of water.
EROSION — The wearing away of soil by action of wind, water or other
geological agents.
FARMING OPERATION — The work of cultivating the soil, producing crops
and/or boarding or raising livestock when that operation is for profit or
involves the cultivation of more than one acre of ground.
FIRST FLUSH — The initial flow of stormwater runoff (usually the first 1/2
inch) which washes most bacterial and chemical pollutants from the land.
GROUND STABILIZATION FABRIC — A plastic material designed to prevent
upward and downward movement of soil or other solids while permitting
water movement. Commonly used in road construction when watersaturated
soil could weaken the road base and surface. Trade names are
Mirafi 500, Bidim, Typar and Supac.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of geological structures
and rock or soil interstices which have the capacity to store water.
GROUNDWATER SUPPLY — A supply of water which is drawn from wells or
springs.
GROUNDWATER TABLE — The depth at which soil particles approach
saturation with water.
HOME GARDEN — A portion of property used for the growing of fruits,
flowers or vegetables when that operation is not for profit and involves the
use of one acre of ground or less.
HYDROLOGY — Properties, distribution and effects of water on the earth's
surface, in the soil and underlying rocks and in the atmosphere.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Materials which are essentially impenetrable
and thus unable to absorb liquids.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct the flow of
rain into storage in geological structures, e.g., french drains, dutch drains
and seepage pits.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES — Those activities listed within § 148-3
of this chapter.
LOGGING AND WOODCUTTING — The felling of trees within a
concentrated area, and/or the removal of trees or logs from the site by
means of mechanized equipment.
MAJOR STREAM — See "stream, major."
NURSERY — A tract of land on which trees and plants are raised or stored
for transplanting or sale.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point
resulting from a predetermined storm.
RELEASE RATE — A volume of flow being released from a detention
structure per specified unit of time (e.g., gallons per minute).
§ 148-6 CONCORD CODE § 148-6
144:196
RETAINING WALLS — A stabilized structure of stone, concrete or treated
wood designed to prevent the erosion or collapse of a rock or earth-faced
cut or fill.
RETENTION BASIN — A reservoir, formed from soil or other material,
which is designed to permanently retain a certain amount of stormwater
from a catchment area and which may also be designed to temporarily
detain excess stormwater runoff from the catchment area. Retention basins
may also receive fresh water from year-round streams. Unlike detention
basins, retention basins always contain water, thus they are man-made lakes
or ponds.
ROOT MAT — The surface and subsurface network of roots which support
vegetation.
RUNOFF COEFFICIENT — That portion of a total volume of water which
can be expected to flow off a particular surface.
SCS — Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin
by water.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A retention or detention basin located and designed
to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt and other stormwater-transported material
through trapping, screening, settling, etc.
SEEPAGE PIT — A broad area of excavated earth, filled with loose stone
or other particles, to which surface water is directed for infiltration into
geological storage.
SEEPAGE TRENCH — A linear excavation of the earth, filled with loose
stone or similar materials, to which surface water is directed for infiltration
to geological storage.
SEMIPERVIOUS MATERIAL — Stone, rock, concrete or other materials
which permit some vertical transmission of water.
S/LDO — Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development, as amended.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A mathematical method of runoff
computation, developed by the Soil Conservation Service of the United
States Department of Agriculture, which provides for accurate
consideration of the effect of applied conservation measures on runoff rates
and volume.
SPRING — A place at which water flows or seeps from soil or rock.
STABILIZED SOIL — Soil which is not susceptible to erosion, due to natural
vegetation or mechanical or artificial stabilization.
STORM SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries intercepted surface runoff,
street wash and other wash waters or drainage, but excludes domestic
sewage and industrial wastes.
§ 148-6 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-6
144:197
STORMWATER — Water which surfaces, flows or collects during and
subsequent to rain or snowfall.
STREAM — Any perennial current or flow of water, especially one running
along the surface of the earth.
STREAM, MAJOR — Any stream that is shown as a blue line on United
States Coast and Geodetic Survey Quadrant Maps.
SUMP — A low point in a roadway or drainage swale where stormwater can
potentially fill to a depth of one foot or more prior to overflowing to a lower
area.
SWALE (DRAINAGE, NATURAL) — A low-lying stretch of land (natural)
which collects or carries surface water runoff.
TILLAGE CROPS — Crops requiring cultivation of soil.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — The duly appointed employee or independent
contractor performing engineering services for the Township, or such
individual appointed by the Supervisors to perform the duties and services
designated herein.
UNDERBRUSH — Shrubs, small trees, vines and other plants.
UNDERSTABILIZED SOIL — Soil subject to erosion, due to lack of
vegetation or inherent nature of soil structure.
WOODLAND — An area where trees are the dominant vegetation, or at least
15 trees over six inches DBH are distributed over an acre of ground.
§ 148-6 CONCORD CODE § 148-6
144:198
ARTICLE III
Performance Standards
§ 148-7. Erosion and sedimentation.
All activities involving land disturbance, whether or not a plan is prepared
or a permit obtained in accordance with this chapter, shall be consistent
with good engineering practice and the following performance standards:
A. All land disturbance activities shall be conducted in such a way as to
prevent accelerated erosion and resulting sedimentation. To
accomplish this, all persons engaged in land disturbance activities shall
design, implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control
measures which effectively prevent accelerated erosion and
sedimentation.
B. In order to prevent accelerated erosion and resulting sedimentation,
land disturbance activities relating to construction, farming operations,
nursery and sod operations and logging operations shall be conducted
only in conformity with the following: [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord.
No. 221]
(1) Land disturbances related to construction activities. All landdisturbing
activities related to construction, including but not
limited to construction of buildings or other structures and paving
activities, shall be conducted only in conformity with the following:
(a) Erosion and sedimentation devices such as temporary
vegetation/mulch, temporary detention basins, diversion
terraces, rock filter berms or hay bales (in areas of minimum
flows) appropriate to the scale of operations shall be provided
where necessary.
(b) No earthmoving shall be conducted in areas greater than 25%
slope unless written approval is obtained from the Township
Engineer.
(c) Earthmoving will not involve the addition or removal of soil,
rock or fill material to or from more than 10% of a developed
site (containing a business or residential structure) or 30% of
an undeveloped site at any one time until stabilized, unless
approved, in writing, by the Township Engineer.
(d) Changes in grades and topography shall be limited and will not
involve more than 30% of the area of a site nor create slopes
greater than 10 feet in 100 feet except as provided in Appendix
A, Section I, Subsection A, unless approved, in writing, by the
Township Engineer.
(e) Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall
be done in such a way that will minimize erosion.
§ 148-7 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-7
144:199
(f) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features,
keep cut or fill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity
with topography to create the least erosion potential and to
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface runoff.
(g) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained,
protected and supplemented.
(h) The amount of disturbed area and the duration of exposure
shall be kept to a practical minimum.
(i) The permanent (final) vegetation and structural erosion
control and drainage measures shall be installed as early as
practical during the development.
(j) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped and removed to
assure adequate capacity in the basins or traps, as required by
the Township Engineer.
(k) Procedures for protecting soils or geologic structures with
water supply potential from contamination by surface water or
other disruption by construction activities shall be established
(see Appendix A, Section II).
(2) Farming operations. All farming operations shall be conducted only
in conformity with the following:
(a) Plowing shall conform to the contours of the property.
(b) Drainage swales shall be maintained with permanent cover
with grasses, plants or trees.
(c) Permanent cover shall be maintained within a minimum of 20
feet of a stream and 10 feet up-slope from property lines.
(d) If livestock are watered from a stream, methods to protect the
stream bank from erosion will be provided in areas of animal
concentration.
(e) Runoff from buildings and other impervious surfaces shall be
diverted around areas where livestock are confined or tillage
crops are planted or shall be otherwise controlled.
(f) Tillage shall not be conducted on slopes exceeding 15%, except
where minimum tillage methods approved by the Soil
Conservation District have been approved.
(g) Diversion terraces or cover crops of no less than 10 feet in
width shall be provided at a maximum of two-hundred-foot
intervals on slopes of 8% to 15% where tillage crops are
planted.
(h) Except where over-winter crops are planted, minimum tillage
methods are used, as approved by accepted agricultural
§ 148-7 CONCORD CODE § 148-7
144:200
standards, or cover crop strips are established, fall plowing is
prohibited.
(i) Any earthmoving other than plowing shall conform to the
earthmoving standards.
(3) Nursery and sod operations. All nursery and sod operations shall be
conducted only in conformity with the following:
(a) Runoff from buildings and other impervious surfaces shall be
diverted around areas where sod or plants are regularly
removed.
(b) Drainage swales shall be maintained with permanent cover of
grasses, plants or trees.
(c) Diversion terraces or permanent cover strips of no less than 10
feet in width shall be provided or maintained on the contours at
a maximum of two-hundred-foot intervals on slopes exceeding
8% from which sod or nursery stock will be regularly removed.
(d) Permanent cover grasses or plants shall be maintained within a
minimum of 20 feet of a stream or road right-of-way and a
minimum of 30 feet up-slope from abutting property lines.
(e) Areas where sod is being reworked must be promptly seeded,
planted or otherwise stabilized within 15 days of disturbance.
(4) Logging and woodcutting operations. All logging operations
conducted for profit or in conjunction with or prior to a land
development, subdivision or farm operation shall be conducted only
in conformity with the following:
(a) Stumps, ground cover and root mat must be left intact, except
where land is being developed or farmed.
(b) Methods of removal of logs and the removal routes shall be
specified in a plan, approved by the Township Engineer, and
shall avoid the the use of tracked vehicles. Slopes of 15% to
25% shall be traversed at the minimum gradient possible.
(c) On slopes of 15% to 25%, logging shall involve less than 1/3 of
uniform aged and noncontiguous trees.
(d) On slopes exceeding 25%, logging and woodcutting shall be by
written approval of the Board of Supervisors and shall be
limited to highly selective removal of trees. Maximum
precautions shall be taken to avoid destruction or injury of
understory brush and trees.
(e) No cutting of live trees within 20 feet of closest bank of any
stream is permitted.
§ 148-7 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-7
144:201
§ 148-8. Permanent stormwater management.
All activities described in § 148-7 involving an increase in impervious cover
shall be consistent with the following performance standards:
C. The design requirements for controlling erosion and sedimentation for
construction are set forth in Appendices A and B attached to this
chapter and made a part hereof.
A. There shall be no increase in stormwater peak discharge after
installation of impervious cover over and above that which would have
occurred from the land prior to development, using woodland as the
prior condition for those portions of the site that have trees of over six
inches DBH (or had such trees within a year prior to application) and
meadowland for all other areas, assuming average antecedent moisture
conditions and a Type II distribution storm under any of the following
storm conditions:
(1) A two-year, twenty-four-hour storm of 3.2 inches of rainfall.
(2) A five-year, twenty-four-hour storm of 4.2 inches of rainfall.
(3) A ten-year, twenty-four-hour storm of 5.0 inches of rainfall.
(4) A twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm of 5.7 inches of rainfall.
(5) A fifty-year, twenty-four-hour storm of 6.4 inches of rainfall.
(6) A one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour storm of 7.12 inches of
rainfall.
B. Storm sewer systems for conveyance of stormwater shall be designed to
a ten-year design storm, except at sumps, in which case the system
shall be sized to carry a twenty-five-year design storm. In addition,
there shall be adequate provision made to safely handle all storms in
excess of the required design storm (up to the one-hundred-year storm)
to prevent significant damage when the system fails. Inundation of
yards or periodic basement flooding is not considered significant
damage. Any bridge or culvert proposed to be within a major streambed
shall be designed to safely carry the one-hundred-year design storm in
conjunction with normal base flow without causing flood or erosion
damage to the surrounding properties. No provisions within this
chapter shall limit or otherwise affect the requirements of the
Floodplain Ordinance.54
C. All plans and designs for stormwater management facilities submitted
to the Township Engineer for approval shall determine stormwater peak
discharge and runoff by the use of the Soil Cover Complex Method, as
set forth in Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release
No. 55, with specific attention given to antecedent moisture conditions,
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Zoning, Article XX, Floodplain Conservation District.
§ 148-7 CONCORD CODE § 148-8
144:202
flood routing and peak discharge specifications included therein, and
Hydrology National Engineering Handbook, Section 4, both by United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
D. In calculating runoff after development, those areas covered by
concrete lattice blocks on an appropriate base, as outlined in Appendix
B, Section II, and roofs which drain to properly designed and installed
seepage beds shall not be considered to be impervious surfaces.
Concrete lattice blocks, seepage beds for roof drainage or similar
provisions to reduce runoff shall be required under the following
conditions:
(1) Whenever total impervious surfaces (buildings, parking areas,
driveways, etc.) will exceed 15% of the lot coverage on a residential
lot, driveways shall be constructed of concrete lattice blocks or
other equivalent provision shall be made to reduce runoff which is
accepted by the Township Engineer.
(2) Whenever total impervious surfaces in a residential land
development will exceed 8% or whenever total impervious surfaces
in other types of land development will exceed 20%, the following
facilities designed in accordance with Appendix B shall be provided
to hold or infiltrate roof drainage:
(a) Infiltration structures.
(b) Detention basins.
(c) Combinations of the above.
E. In order to prevent an increase in the rate of stormwater runoff under
design conditions, the installation of impervious cover shall be effected
only in conformity with the following:
(1) Erosion and sediment control and stormwater management control
facilities shall be incorporated into all building site designs and the
overall design of any subdivision or land development or
improvement so they may serve purposes such as wildlife areas,
recreational areas and fire prevention ponds.
(2) The natural infiltration and water resource potentials of various
soil and geologic formations shall guide design, construction and
vegetation decisions (Appendix A, Section II). Runoff in excess of
natural conditions from roofs, lawn areas and other surfaces which
are unlikely to contain pollutants shall be recharged to the
groundwater table or stored for nonpotable water uses.
(3) All existing trees and shrubs, natural streams, channels, drainage
swales and areas of surface water concentration shall be
maintained in their existing conditions, except where changes can
be justified on the basis of other design standards of this chapter.
§ 148-8 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-8
144:203

ARTICLE IV
Permit Procedures
§ 148-9. Description.
This article describes exemptions from the permit procedure for minor land
disturbance activities which will comply with the performance standards set
forth in Article III and the use of existing plan and permit procedures for
the processing of plans required to accompany applications for stormwater
management permits.
§ 148-10. Exemptions.
All land disturbance activities within Concord Township must comply with
the performance standards set forth in Article III. Certain activities by
their nature will comply with applicable performance standards without the
necessity of specific methods for the control of erosion and sedimentation
or the detention of stormwater runoff, and other activities are too minimal
to require review. While remaining subject to the performance standards,
all such activities are exempted from formal plan submission and permit
requirements. The activities so exempted are:
A. The following minor increases in impervious and semipervious cover on
existing developed properties when such will not exceed the
permissible site coverage provided in Chapter 210, Zoning:
(1) Paving, including brick pavement, additions to existing structures
or construction of new structures, where impervious cover
expansion will not exceed 1,000 square feet. [Amended 4-4-2006
by Ord. No. 300]
(2) Installation of concrete lattice blocks or gravel for driveways,
parking areas or other uses on slopes less than 8% and involving
less than 1,000 square feet of total ground coverage.
(3) Temporary storage of rock, soil or other impervious or pervious
material, where ground contact coverage will not exceed 3% of the
lot size, to a maximum of 4,000 square feet, provided that material
is not placed on slopes exceeding 8% and such storage is not in an
alluvial soils area or in a drainageway.
B. Earthmoving on an existing developed lot up to 10,000 square feet or
10% of the lot, whichever is less, provided that the changes will not
alter drainage patterns, accelerate erosion or interfere with
stormwater control measures previously installed.
C. The following farming activities: dairy farms, horse farms, livestock or
poultry operations, field crops, orchards or combinations thereof,
provided that residences, farm buildings and other impervious surfaces
and livestock confinement areas do not exceed 5% of surface coverage
of the total acreage and operations comply with § 148-7B(2) of this
chapter or a plan has been previously approved by the Township.
§ 148-9 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-10
144:205
§ 148-11. Application requirements.
All land disturbance activities, except those exempted from permit
requirements by § 148-10, shall be conducted only pursuant to and after
the issuance of a land disturbance permit. In all land disturbances involving
land development or the expansion or construction of buildings or other
improvements which will create impervious surfaces, an application shall
be submitted and processed in accordance with § 148-12 or § 148-13, as
appropriate. Applications for permits for land disturbance activities
ancillary either to a subdivision or land development and/or construction
for which a building permit is required shall be submitted to be processed
concurrently with applications for a subdivision or land development or an
application for a building permit, respectively. All other applications for a
land disturbance permit shall be submitted and processed in accordance
with § 148-14.
§ 148-12. Land disturbance ancillary to final approval.
D. Nursery and/or sod operations, provided that:
(1) Operations comply with § 148-7B(3) of this chapter;
(2) Nursery operations are on slopes less than 15%;
(3) Sod operations are on slopes less than 8%, and no more than 30%
of the sod on a contiguous growing area is removed before new sod
is established; and
(4) Buildings and/or impervious surfaces do not exceed 5% surface
coverage of the nursery or sod operation's total acreage at the site.
E. The following woodcutting activities:
(1) Operations complying with § 148-7B(4) of this chapter.
(2) Removal of dead or fallen trees.
F. Home gardens, provided that they do not obstruct with drainage
facilities or cause erosion, sedimentation or runoff on open roadways or
adjacent properties.
A. Concurrently with the submission of an application for final approval of
a subdivision or land development plan involving any nonexempt land
disturbance activities, the applicant shall submit a stormwater
management plan demonstrating that all land disturbance activities
ancillary to the subdivision or land development shall comply with the
performance standards for erosion and sedimentation set forth in
§ 148-7 and for permanent stormwater management set forth in § 148-8
and design requirements set forth in Appendices A and B.
B. The stormwater management plan shall contain all of the information
required by Article V hereof. The applicant and/or his engineer is
§ 148-10 CONCORD CODE § 148-12
144:206
encouraged to confer with the Township Engineer prior to the
preparation of a stormwater management plan.
C. The stormwater management plan shall be reviewed by the Township
Engineer, who shall submit a report thereon to the Township Planning
Commission within 30 days of submission of the plan.
D. If, in the Township Engineer's opinion, the stormwater management
plan, as submitted, satisfies all requirements of this chapter, he shall
recommend its approval by the Planning Commission. The
recommendation shall be considered by the Planning Commission,
together with the results of its own review and the comments of any
other reviewing body, as it reviews the subdivision or land development
application of which the stormwater management plan is a part.
E. If, in the Township Engineer's opinion, the stormwater management
plan, as submitted, fails to satisfy all requirements of this chapter, he
shall indicate so in his report to the Planning Commission and shall
recommend disapproval. Deficiencies shall be specified in terms of
chapter requirements not met.
(1) Upon receipt of the Township Engineer's report recommending
disapproval of the plan, the Planning Commission shall
communicate that finding to the applicant, proposing one of the
three following alternatives:
(a) The applicant shall withdraw the plan, as submitted,
terminating, in writing, the ninety-day review period for the
subdivision or land development plan. A new ninety-day period
will then commence upon the plan's resubmission.
(b) The applicant may, at that point, request, in writing, an
extension beyond the ninety-day period in order to accomplish
revisions as called for in the Township Engineer's report. If
acceptable to the Planning Commission, it shall indicate so, in
writing. If unacceptable to the Planning Commission, the
proposed extension shall not be granted, and the applicant
shall proceed in accordance with either Subsection E(1)(a)
above or Subsection E(1)(c) below.
(c) Revised plan.
[1] Should the applicant feel that, based upon the extent of
revisions needed, a revised plan can be resubmitted to the
Township Engineer sufficiently in advance of the ninetyday
expiration to allow further review by the Township
Engineer and a decision by the Planning Commission, he
shall propose such a course of action. Such proposal shall
specify the time within which the plan will be resubmitted
to the Township and, thus, the review and approval time
that will remain for the Township. If the Planning
Commission concurs in the proposed resubmission
§ 148-12 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-12
144:207
§ 148-13. Land disturbance ancillary to building construction.
schedule, this proposal shall be mutually signed and shall
become the basis for proceeding with the plan review.
[2] Should the applicant fail to resubmit the plan within the
agreed-upon time period, he shall request, in writing, an
extension of the ninety-day review period of sufficient
length to allow completion of the review and decision
process. If agreed to, in writing, by the Township, this
extended period shall be in effect.
(2) The Planning Commission may recommend approval of the
stormwater management plan with conditions to be addressed as
part of the final subdivision or land development application. Such
conditions will be agreed to by the applicant, in writing, prior to
conditional approval. If these conditions are not accepted by the
applicant, the Planning Commission may deny approval of the plan.
F. Final plan approval.
(1) Approval of the final subdivision and land development plan shall
require the applicant to submit all construction specifications for
stormwater management facilities as outlined in this chapter and
by the Township Engineer, a performance guarantee escrow
agreement as outlined in § 148-32, detailed documents necessary
to comply with the maintenance requirements of Article VII and
such other information as is deemed necessary by the Township
Engineer. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
(2) The applicant may request, in writing, the approval of the final
subdivision and land development plan conditioned upon
satisfactory submission of the above. If so, the land disturbance
permit will not be issued at the time of final approval but shall
await satisfaction of conditions. No site work shall begin until all
conditions are met.
G. If the stormwater management plan submission does not comply with
the performance standards set forth in §§ 148-7 and 148-8, the design
requirements of Appendices A and B or other relevant sections of this
chapter, this failure to comply shall be grounds for denial of the
application for subdivision and land development.
H. Where individual on-lot disturbance activities are not specifically
addressed in the applicant's stormwater management plan, the final
subdivision and land development plan shall note thereon that
supplementary individual on-lot stormwater management plans must be
submitted by the applicant or his successors concurrently with
applications for building permits for each lot.
A. Where individual on-lot land disturbance activities have been
addressed, approved and noted as such in the applicant's stormwater
§ 148-12 CONCORD CODE § 148-13
144:208
§ 148-14. Other land disturbance activities.
management plan ancillary to a subdivision and land development,
applications for building permits for each individual lot shall refer to
such approval and it shall not be necessary for the applicant to resubmit
a stormwater management plan concurrently with applications for
building permits, provided that the locations of houses, driveways and
drainage or seepage bed facilities will not appreciably alter the runoff
characteristics of the lot.
B. In all other cases or in cases where an applicant in Subsection A above
wishes to change building locations or the on-lot stormwater
management system, concurrently with the submission of an
application for building permit involving any nonexempt land
disturbance activities, the applicant shall submit a stormwater
management plan demonstrating that all land disturbance activities
ancillary to the building construction shall comply with the
performance standards for erosion and sedimentation set forth in
§ 148-7 and for permanent stormwater management set forth in
§ 148-8.
C. The stormwater management plan shall contain all of the information
required by Article V hereof. However, the applicant and/or his
engineer is encouraged to confer with the Township Engineer prior to
the preparation of stormwater management plan to determine the
scope and detail of the submission.
D. The stormwater management plan shall be reviewed by the Township
Engineer, who shall submit a report thereon within 30 days of
submission of the plan.
E. Where revisions to the plan are necessary in order to meet the
performance standards set forth in §§ 148-7 and 148-8, the applicant is
urged to discuss the contents of the Township Engineer's report with
the Township Engineer. All necessary revisions shall be effected and
submitted within 20 days after issuance of the Township Engineer's
report.
F. Within 10 days after receipt of the applicant's revisions, the Township
Engineer shall review the revisions for compliance with the Engineer's
report and issue a supplementary report.
G. If the stormwater management plan shall not be in compliance with the
performance standards set forth in §§ 148-7 and 148-8, failure to so
comply shall be grounds for denial of the building permit. Approval of
the building permit shall constitute approval of the stormwater
management plan. Where the stormwater management plan is
approved, the land disturbance permit for all land disturbance activities
ancillary to the building construction shall be issued concurrently with
building permit approval.
§ 148-13 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-14
144:209
§ 148-15. Land disturbance permit.
A. Whenever any person engages in nonexempt land disturbance activities
that are not ancillary to a subdivision or land development or to
building construction, he shall first submit a stormwater management
plan demonstrating that all proposed land disturbance activities shall
comply with the performance standards for erosion and sedimentation
set forth in § 148-7 and for permanent stormwater management set
forth in § 148-8, except that rock quarrying need only comply with
§ 148-8 and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The stormwater management plan shall be required to include all of the
information required by Article V hereof. The applicant and/or his
engineer shall confer with the Township Engineer to determine the
scope and detail required in his submission. If the proposed activities
shall consist of nonexempt farming activities, the Delaware County
agent of the United States Soil Conservation Service and/or staff of the
Delaware County Soil and Water Conservation District should be
consulted for possible assistance with the preparation of the
stormwater management plan.
C. The stormwater management plan shall be reviewed by the Township
Engineer, who shall submit a report thereon within 30 days of
submission of the plan.
D. Where revisions of the plan are necessary in order to meet the
performance standards set forth in §§ 148-7 and 148-8, the applicant is
urged to discuss the contents of the Township Engineer's report with
the Township Engineer. All necessary revisions shall be effected and
submitted within 20 days after issuance of the Township Engineer's
report.
E. Within 10 days after receipt of the applicant's revisions, the Township
Engineer shall review the revisions for compliance with the Engineer's
report and issue a supplementary report.
F. If the stormwater management plan shall not be in compliance with the
performance standards set forth in §§ 148-7 and 148-8, failure to so
comply shall be grounds for denial of the land disturbance permit.
Issuance of the land disturbance permit shall constitute approval of the
stormwater management plan.
A. Conditions of issuance.
(1) In approving a stormwater management plan and granting a land
disturbance permit, the Township may impose such conditions as it
may deem necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the
community. No permit shall be issued until the owner, builder or
developer applicant of the site certifies, in writing, that all site
work shall be performed in accordance with the plan. The plan shall
§ 148-14 CONCORD CODE § 148-15
144:210
be a condition of the permit and no person shall violate any such
condition so imposed.
(2) Those elements of the overall stormwater management system
designed to retain stormwater and sediment on an individual lot
shall be specifically located on the approved final subdivision or
land development plan that is to be recorded with the Delaware
County Recorder of Deeds. These elements may include:
(a) Maintenance of existing surface drainage systems, swales, etc.
(b) Utilization of groundwater recharge areas, seepage pits,
basins, etc.
(c) Limitations on grading of the lot so as to retain the absorption
capacity of the soil.
(d) Establishment of drainage easements, granted to the
Township, for the protection of existing drainage patterns.
(3) No certificate of occupancy or zoning use approval, whichever is
applicable, shall be granted until all stormwater management
facilities have been satisfactorily installed. As a condition to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the deed shall contain
evidence of appropriate deed restriction placed upon an individual
lot owner, group of lot owners or the obligation placed upon a
homeowners' association for the maintenance of said stormwater
management facilities. Said deed restriction shall require that no
action will be taken by any lot owner(s) or homeowners' association
to disrupt or in any way impair the effectiveness of the system and
that routine maintenance will be undertaken as necessary to
ensure the system's continued functioning. [Amended 1-5-1998
by Ord. No. 221]
B. Expiration and renewal.
(1) Every permit issued hereunder shall expire at the end of the period
of time set out in the permit. The permittee shall fully perform and
complete all of the work required to be done within the time limit
specified in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete
the work within the specified time, he shall, within 30 days prior to
the expiration of the permit, present, in writing, to the Board of
Supervisors a request for an extension of time, setting forth therein
the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the discretion of the
Board and the Township Engineer, such an extension is warranted,
the Board may grant additional time for the completion of the work.
Where the Township Engineer determines that the extension of
time will require a substantial modification of the runoff and
erosion control plan, any extension of a permit shall be subject to
approval of a revised runoff and erosion control plan by him in the
same manner as with an original plan and application.
§ 148-15 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-15
144:211
(2) Permits for agriculture and nursery and sod operations shall be
valid for 10 years, provided that the conditions of the plan and
performance standards are followed and there is no increase in
impervious surfaces, intensification of land use or changes in
drainage.
C. Modification of plans.
(1) Major modifications of the approved application and plans shall be
submitted to the Township Engineer and reprocessed in the same
manner as the original application and plans.
(2) All development must be suspended pending the approval of
modified plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be
authorized by the Township Engineer provided that written
authorization is given to the person performing work pursuant to
the permit.
D. Revocation or suspension. Any permit issued under this chapter may be
revoked or suspended by the Board of Supervisors, after notice, for:
(1) Violation of any condition of the permit;
(2) Violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the work;
(3) Existence of any condition or the commission of any act
constituting or creating a nuisance, hazard or endangering human
life or the property of others; and
(4) Falsification of any drawings, data or information pertaining to the
issuance of a permit.
§ 148-15 CONCORD CODE § 148-15
144:212
ARTICLE V
Plan Requirements
§ 148-16. Stormwater management plan requirements.
Except as provided in §§ 148-13 and 148-14, the stormwater management
plan consists of two parts: a map or maps describing the topography of the
area, the proposed alteration to the area and the erosion and sedimentation
control measures and facilities and the permanent stormwater control
measures and facilities; and a narrative report describing the project and
giving the purpose and the engineering assumptions and calculations for
control measures and facilities. The following elements, where relevant,
shall be included in the map and narrative portions of the plan:
A. A general statement of the project must be included in the narrative,
including:
(1) A general description of the project;
(2) A general description of accelerated erosion control;
(3) A general description of sedimentation control;
(4) A general description of stormwater handling, both during and
after construction; and
(5) The date that the project is to begin and the expected date that
final stabilization will be completed.
B. The topographic features of the project area must be shown on the map,
including:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Contours at an interval prescribed by the Township Engineer
(generally two feet for subdivision and land development) that will
adequately describe the topography (indicate source of
topographic information and date).
(3) Boundary lines of the project area.
(4) Acreage of the project.
(5) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the project
area or in the vicinity of the project.
(6) Other physical features, including existing drainage swales and
areas of trees and shrubs to be protected during construction.
(7) Proposed location of underground utilities and sewer and/or water
lines.
(8) Scale of map and north arrow.
§ 148-16 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-16
144:213
(9) Existing roads and easements.
C. The types, depth, slope and areal extent of the soils and underlying
geology must be shown on the map, including:
(1) The type (may be specified as in a soil survey or by name), depth,
slope, texture and structure; and
(2) The areal extent.
D. The proposed alteration to the area must be shown on the map,
including:
(1) Changes to land surface and vegetative cover;
(2) Areas of cuts and fills;
(3) Structures, roads, paved areas and buildings;
(4) Stormwater control facilities; and
(5) Contours of finished area at an interval that will adequately
describe the final topography.
E. The amount of runoff from the project area and the upstream watershed
area must be described in the narrative, including:
(1) The method of calculation and figures used; and
(2) The factors considered.
F. The staging of earthmoving activities must be described in the
narrative, including:
(1) Cover removal, including all cuts and fills;
(2) Installation of erosion and sediment control facilities and practices;
(3) Installation of improvements, including streets, storm sewers,
underground utilities, sewer and water lines, buildings, driveways,
parking areas, recreational facilities, other structures, etc.; and
(4) The program of operations to control erosion and sedimentation
and convert to permanent stormwater management facilities,
including a chart of the relative time sequence of activities.
G. Temporary control measures and facilities for use during earthmoving
must be shown on the map and described in the narrative, including:
(1) Purpose;
(2) Temporary facilities or other soil stabilization measures to protect
existing trees and shrubs from earthmoving activities;
(3) Types, locations and dimensioned details of control measures and
facilities;
§ 148-16 CONCORD CODE § 148-16
144:214
(4) Design consideration and calculations of control measures and
facilities; and
(5) Facilities to prevent tracking of mud by construction vehicles onto
existing roadways.
H. Permanent control and groundwater recharge measures and facilities
for site restoration and long-term protection must be shown on the map
and described in the narrative, including:
(1) Purpose;
(2) Establishment of permanent vegetation or other soil stabilization
measures;
(3) Installation of infiltration facilities, rooftop storage, cisterns,
seepage pits, french drains, etc., to serve structures;
(4) Use of semipervious materials for driveways, parking areas, etc.;
(5) Types, locations and dimensioned details of facilities for
stormwater detention and storage;
(6) Location of wells and septic tank leach fields;
(7) Design considerations and calculations; and
(8) Conversion of erosion and sediment control facilities to permanent
stormwater management facilities.
I. A maintenance program and ownership descriptions for the control
facilities must be described in the narrative, including:
(1) The method of disposal of materials removed from the control
facilities or the project area;
(2) The method, frequency of removal and ultimate disposal site for
sediment and other materials removed from control facilities must
be considered. The facilities must be maintained for their designed
operation to ensure adequate performance;
(3) The proposed ownership and financial responsibility for
maintenance of the control facilities.
§ 148-16 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-16
144:215

ARTICLE VI
Inspections
§ 148-17. Subdivision and land development activities.
A. No work shall proceed to a subsequent phase until inspected and
approved by the Township Engineer or his designee, who shall then file
a report thereon with the Township and with the permittee. All work
shall be performed in accordance with an inspection and construction
control schedule approved by the Township Engineer. An estimate of
inspection costs shall be provided to the permittee prior to the initiation
of the inspections.
B. Times of inspection. After the commencement of initial earthmoving
operations, the Township Engineer or his designee shall inspect at the
following points in the development of the site or of each stage thereof:
(1) Upon completion of stripping, the stockpiling of topsoil, the
construction of temporary stormwater management and erosion
control facilities, disposal of all unsuitable materials, and
preparation of the ground.
(2) Upon completion of rough grading but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development improvements and
ground covers.
(3) Upon completion of permanent stormwater management facilities,
including established ground covers and plantings for that
purpose.
(4) Upon completion of final grading, vegetative control measures and
all other site restoration work undertaken in accordance with the
approved plan and permit.
(5) During construction at such time(s) as is necessary to force
correction of noncompliance of this chapter.
C. Notices. The permittee shall notify the Township 48 hours prior to
completion of each phase identified in Subsection B to request an
inspection. Upon receiving such notice, the Township Engineer shall
inspect the work within two workdays of receipt of notice or completion
of the phase, whichever shall last occur, and notify the permittee, in
writing, of its acceptability or in what respect there has been a failure
to comply with the requirements of this chapter. Any portion of the work
which does not comply shall be promptly corrected by the permittee.
No work shall be initiated on subsequent phases of the stormwater
management plan, the subdivision or land development or building
construction until the Township Engineer has inspected and approved
the work in the present phase. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
D. Completion certification. The Township Engineer shall maintain a
permanent file of his inspections. Upon completion of the work, the
§ 148-17 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-17
144:217
§ 148-18. Waiving of inspections.
In the review of any stormwater management plan, the Township Engineer
shall have discretion to modify or waive the otherwise applicable inspection
schedule called for in § 148-17 above. Such modifications or waivers shall
be noted on the land disturbance permit.
§ 148-19. Misinterpretation of exemption criteria.
§ 148-20. Other land disturbance.
See § 148-31.
permittee shall file with the Township a certification that all stormwater
management measures have been completed in conformance with the
approved plan and permit and with all provisions of this chapter.
E. Final inspection.
(1) Immediately upon completion of all work, the notification called for
in Subsection C above, and the filing by the permittee of the
certification cited in Subsection D, the Township Engineer shall
make a final inspection and shall prepare a final inspection report.
(2) If, upon final inspection of any work, it is found by the Township
Engineer that the work subject to inspection has been satisfactorily
completed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and
the permit, plans, conditions, drawings and specifications, as the
case may be, and the required reports have been submitted, a
completion certificate covering such work shall be issued to the
owner.
A. When brought to the attention of the Township Engineer or his designee
that the exemption criteria in § 148-10 of this chapter may not be
applicable to an existing land disturbance activity for which a permit
was not obtained, the Township shall advise the owner of record by
certified mail of his intention to inspect the property on a specified date
within the following seven days to determine compliance with this
chapter. The owner may request a joint inspection on that date or on a
mutually acceptable alternative date.
B. If, upon inspection, the Township Engineer determines that the land
disturbance activity does not qualify for exemption under § 148-10, the
owner shall be notified by certified mail that he has 30 days in which to
apply for a permit under the terms of § 148-11. Until such permit has
been issued, no further disturbance activities shall be pursued and any
stabilizing or drainage measures ordered by the Township Engineer
shall be installed.
§ 148-17 CONCORD CODE § 148-20
144:218
ARTICLE VII
Maintenance of Permanent Stormwater Management Facilities
§ 148-21. Maintenance of other than on-lot facilities.
§ 148-22. Maintenance of individual-lot systems.
Stormwater management facilities and systems that are located on an
individual lot and are the responsibility of that landowner to maintain and
assure the performance of, i.e., those obtaining a permit under § 148-13
or § 148-14 of this chapter, shall be maintained and their performance
guaranteed in accordance with § 148-15A and § 148-16I of this chapter.
Obligations may include the perpetuation of natural drainage and
infiltration patterns and/or the maintenance of facilities constructed by the
individual lot owner under terms of his building or stormwater permit, e.g.,
cisterns, downspout connections, seepage pits, etc.
§ 148-23. Corrective measures.
If the Township determines at any time that stipulated permanent
stormwater management facilities have been eliminated, altered or
improperly maintained, the owner shall be advised of corrective measures
required and given a period of time, as set by the Township Engineer, to
take necessary action.
§ 148-24. As-built plans.
Prior to final inspection required as part of any approved subdivision or land
development or building permit, the holder shall present an as-built plan of
sewage and water supply facilities and stormwater management facilities,
showing drainage easements, detention or retention basins, infiltration
structures and the size, storage capacity and cross sections of such.
A. On or before completion of subdivision or land development activities in
accordance with the stormwater management plan and permit, the
permanent stormwater management system for a tract shall be in place
and operation. Temporary sediment-trapping facilities in detention
basins, upon inspection and approval by the Township Engineer, shall
be converted into permanent stormwater management basins in
accordance with the approved plan; additional facilities serving more
than an individual lot shall begin operation as specified in the plan.
Continued functioning and, as necessary, maintenance of these
facilities shall be performed and guaranteed in accordance with
§ 148-16I of this chapter and Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land
Development, Article X, Improvements.
B. In addition, property which will be subdivided or developed under
§ 148-12 for commercial, industrial, apartment or residential use
involving a homeowners' association shall comply with § 148-22 and
§ 148-25.
§ 148-21 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-25
144:219
§ 148-25. Maintenance agreements on individual lots.
Where the maintenance of stormwater management facilities and systems
is the responsibility of an individual lot owner, group of lot owners or
homeowners' association, the terms of that maintenance agreement and a
description of the facilities and systems on the lot or lots, as called for in
§ 148-15A of this chapter and § 148-24, shall be recorded with the deed to
the property.
§ 148-25 CONCORD CODE § 148-25
144:220
ARTICLE VIIA
Prohibitions
[Added 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 340]
§ 148-25.1. Prohibited discharges.
As indicated by § 148-57.
§ 148-25.2. Prohibited connections.
As indicated by § 148-58.
§ 148-25.3. Roof drains.
As indicated by § 148-59.
§ 148-25.4. Alteration of BMPs.
As indicated by § 148-60.
§ 148-25.1 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-25.4
144:221

ARTICLE VIII
Ameliorative Measures
§ 148-26. Protection of adjacent property.
A. No person shall engage in earthmoving sufficiently close to the
property line to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or
other public property without supporting and protecting such public
street, sidewalk, alley or other public property from settling, cracking
or other damage which might result from such earthmoving. If the
nature of the earthmoving is such as to create a hazard to life or
property unless adequately safeguarded, the applicant shall construct
walls, fences, guardrails or other structures to safeguard the public
street, sidewalk, alley or other public property and persons.
B. No persons shall dump, move or place any soil, bedrock or other
material or divert or increase the flow of water so as to cause the water
and/or material to be deposited upon or roll, flow or wash upon or over
the premises of another without the express consent of the owner of
such premises so affected or upon or over any public street, street
improvement, road, sewer, storm drain, watercourse or right-of-way or
any public property.
C. No person shall, when hauling soil, bedrock or other material over any
public street, road, alley or public property, allow such materials to
blow or spill over and upon such street, road, alley or public property or
adjacent private property.
D. If any soil, bedrock or other material or water or liquid is caused to be
deposited upon or to roll, flow or wash upon any public property or
right-of-way in violation of the above subsections of this subsection, the
person responsible shall be notified, in writing, and shall cause the
same to be removed from such public property or way within 36 hours.
In the event of an immediate danger to the public health or safety,
notice shall be given by the most expeditious, means and the material
or liquid shall be removed immediately. In the event that it is not so
removed, the Township Manager shall cause such removal, and the cost
of such removal shall be paid to Concord Township by the person who
failed to so remove the material and shall be a debt due the Township.
The cost of such removal shall be a lien upon all property and all rights
to property, real or personal, of any person liable to pay the same from
and after the time said cost is due and payable. The cost of such
removal shall be collected in the manner of said taxes or from escrow
funds established for the land development activity.
§ 148-26 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-26
144:223

ARTICLE IX
Enforcement
§ 148-27. Notification of noncompliance.
Any activity conducted pursuant to a stormwater management permit
issued by Concord Township shall be performed in strict compliance with
the terms of that permit. Violations shall be treated in the following manner:
§ 148-28. Misinterpretation of exemption criteria.
Earthmoving and related activities exempt from the need for Township
approval are identified in § 148-10 of this chapter. Any property owner who
anticipates undertaking earthmoving activities or who intends to authorize
such work on his land is responsible to determine the extent of Township
approval and permit necessary. Should a misinterpretation of the criteria
as applied to his site lead a property owner to conclude erroneously that
he is exempt from the requirements of this chapter, he may be notified of
his error by the Township, as provided in § 148-19. In such event, all work
in progress shall be halted, and the procedures described in Article IV of
this chapter shall be applied to the conduct of the project from that point
forward. Violations shall then be handled in accordance with § 148-29 of
this chapter.
§ 148-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
A. Any noncompliance with the terms of the permit that is identified by the
Township Engineer or his designee in the course of inspections as
specified in Article VI of this chapter shall be remedied by the permittee
according to the terms of that article. Failure to comply with those
provisions shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and the permittee
then shall be subject to the procedure of Subsection B below.
B. If at any time work does not conform to the permit, including conditions
thereof, or to the plans and specifications, including modifications
thereof, comprising the approved stormwater management plan, a
written notice to comply shall be given to the permittee. Such notice
shall set forth the nature of corrections required and the time within
which corrections shall be made. Upon failure to comply within the time
specified, the permittee shall be considered in violation of this chapter,
and the Township shall issue a cease and desist order on all work on the
site until corrections are made. If corrections are not undertaken within
a specified time or the permittee violates the cease and desist order,
penalties shall be imposed under § 148-29 of this chapter. Further,
when the permit has been issued in accordance with § 148-12 of this
chapter, such violation shall be considered a violation of Chapter 160,
Subdivision and Land Development, and shall be grounds for the
forfeiture of any bond or performance guarantee required under that
chapter.
§ 148-27 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-29
144:225
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine of
$600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this chapter, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
§ 148-29 CONCORD CODE § 148-29
144:226
ARTICLE X
Fees; Performance Guaranties
§ 148-30. Permit application fees.
§ 148-31. Inspection fees.
A. At the time of application for subdivision or land development approval,
a building permit or a land disturbance permit for any other activity
covered by this chapter, the applicant shall agree, in writing, to cover
all costs of administration and review and shall deposit with the
Township an amount sufficient to cover:
(1) Administrative costs to the Township to process the land
disturbance permit.
(2) The cost of review of the plans by the Township Engineer and other
consultants.
(3) Standard inspections within Article VI with the exception of those
described in § 148-17B(5).
(4) The costs of the Township Solicitor's review of legal agreements
where such are required by this chapter.
B. The exact amount required for deposit on any permit application shall
be determined as follows:
(1) Administrative costs shall be fixed fees established by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors.
(2) The Township Engineer shall estimate the costs of each review
based upon the hourly fees and established standards adopted by
resolution.
(3) The Township Solicitor's reviews shall be estimated on the basis of
hourly fees and established standards adopted by resolution.
C. Excluding fixed administrative costs, the applicant shall only be
charged for time actually expended and detailed in bills from the
Township Engineer and Solicitor. The balance, if any, of the deposit
shall be returned to the applicant at the time of final action by the
Board of Supervisors.
D. If actual time estimates of the Township Engineer and Solicitor will be
exceeded, the applicant will be charged only for those additional
charges due to actions. The applicant's deposit shall be current prior to
preliminary and final approvals.
E. Costs incurred by the Township in an initial conference with applicants,
as called for in Article IV of this chapter, shall not be chargeable to the
applicants.
§ 148-30 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-31
144:227
§ 148-32. Performance guaranty.
A. When the stormwater management plan for a building, logging or
woodcutting operation, nursery or sod farming operation or
agricultural operation has been approved by the Township Engineer,
the applicant shall pay a fee to cover inspections by the Township
Engineer or his designee. The land disturbance permit will then be
issued.
B. The fees shall be fixed by resolution of the Board of Supervisors to
cover these inspections: one at the beginning of land disturbance; one
of the work in progress; and a final inspection.
C. If problems arise requiring more extensive involvement of the Township
Engineer, these costs will be assessed the permittee only if the
additional costs are due to his actions.
D. All fees shall be waived for ongoing agricultural activities performed in
accordance with an approved soil conservation plan, as well as any
Township filings and reviews required to obtain such a plan.
A. Where proposed land disturbance activities are ancillary to a
subdivision or land development, all costs to the applicant and the
Township for implementing the stormwater management plan shall be
considered the costs of subdivision or land development improvements
which must be completed prior to final approval of the plat. The
applicant shall furnish a performance guaranty in the form of an escrow
agreement or other financial security acceptable to the governing body
to guarantee satisfactory completion of these activities in accordance
with Section 509 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. § 10509, Regulations. The Township must be an approving authority
for the release of funds under such an agreement.
B. The performance guaranty shall cover 110% of the following costs
related to the stormwater management plan:
(1) The full costs of land preparation and installation of erosion and
sediment control measures, drainage and stormwater management
facilities outlined in the plan, costs being verified by bids from
firms experienced in such work.
C. No work shall begin until the Board of Supervisors shall approve the
performance guaranty.
D. The performance guaranty shall be reviewed annually and whenever it
is apparent that expenses will exceed estimates, in order to ensure that
funds will be available to cover all costs. When it is apparent that
sufficient funds will not be available, the applicant shall make
arrangements to ensure that funds will be on deposit before work
proceeds on the project.
§ 148-31 CONCORD CODE § 148-32
144:228
Part 2
Ches[tAedro Cprteeedk7 S-1to3r-2m0w0a4teBry MOardn.a Ngeom. 2e8n2t ]Plan
ARTICLE XI
General Provisions
§ 148-33. Statement of findings.
The Board of Supervisors of Concord Township finds that:
§ 148-34. Purpose.
The purpose of this part is to promote health, safety, and welfare within the
Township, implement the requirements of the Chester Creek Stormwater
Management Plan, and implement the requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Phase II (NPDES II) by minimizing
the damages described in § 148-33A of this part through provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare,
and the protection of the people of the Township and all of the people of
the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
A. Manage accelerated runoff, erosion, and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities that cause these problems;
B. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems;
C. Encourage recharge of groundwater where appropriate and prevent
degradation of groundwater quality;
D. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the
Township and the commonwealth;
E. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams;
F. Provide proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater management
facilities that are constructed in the Township; and
G. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide
stormwater management and planning.
§ 148-33 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-35
144:229
§ 148-35. Statutory authority.
The Township is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoffs by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167),
32 P.S., § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the Storm Water Management Act,
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,55 Act 247, as amended, and
the Code of the Township of Concord, Chapter 148 (SLDO), Part 1, and
the regulations of the PA Department of Environmental Protection NPDES
Phase II.
§ 148-36. Applicability.
A. This part shall apply to all areas of the Township located within the
Chester Creek Watershed as delineated in the Chester Creek
Stormwater Management Plan, which is hereby adopted as part of this
part.
B. This part shall only apply to permanent stormwater management
facilities constructed as part of any of the regulated activities listed in
this section. Stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation
control during construction activities are specifically not regulated by
this part but shall continue to be regulated under existing laws and
ordinances.
C. This part contains only the stormwater management performance
standards and design criteria that are necessary or desirable from a
watershed-wide perspective. Local stormwater management design
criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and
details, outlet structure design, etc.) shall continue to be regulated by
the applicable Township ordinances or at the Township Engineer's
discretion.
D. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this part:
(1) Land development and/or redevelopment.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(6) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
(7) Placement of fill material.
55.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 148-35 CONCORD CODE § 148-37
144:230
§ 148-37. Repealer.
Any ordinance or ordinance provision of the Township inconsistent with
any of the provisions of this part is hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
§ 148-38. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this part be declared invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of
the remaining provisions of this part.
§ 148-39. Compatibility with other ordinance requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this part do not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to comply with or to secure required permits or approvals
for activities regulated by any other applicable codes, rules, statutes, or
ordinances.
§ 148-37 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-39
144:231

ARTICLE XII
Terminology
§ 148-40. Interpretation.
For the purposes of this part, certain terms and words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows.
§ 148-41. Word usage.
§ 148-42. Definitions.
As used in this part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure detached from a principal building
located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal building or use.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising
livestock including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing, and
installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or
impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another, and
also, the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more
or less impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has submitted a drainage
plan or filed an application for approval to engage in any regulated activities
as defined in § 148-36 of this part.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The words "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but are intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied, or maintained."
§ 148-40 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-42
144:233
AS-BUILT DRAWINGS — A set of engineering or site drawings that
delineates the specific permitted stormwater management facility as
actually constructed.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Stormwater structures,
facilities, and techniques to maintain or improve the water quality of surface
runoff. Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for
Developing Areas, Spring 1998.
BUFFER — See "riparian buffer."
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward cutting of
small channels and waterways due to erosion caused by moderate to large
floods.
CHAPTER 148 PERMIT — A permit issued by the Township after the
drainage plan has been approved. Said permit is issued prior to or
contemporaneously with the final Township approval.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank, both permeable and
nonpermeable, managing rainwater.
COMBINED SEWERS — A sewerage system that carries both sanitary
sewage and stormwater runoff.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Delaware County Conservation District.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works that carries a stream
under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill, or structure for highway, railroad,
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DEED RESTRICTION — See "restrictive covenant."
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Delaware County Planning Department and/
or agent of the governing body involved with the administration, review, or
enforcement of any provisions of this part by contract or memorandum of
understanding.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate.
DETENTION DISTRICT — Those subareas in which some type of detention
is required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of Act 167.56
56.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 148-42 CONCORD CODE § 148-42
144:234
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity of this part.
DEVELOPMENT — See "land development."
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed.
DISCHARGE EASEMENT — The grant of a property right to allow runoff in
excess of the previous quantity and/or rate of flow.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all overland
or pipe flow from the site would be directed towards it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transmit stormwater runoff, including streams, channels,
swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater management
system, if any, to be used for a given development site, the contents of which
are established in § 148-46.
EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity including, but not limited to,
construction, mining, timber harvesting, and grubbing which alters,
disturbs, and exposes the existing land surface.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use
of private land for a public or quasi-public purpose (e.g., utility lines) and
within which the owner of the property shall not erect any permanent
structures.
EPHEMERAL STREAMS — Streams that carry only surface runoff and are
dry except during precipitation events. The groundwater table is generally
located below the bottom of ephemeral streams. This may be a water of the
Commonwealth.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind,
ice, or other mechanical or natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan that
is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation. Said plan
must be submitted to and approved by the Delaware County Conservation
District and/or Concord Township before construction can proceed.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to
the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped
land, the land use shall be considered as "meadow" on B soils unless the
natural land cover is proven to generate lower curve numbers or Rational C
value, such as forested lands.
§ 148-42 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-42
144:235
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers,
and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration, Flood Hazard
Boundary Map or Concord Township Flood District Map, as being a special
flood hazard area.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of
the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to
the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the
top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forest land. These include timber
inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design high
water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge. The space
is required as a safety margin in a pond, berm, or basin.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel, or natural ground, specified in
percent and shown on plans as specified herein. "To grade" means to finish
the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment, or bottom of excavation.
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct
surface water from cropland.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies. This is to be the first chosen method of
stormwater management.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with material to the extent that it is highly resistant to infiltration by
water, including, but not limited to, conventional impervious surfaces such
as paved streets, roofs, compacted stone, and sidewalks. In addition, the
following shall be considered impervious surfaces when used by motor
vehicles: graveled areas, paver blocks, bricks, and cobblestone.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pit, and seepage trench) to
accomplish groundwater recharge.
§ 148-42 CONCORD CODE § 148-42
144:236
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the diversion
end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through which water
may flow.
INTERMITTENT STREAMS — Streams which flow only during wet seasons.
The groundwater table generally is at or above the bottom of intermittent
streams during wet seasons but drops below the stream bottom during
dry seasons. Stream flow in intermittent streams is primarily due to
precipitation but does have some groundwater contribution during wet
seasons. These streams may be waters of the commonwealth.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LAND/EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling,
digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity
that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Chester Creek hydrologic model.
MANNING EQUATION (IN MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow, and slope. "Open channels" may include closed
conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPALITY — Concord Township, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service [previously the Soil
Conservation Service (SCS)].
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a watery body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an
open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure, or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or
other features.
(2)
A.
B. Any subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the PA Municipalities
Planning Code.
C.
§ 148-42 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-42
144:237
and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes
flowing partly full.
OUTFALL — Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater, or
artificial drain.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of impervious parking areas as
temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (calibrated) — A computer-based
hydrologic modeling technique.
PERENNIAL STREAMS — Streams that flow year round. Perennial streams
derive their flow from both groundwater and runoff, and the groundwater
table never drops below the streambed. These streams are always waters of
the commonwealth.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Concord
Township.
PMF (PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD) — The flood that may be expected
from the most severe combination of critical meteorological and hydrologic
conditions that are reasonably possible in any area. The PMF is derived
from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined based on
data obtained from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA).
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow.
REDEVELOPMENT — Reconstruction of an existing improved, developed
property, as of the date of adoption of this part.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that have an
impact on stormwater runoff and that are specified in § 148-36 of this part.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the postdevelopment peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT — A restriction on the use of land usually set
forth in the deed. Restrictive covenants (a.k.a. deed restrictions) usually
run with the land and are legally binding upon subsequent owners of the
property.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released from the
basin at some time after the end of the storm.
§ 148-42 CONCORD CODE § 148-42
144:238
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average once every 25 years.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A vegetative strip paralleling the banks of a perennial
or intermittent stream or other water body (including wetlands and ponds).
The buffer shall contain appropriate native vegetation throughout its width
with the exception of a minimum twenty-five-foot wide strip of land
maintained in meadow grass or forbs at its outer boundary. See also
Appendix C, Riparian Buffer Technical Reference Guide.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs in the form of a seepage
pit/seepage trench.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, or retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported
by water.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which matter is accumulated or
deposited by the movement of water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to design, construct, implement, or maintain control
measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this
part.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the ground to accomplish groundwater recharge.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called curve number (CN).
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by SCS into four
runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are very
permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very
permeable and produce much more runoff.
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin that is
used to pass the peak discharge which is greater than the maximum design
storm controlled by the pond.
§ 148-42 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-42
144:239
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and
depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "return
period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that conveys
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The total amount of precipitation reaching the ground
surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins,
open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff in the Chester Creek Watershed adopted by Delaware and Chester
Counties as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167),
and known as the "Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan, Chester Creek
Watershed," as well as Chapter 148, Part 1, of the Concord Township Code.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
applicant or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the particular site of interest according to this part.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated
water of this commonwealth.
SUBAREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which
stormwater management criteria have been established in the stormwater
management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development;
provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or
easement of access or any residential dwellings shall be exempt.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of
§ 148-42 CONCORD CODE § 148-42
144:240
interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
TR-20 — The computer-based hydrologic modeling technique adapted to
the Chester Creek Watershed for the Act 167 plan. The model has been
calibrated to reflect actual recorded flow values by adjusting key model
input parameters.
TR-55 — A method for determining runoff volumes and rates developed by
NRCS.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration during the growing season
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas
(hydrophytic regitation).
§ 148-42 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-42
144:241

ARTICLE XIII
Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 148-43. Written approval of drainage plan required.
For any of the activities regulated by this part, the final approval of
subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of any building or
occupancy permit, or the commencement of any land disturbance activity
may not proceed until the applicant or his/her agent has received written
approval of a drainage plan from the Township.
§ 148-44. Exemptions.
A. A stormwater quantity control exemption, Concord Township (as listed
in Chapter 148, Part 1).
(1) Any regulated activity that meets the following exemption criterion
shall not be required to submit a drainage plan implementing the
stormwater quantity controls of this part. This criterion shall apply
to the total development even if the development is to take place in
phases. The date of the adoption of this part shall be the starting
point from which to consider tracts as "parent tracts" in which
future subdivisions and respective impervious area computations
shall be cumulatively considered. Exemption shall not relieve the
applicant from implementing such measures as are necessary to
protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Stormwater management exemption criterion: no more than 1,000
square feet of impervious surface. [Amended 4-4-2006 by Ord.
No. 300]
B. Applicants whose activities are exempted under Subsection A above
shall still be required to meet the stormwater management quality
controls of this part. This may be achieved by implementing one or
more of the following minimum best management practices:
(1) Provide infiltration capacity for the equivalent of one inch of runoff
from all new impervious surfaces. The infiltration volume does not
have to be provided in one location. However, if site conditions
preclude capture of runoff from portions of the impervious area,
the infiltration volume for the remaining area must be increased an
equivalent amount to offset the loss. In no case should the portion
of the new impervious area flowing to an infiltration facility be less
than 90% of the total new impervious area.
(2) If site conditions preclude use of infiltration facilities (e.g., high
groundwater table or extensive rock conditions), provide an
extended detention facility that will detain the equivalent of one
inch of runoff from all new impervious areas for at least 24 hours.
(3) Provide buffer areas on the downstream side of any new impervious
surfaces (e.g., sidewalks, roadways, parking lots) where the runoff
§ 148-43 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-44
144:243
§ 148-45. Plan submission.
discharges in a sheet flow manner. The buffer areas must be at
least 20 feet wide and can be a mix of grass, shrubs, and trees.
If buffer areas cannot be provided for the entire length of the
impervious surfaces, consider installing a bioretention system and
diverting surface runoff from the impervious surfaces to the facility
using grass swales.
(4) If none of the above options are feasible due to site constraints, the
applicant must provide stormwater detention that meets the
release rate criteria for the site location or else obtain approval
from the Township Engineer to implement other BMPs that will
provide water quality benefits of an equivalent level.
C. New federal regulations approved October 1999 require operators of
small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) to obtain NPDES
Phase II permits from DEP by March 2003. (NPDES II is an acronym for
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Phase II
Stormwater Permitting Regulations.) This program affects all
municipalities in urbanized areas of the state. This definition applies to
all of the Chester Creek Watershed and/or Concord Township.
Therefore, all municipalities within the Chester Creek Watershed will
be subject to the NPDES Phase II requirements, mandated by the
Federal Clean Water Act as administered by DEP. For more information
on NPDES II requirements, contact the DEP Regional Office.
D. Concord Township does not currently have or contemplate a municipal
separate storm sewer system.
A. For all activities regulated by this part, the steps below shall be
followed for submission. For any activities that require a DEP joint
permit application and are regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety
and Waterway Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management)
of DEPs Rules and Regulations, require a PennDOT highway occupancy
permit, or require any other permit under applicable state or federal
regulations, the permit(s) shall be part of the plan.
B. Five copies of the drainage plan and associated plan review application
shall be submitted by the applicant as part of the Act 247 preliminary
plan submission for the regulated activity. Distribution of the drainage
plan will be as follows:
(1) Two copies to the Township accompanied by the requisite Township
review fee, as specified in this part.
(2) One copy to the Township Engineer.
(3) One copy to the Delaware County Planning Department.
(4) One copy to the Delaware County Conservation District.
§ 148-44 CONCORD CODE § 148-46
144:244
§ 148-46. Drainage plan contents.
A. The drainage plan shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps, and
plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations
and erosion and sedimentation control plan by title and date. The cover
sheet of the computations and erosion and sedimentation control plan
shall refer to the associated maps by title and date. All drainage plan
materials shall be submitted to the Township in a format that is clear,
concise, legible, neat, and well organized; otherwise, the drainage plan
shall be disapproved and returned to the applicant.
B. The following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
(1) General.
(a) General description of project.
(b) General description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the
materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(c) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations
for all stormwater management facilities.
(2) Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch
by thirty-six-inch (maximum) sheets and shall be prepared in a form
that meets the requirements for recording at the offices of the
Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County. The contents of the maps(s)
shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities,
or other identifiable landmarks.
(b) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be
used.
(c) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water and
wetlands within the project area.
(d) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
streams, existing drainage courses, areas of natural vegetation
to be preserved, and the total extent of the upstream area
draining through the site.
(e) The locations of all existing and proposed structures and
utilities within 100 feet of property lines.
(f) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(g) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would
be added.
§ 148-46 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-46
144:245
(h) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(i) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(j) The name of the development, the name and address of the
owner of the property, and the name of the individual or firm
preparing the plan.
(k) The date of the plan, including revisions.
(l) A graphic and written scale at a minimum of one inch equals no
more than 50 feet.
(m) A North arrow.
(n) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(o) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(p) Vertical profiles of all proposed open channels and storm
sewers including hydraulic capacity for both.
(q) Overland drainage paths of proposed swales or channels to
convey water.
(r) A note on the plan indicating the location, access, and
responsibility for maintenance of stormwater management
facilities.
(s) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management system to be a permanent fixture that
can be altered or removed only after approval of a revised plan
by the Township.
(t) The following signature block for the design engineer:
(Design Engineer), on this date (date of signature), has
reviewed and hereby certifies that the drainage plan is
consistent to design standards and criteria of the Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan, Chester Creek Watershed,
Model Stormwater Management Ordinance and Chapter 148
of the Code of the Township of Concord.
(3) Supplemental information.
(a) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted.
[1] The overall stormwater management concept for the
project.
[2] Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this part.
§ 148-46 CONCORD CODE § 148-46
144:246
§ 148-47. Drainage plan review.
[3] Stormwater management techniques to be applied both
during and after development.
[4] Expected project time schedule.
(b) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, where
applicable, including all reviews and approvals, as required by
DEP.
(c) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak
flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing Township
stormwater collection system that may receive runoff from the
project site.
(4) Stormwater management facilities.
(a) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a
plan and described in detail.
(b) When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits,
beds, or trenches are used, the locations of existing and
proposed septic tank infiltration areas and wells must be
shown.
(c) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of
the stormwater management facilities must be shown.
A. The Township Engineer shall review the drainage plan for consistency
with the adopted Chester Creek Stormwater Management Plan and
Chapter 148, Part 1, of the Code of the Township of Concord. The
Township shall require receipt of a complete plan, as specified in this
part. The Township Engineer shall review the drainage plan for any
submission or land development against the Township Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance57 provisions not superseded by this part.
B. The Conservation District, in accordance with established criteria and
procedures, shall review the drainage plan for consistency with
stormwater management and erosion and sediment pollution control
requirements and provide written comments to the Township Engineer.
Such comments shall be considered by the Township prior to final
approval of the drainage plan.
C. For activities regulated by this part, the Township Engineer shall notify
the Township in writing as to whether the drainage plan is consistent
with the stormwater management plan. Should the drainage plan be
determined to be consistent with the stormwater management plan, the
Township Engineer will forward an approval letter to the applicant with
a copy to the Township Manager.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 148-46 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-47
144:247
D. Should the drainage plan be determined to be inconsistent with the
stormwater management plan, the Township Engineer will forward a
disapproval letter to the applicant with a copy to the Township
Secretary citing the reason(s) for the disapproval. Any disapproved
drainage plans may be revised by the applicant and resubmitted
consistent with this part.
E. For regulated activities specified in § 148-36 of this part, the Township
Engineer shall notify the Township Director of Code Enforcement,
within a time frame consistent with the Township building code and/or
Township Subdivision Ordinance,58 as to whether the drainage plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan and forward a copy of
the approval/disapproval letter to the applicant. Any disapproved
drainage plan may be revised by the applicant and resubmitted
consistent with this part.
F. For regulated activities requiring a DEP joint permit application, the
Township Engineer shall notify DEP as to whether the drainage plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan and forward a copy of
the review letter to the Township and the applicant. DEP may consider
the Township Engineer's review comments in determining whether to
issue a permit.
G. The Township shall not approve any subdivision or land development
for regulated activities specified in § 148-36 of this part if the drainage
plan has been found to be inconsistent with the stormwater
management plan as determined by the Township Engineer. All
required permits from DEP must be obtained by the applicant prior to
Township approval.
H. The Township Director of Code Enforcement shall not issue a building
permit for any regulated activity specified in § 148-36 of this part if the
drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with the stormwater
management plan as determined by the Township Engineer, or without
considering the comments of the Township Engineer. All required
permits from DEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a building
permit.
I. The applicant shall be responsible for completing as-built drawings of
all stormwater management facilities included in the approved
drainage plan. The as-built drawings and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the design plans shall be submitted to the Township
Engineer for final approval.
J. The Township's approval of a drainage plan shall be valid for a period
not to exceed three years. This three-year period shall commence on
the date that the Township signs the approved drainage plan. If
stormwater management facilities included in the approved drainage
plan have not been constructed, or if as-built drawings of these facilities
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 82, Building Construction, and Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land
Development, respectively.
§ 148-47 CONCORD CODE § 148-47
144:248
§ 148-48. Modification of plans.
§ 148-49. Resubmission of disapproved drainage plans.
A disapproved drainage plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Township Engineer's concerns documented in writing, to the
Township Engineer in accordance with § 148-46 of this part and be subject
to review as specified in § 148-47 of this part. The applicable Township
review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved drainage plan.
have not been approved within this three-year time period, then the
Township may consider the drainage plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits. Drainage plans that are considered disapproved by
the Township shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 148-49 of this
part.
A. A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a development site that
involves a change in stormwater management facilities or techniques,
or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater management
facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as
stated on the drainage plan as determined by the Township Engineer,
shall require a resubmission of the modified drainage plan consistent
with § 148-46 of this part and be subject to review as specified in
§ 148-47 of this part.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved drainage plan
shall be submitted to the Township, accompanied by the applicable
review fee. A modification to a drainage plan for which a formal action
has not been taken by the Township shall be submitted to the Township,
accompanied by the applicable Township review fee.
§ 148-47 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-49
144:249

ARTICLE XIV
Stormwater Management
§ 148-50. General procedures for water quality and quantity
control.
§ 148-51. Stormwater management districts.
The Chester Creek Watershed is divided into districts that represent three
levels of stormwater management. The boundaries of the stormwater
management districts are shown on an official release rate map, included
as part of the Chester Creek Stormwater Management Plan (see Plate 1,
Release Rate Map). A copy of the official release rate map at a reduced
scale is included as Plate 1 in Appendix A of this part.60 This map is for
reference only. The exact location of the stormwater management district
boundaries as they apply to a given development site must be determined
by mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic contours (or the
most accurate data required) provided as part of the drainage plan.
A. All regulated activities in the Chester Creek Watershed which do not
fall under the exemption criterion shown in § 148-44 shall submit a
drainage plan consistent with the Chester Creek Stormwater
Management Plan to the Township for review. This criterion shall apply
to the total proposed development even if development is to take place
in stages. Impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to, any roof,
parking, or driveway areas and any new streets and sidewalks. Any
areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed
to be impervious.
B. Drainage plans shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions
contained in this article. The process for implementing these provisions
is illustrated in Figure 4-1, Water Quality and Quantity Control
Drainage Plan Preparation Procedures.59
C. The Chester Creek Stormwater Management Plan requires water
quality and water quantity controls as illustrated on the flow chart
shown in Figure 4-1 and detailed in § 148-53. The flow chart illustrates
a three-step hierarchical process: Step 1, infiltration, Step 2, extended
detention, and Step 3, implementation of additional design controls.
Applicants must evaluate the outcome of each step before proceeding
to the next. In addition, riparian buffers are required where applicable,
in accordance with § 148-53A(2).
D. Applicants are highly encouraged to meet the postdevelopment peak
discharge control criteria indicated in §§ 148-51 and 148-52 through
use of BMPs and innovative site designs that minimize the amount of
new impervious surface.
59.Editor's Note: Said figure is included at the end of this chapter.
60.Editor's Note: Said map is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 148-50 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-52
144:251
§ 148-52. Stormwater management district implementation
provisions (performance standards).
A. General. Postdevelopment rates of runoff from any regulated activity
shalt not exceed the peak release rates of runoff prior to development
for the design storms specified on the official stormwater management
release rate map, Appendix A,61 and § 148-51 of the part.
B. Standards for managing runoff.
(1) Standards for managing runoff for new development from each
subarea in the Chester Creek Watershed for the two-, five-, ten-,
twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year design storms are shown
in Table 403-1. Development sites located in each of the districts
must control postdevelopment peak runoff rates to the specified
percentage of predevelopment peak runoff rates for the design
storms as shown in the table.
Table 403-1 Control Criteria for Stormwater Management
Districts
District Control Criteria
100% Postdevelopment peak discharge for all design storms
must be no greater than predevelopment peak
discharges.
75% Postdevelopment peak discharge for all design storms
must be no greater than 75% of the predevlopment
peak discharges.
50% Postdevelopment peak discharge for all design storms
must be no greater than 50% of the predevelopment
peak discharge.
SOURCE: Gannett Fleming, 2001
(2) All other areas shall utilize a 100% release rate for purposes of
implementation of this part.
C. Redevelopment projects shall meet peak discharge requirements based
on the adjusted runoff control number (RCN) or C value illustrated by
Figure B-3 in Appendix B.62
D. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
located within two or more release category subareas, the peak
discharge rate from any subarea shall be the predevelopment peak
discharge for each subarea multiplied by the applicable release rate.
The calculated peak discharges shall apply regardless of whether the
grading plan changes the drainage area by subarea.
61.Editor's Note: Said map is included at the end of this chapter.
62.Editor's Note: Said figure is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 148-52 CONCORD CODE § 148-52
144:252
§ 148-53. Water quality requirements.
E. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed
to safely convey off-site flows through the development site.
F. Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, as
determined by the Township Engineer, only the proposed development
area and areas contributory to the proposed stormwater management
facilities shall be subject to the release rate criteria.
G. Regional detention alternatives (optional). For certain areas within the
study area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility
for more than one development site than to provide an individual
control facility for each development site. The initiative and funding for
any regional runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of
prospective applicants. The design of any regional control basins must
incorporate reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed.
The peak outflow of a regional basin would be determined on a case-bycase
basis using the hydrologic model of the watershed consistent with
protection of the downstream watershed areas. "Hydrologic model"
refers to the calibrated model as developed for the stormwater
management plan.
A. In addition to the performance standards and design criteria
requirements of §§ 148-51 and 148-52 and § 148-54 through § 148-56 of
this part, the applicant shall comply with the following water quality
requirements unless otherwise exempted by provisions of this part.
(1) The applicant shall first provide infiltration facilities in areas where
soils are suitable for infiltration and shall direct the runoff from
impervious surfaces into those infiltration facilities. The volume of
storage to be provided shall be no less than the total in runoff from
the two-year storm event, or one inch of runoff from the total area
draining to the infiltration facility, whichever is greater.
(2) If a perennial or intermittent stream passes through the site, the
applicant shall create a riparian buffer extending a minimum of 30
feet to either side of the top of the bank of the channel. This
distance may be increased to 75 feet at the discretion of the
Township if the stream is the west branch of Chester Creek. The
buffer area shall be maintained with appropriate native vegetation
(see list of technical references in Appendix C of this part63). If the
applicable rear or side yard setback is less than 30 feet, the buffer
width may be reduced to 25% of the setback to a minimum of 10
feet. If an existing buffer is legally prescribed (e.g., deed covenant,
63.Editor's Note: Said appendix is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 148-52 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-53
144:253
easement, etc.) and it exceeds the requirement of this part, the
existing buffer shall be maintained.
(3) Detain the two-year, twenty-four-hour design storm runoff based on
using the SCS Type II distribution. Provisions shall be made so that
the detained runoff takes a minimum of 24 hours to drain from the
facility from a point where the maximum volume of water is
captured (i.e., the maximum water surface elevation is achieved in
the facility). Release of water can begin at the start of the storm
(i.e., the invert of the water quality orifice is at the invert of the
facility). The design of the facility shall consider and minimize the
chances of clogging and sedimentation potential. The applicant
may also utilize infiltration facilities in lieu of extended detention.
The volume of infiltration provided for the contributing area may be
deducted from the volume requirement for extended detention.
B. The applicant shall submit designs for water quality facilities to the
Township Engineer for review and approval. Such designs may achieve
the water quality objectives through a combination of BMPs.
C. In selecting the appropriate BMPs or combinations thereof, the
applicant shall consider the following:
(1) Total contributing area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high-water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and well heads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
(8) Consistency with approved watershed and stormwater
management plans or regulations.
D. The following additional factors should be considered when evaluating
the suitability of BMPs used to control water quality at a given
development site:
(1) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(2) Streambank erosion.
(3) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(4) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(5) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
§ 148-53 CONCORD CODE § 148-53
144:254
§ 148-54. Calculation methodology.
(6) Maintenance requirements.
(7) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(8) Recreational value.
(9) Enhancement of aesthetic and property values.
A. Any stormwater runoff calculations involving drainage areas greater
than 200 acres, including on- and off-site areas, shall use a generally
accepted calculation technique that is based on the NRCS soil-cover
complex method. Table 405-1 summarizes acceptable computation
methods. It is assumed that all methods will be selected by the design
professional based on the individual limitations and suitability of each
method for a particular site.
Table 405-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies
for Stormwater Management Plans
Method
Method Developed
By Applicability
TR-20 or
commercial package
based on TR-20
USDA - NRCS When use of full model is
desirable or necessary
TR-55 or
commercial package
based on TR-55
USDA - NRCS Applicable for plans within
the model's limitations
HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
When use of full model is
desirable or necessary
PSRM Penn State
University
When use of full model is
desirable or necessary
Rational Method or
commercial package
based on Rational
Method*
Emil Kuiching (1889) For sites with a total
contributing drainage area
of less than 100 acres
Rational Method or
other methods
Various As approved by the
Township Engineer
*Use of the Rational Method to estimate peak discharges from
drainage areas that contain more than 100 acres must be approved by
the Township Engineer.
SOURCE: Gannett Fleming, 2001
B. All calculations consistent with this part using the soil-cover complex
method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the various
§ 148-53 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-54
144:255
return period storms presented in Table B-1 in Appendix B of this part.64
If a hydrologic computer model such as PSRM or HEC-1 is used for
stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall be 24
hours. The NRCS S curve shown in Figure B-1, Appendix B, of this part
shall be used for the rainfall distribution.
C. For the purposes of predevelopment flow rate determination in the
Chester Creek Watershed, undeveloped land shall be considered as
"meadow" good condition, type B soils, (RCN = 58, Rational C = 0.12)
unless the natural ground cover generates a lower curve number or
Rational C value (i.e., forest). If a proposed development meets the
definition of "redevelopment" as defined in Article XII of this part, the
applicant may adjust the predevelopment RCN or C value based on the
curves presented in Figure B-3.65
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times of concentration for overland flow
and return periods from the design storm curves from PA Department of
Transportation Design Rainfall Curves (1986) (Figure B-2).66 Times of
concentration for overland flow shall be calculated using the
methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to time
by NRCS). Times of concentration for channel and pipe flow shall be
computed using Manning's Equation.
E. RCNs for both existing and proposed conditions to be used in the soilcover
complex method shall be obtained from Table B-2 in Appendix B
of this part.67
F. Runoff coefficients (C) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table B-3 in Appendix B
of this part.68
G. Runoff characteristics of off-site areas that drain through a proposed
development shall be based on actual existing conditions, not RCN=58
or C=0.12, and shall be assumed to not have any controls implemented
on future development (i.e., no release rate restrictions).
H. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table B-4 in Appendix B of the
Ordinance.69
64.Editor's Note: Said table is located at the end of this chapter.
65.Editor's Note: Said figure is included at the end of this chapter.
66.Editor's Note: Said figure is included at the end of this chapter.
67.Editor's Note: Said table is included at the end of this chapter.
68.Editor's Note: Said table is included at the end of this chapter.
69.Editor's Note: Said table is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 148-54 CONCORD CODE § 148-54
144:256
§ 148-55. Design criteria for stormwater management facilities.
I. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall be
designed to meet the performance standards of this part using any
generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method. Acceptable
methods are presented in Handbook of Hydraulics, by King and Brater
(McGraw Hill). In addition, application of computer programs such as
HY-8 (Federal Highway Administration) or FlowMaster (Haestad
Methods) will also be accepted.
J. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this part shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the storageindication
method. For drainage areas greater than 20 acres in size, the
design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation method
that produces a full hydrograph. The Township may approve the use of
any generally accepted full hydrograph approximation technique that
uses a total runoff volume that is consistent with the volume from a
method that produces a full hydrograph.
K. The Township has the authority to require that computed existing
runoff rates be reconciled with field observations and conditions. If the
designer can substantiate through actual physical calibration that more
appropriate runoff and time-of-concentration values should be utilized
at a particular site, then appropriate variations may be made upon
review and recommendation of the Township Engineer. Calibration
shall require detailed gauge and rainfall data for the particular site in
question.
A. Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin) designed to
store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment required or
regulated by this part shall be designed to provide an emergency
spillway to handle flow up to and including the one-hundred-year
postdevelopment conditions. The height of the embankment must be set
so as to provide a minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard above the maximum
pool elevation computed when the facility functions for the onehundred-
year postdevelopment inflow. Should any stormwater
management facility require a dam safety permit under DEP Chapter
105, the facility shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and
meet the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety which may
be required to pass storms larger than the one-hundred-year event.
B. Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges,
outfalls, or stream enclosures) and any work involving wetlands as
directed in DEP Chapter 105 regulations (as amended or replaced from
time to time by DEP) shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105
and will require a permit from DEP. Any other drainage conveyance
facility that does not fall under Chapter 105 regulations shall be
designed to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or
roadway, runoff from a minimum twenty-five-year design storm.
Municipalities may require design based on a larger storm event. Open
§ 148-54 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-55
144:257
channels shall be designed with a minimum of 1.0 foot of freeboard.
Any facility that constitutes a dam as defined in DEP Chapter 105
regulations may require a permit under dam safety regulations. Any
facility located within a PennDOT right-of-way must meet PennDOT
minimum design standards and permit submission requirements. If the
primary drainage facilities do not have capacity for future flows, then a
safe drainage path must be provided to convey up to the one-hundredyear
design storm (without impacting structures).
C. Storm sewers must be able to convey postdevelopment runoff from a
minimum twenty-five-year design storm without surcharging inlets.
D. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels
and at all points of discharge.
E. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
sound engineering principles and practices. The Township shall reserve
the right to disapprove any design that would result in the occurrence
or continuation of an adverse hydrologic or hydraulic condition within
the watershed.
F. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
part.
G. The existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without written permission of the
adjacent property owner(s) and shall be subject to any applicable
discharge criteria specified in this part.
H. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or maintained as
diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise provided by this part. If
diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document to the Township in
accordance with § 148-54 that adequate downstream conveyance exists
to safely transport the concentrated discharge, or the applicant must
obtain drainage easements from affected downstream property owners
and provide the facilities to safely convey the flow.
I. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any downstream capacity
hydraulic analysis conducted in accordance with this part shall use the
following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased
peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon
§ 148-55 CONCORD CODE § 148-55
144:258
criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers, or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP, Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and,
at a minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return period
runoff.
J. Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, riparian
buffers shall be provided conforming to the line of such watercourses.
The width of the buffers shall be determined as set forth in
§ 148-53A(2). Excavating, placing of fill, building structures, or making
any alterations that may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within
any portion of the riparian buffer shall be prohibited unless the
proposed work is associated with a regulated wetlands mitigation
program. The buffers must be defined through a deed covenant.
K. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by DEP through the joint permit application
process, or, where deemed appropriate by DEP, through the general
permit process.
L. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this part that
would be located in or adjacent to waters of the commonwealth or
wetlands shall be subject to approval by DEP through the joint permit
application process, or, where deemed appropriate by DEP, the general
permit process. When there is a question as to whether wetlands may
be involved, it is the responsibility of the applicant or his agent to show
that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands; otherwise,
approval to work in the area must be obtained from DEP.
M. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this part that
would be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to
approval by PennDOT.
N. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are required, where soil
conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need for detention
facilities.
O. In order to promote overland flow and infiltration/percolation of
stormwater, roof drains must discharge into an accepted BMP providing
infiltration and filtering of the stormwater.
§ 148-55 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-56
144:259
§ 148-56. Erosion and sedimentation requirements.
A. Whenever the vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such
activity must be in conformance with Chapter 102, Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Part I, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, DEP, Subpart C,
protection of Natural Resources, Article II, Water Resources, Chapter
102, Erosion Control, and in accordance with the Delaware County or
Chester County Conservation Districts, as appropriate, and the
standards and specifications of the appropriate Township.
B. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) In order to ensure compliance with Chapter 102, the timing of the
installation and operation of the infiltration BMP shall be at the
discretion of the Township Engineer.
§ 148-56 CONCORD CODE § 148-56
144:260
ARTICLE XV
Prohibitions
§ 148-57. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person or organization in the Township shall allow, or cause to allow,
stormwater discharges into the Township's separate storm sewer
system which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except as
provided in Subsection B below, and discharges allowed under a state
or federal permit.
B. Discharges which may be allowed under the Township's NPDES permit
based on a finding by the Township that the discharge(s) do not
significantly contribute to pollution to surface waters of the
commonwealth are;
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(3) Potable water sources including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings.
(4) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(5) Lawn watering.
(6) Irrigation drainage.
(7) Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed).
(8) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(9) Air-conditioning condensate.
(10)Water from individual residential car washing.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Springs.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14)Water from crawl space pumps.
C. In the event that the Township subsequently determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to
pollution of waters of the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the
Township will notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the Township under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the Township,
§ 148-57 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-57
144:261
§ 148-58. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited except as provided in § 148-57B
above:
§ 148-59. Roof drains.
§ 148-60. Alteration of BMPs.
to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of pollution caused
by the discharge.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the separate storm sewer system,
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks; and
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved by the
Township.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches, except as provided in Subsection B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the Township Engineer.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, unless part of an approved maintenance program,
without the written approval of the Township.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP, without the written approval of the
Township.
§ 148-57 CONCORD CODE § 148-60
144:262
ARTICLE XVI
Inspections
§ 148-61. Schedule of inspections.
A. The Township Engineer or his Township assignee shall inspect all
phases of the installation of the permanent stormwater management
and water quality facilities, including nonstructural BMPs.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Township Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities, water quality
facilities, or nonstructural BMPs are not being installed in accordance
with the approved Chester Creek Stormwater Management Plan and/or
Chapter 148, Part 1, of the Code of the Township of Concord, the
Township shall revoke any existing Township permits or issue a stopwork
order until a revised drainage plan is submitted and approved, as
specified in this part.
§ 148-61 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-61
144:263

ARTICLE XVII
Fees and Expenses
§ 148-62. General.
The fee required by this part is the Township review fee. The Township
review fee shall be established by the Township to defray review costs
incurred by the Township and the Township Engineer. All fees shall be paid
by the applicant.
§ 148-63. Township drainage plan review fee.
The Township shall establish a review fee schedule by separate resolution of
the Township governing body based on the size of the regulated activity and
based on the Township's costs for reviewing drainage plans. The Township
may periodically update the review fee schedule to ensure that review costs
are adequately reimbursed.
§ 148-64. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this part shall, at a minimum, cover:
§ 148-65. Additional costs.
Applicant will be invoiced for any additional costs incurred by the Township
in the course of reviewing the development plan. These costs may include,
but are not limited to, special studies by qualified engineers, geotechnical
engineers, or surveyors, field reconnaissance, and testing.
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the drainage plan by the Township and the Township
Engineer.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the drainage plan.
§ 148-62 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-65
144:265

ARTICLE XVIII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 148-66. Performance guarantee.
The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Township for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved stormwater plan and this part equal to
the full construction cost of the required controls.
§ 148-67. Maintenance responsibilities.
§ 148-68. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
A. The drainage plan for the development site shall contain an operation
and maintenance plan prepared by the applicant and approved by the
Township Engineer. The operation and maintenance plan shall outline
required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to
ensure proper operation of the facility(ies).
B. The drainage plan for the development site shall establish
responsibilities for the continued operation and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers, and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the Township, stormwater
control facilities may also be dedicated to and maintained by the
Township.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner
or private management entity.
C. The Township, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer, shall
make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the drainage plan. The
Township reserves the right to accept the ownership and operating
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater management controls.
A. Prior to final approval of the site's stormwater management plan, the
property owner shall sign and record a maintenance agreement
covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be privately owned.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities.
The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Township Solicitor and Township.
§ 148-66 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-69
144:267
§ 148-69. Postconstruction maintenance inspections.
A. Stormwater detention and retention basins or facilities shall be
inspected by, or under the direction of, a registered professional
engineer on behalf of the applicant or responsible entity (including the
Township Engineer for dedicated facilities) on the following basis:
(1) Annually for the first five years.
(2) Once every three years thereafter.
(3) During or immediately after the cessation of a one-hundred-year or
greater storm event.
B. The entity conducting the inspection shall be required to submit a
report to the Township within one month following completion of the
inspection. Frequency of inspection and associated report(s) may be
increased or decreased at the sole discretion of the Township. The
report will present documentation regarding the condition of the
facility and recommend necessary repairs, if needed. Any needed
repairs shall be implemented by the owner within one month of the
report issuance date.
§ 148-69 CONCORD CODE § 148-69
144:268
ARTICLE XIX
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 148-70. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
the Township may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
Township to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities
in regard to any aspect regulated by this part.
§ 148-71. Notification.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
part or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued hereunder,
the Township shall provide written notification of the violation. Such
notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a
time limit for correction of these violations(s). Failure to comply within the
time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions of this
part. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent
the Township from pursuing any and all other remedies. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with
the terms and conditions of this part.
§ 148-72. Enforcement.
The Township is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the
provisions of this part. All inspections regarding compliance with the
drainage plan shall be the responsibility of the Township Engineer or other
qualified persons designated by the Township.
A. A set of design plans approved by the Township shall be on file at the
site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the Township or its designee during
construction.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to undertake
any regulated activity under § 148-36 on any property except as
provided for in the approved drainage plan and pursuant to the
requirements of this part. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any
control structure required by the drainage plan pursuant to this part or
to allow the property to remain in a condition that does not conform to
the approved drainage plan.
C. At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor, or other qualified person verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
§ 148-70 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-72
144:269
§ 148-73. Public nuisance.
(2) Provide a set of as-built drawings to the Township in the format
specified by the Township Engineer.
(3) Provide a set of as-built drawings to the County Conservation
District. Such plans shall be prepared in accordance with
established criteria and procedures and in a format (electronic or
otherwise) as required by the Conservation District for long-term
storage.
D. After receipt of the certification by the Township, a final inspection shall
be conducted by the governing body or its designee to certify
compliance with this part.
E. Suspension and revocation of permits.
(1) Any Township permit issued under this part may be suspended or
revoked or a stop-work order may be issued by the Township for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the permit.
(b) A violation of any provision of this part or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, resolution or regulation relating to the
project.
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or
creates a hazard or nuisance, or which endangers the life or
property of others.
(2) A suspended permit shall be reinstated by the Township when:
(a) The Township Engineer or his designee has inspected and
approved the corrections to the stormwater management and
erosion and sediment pollution control measure(s), and/or;
(b) The Township is satisfied that the violation of the Ordinance,
law, resolution, rule or regulation has been corrected.
(c) A permit that has been revoked by the Township cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this part.
F. Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued by the
Township unless all requirements of this part have been met. The
occupancy permit shall be required for each lot owner and/or applicant
for all subdivisions and land development in the Township.
A. The violation of any provision of this part is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 148-72 CONCORD CODE § 148-74
144:270
§ 148-74. Enforcement remedies.
§ 148-75. Appeals.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this part shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $600 for each violation plus court costs and attorney
fees. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, the Township, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this part. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Township or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this part, may appeal to the Board of
Supervisors of Concord Township within 30 days of that action by
written notice to the Township Office.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Supervisors of
Concord Township, relevant to the provisions of this part, may appeal to
the Delaware County Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of the
Board of Supervisors written decision.
§ 148-74 SPECIAL EVENTS § 148-75
144:271
Chapter 155
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 87.
Dumping — See Ch. 93.
Excavation and soil removal — See Ch. 98.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 148.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 190.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A225.
§ 148-75 CONCORD CODE § 148-75
155:272
ARTICLE I
Driveways
[Adopted 12-11-1961 by Ord. No. 27]
§ 155-1. Construction requirements.
§ 155-2. Permit required.70
Hereafter no driveway shall be constructed unless the property owner
first receives a permit for the construction thereof from the Township
Roadmaster, who, upon completion of the construction of said driveway,
shall inspect and approve the same. Such permit shall be good for a period
of six months, and the fee for such permit shall be as set from time to time
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 155-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
A. From and after the enactment hereof, all driveways within the Township
of Concord which intersect with a highway shall be constructed so as to
provide a grade of not less than one inch of fall per foot from road edge
to gutter line.
B. Where feasible, a paved basin shall be constructed in the gutter rather
than inserting a pipe. However, where pipe is inserted in gutters for
drainage purposes, said pipe shall be inserted as established by the
Township Roadmaster.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provision of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 155-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 155-3
155:273

ARTICLE II
Street Openings
[Adopted 8-1-1974 by Ord. No. 88]
§ 155-4. Permit required.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 1156 of Article XI of the
Second Class Township Code, as amended,71 no railroad or street railway
shall hereafter be constructed upon any township road, nor shall any
railroad or street railway crossings, nor any gas pipe, water pipe, electric
conduits or other piping be laid upon or in, nor shall any telephone,
telegraph or electric light or power poles or any coal tipples or any other
obstructions be erected upon or in any portion of a township road, except
under such conditions, restrictions and regulations relating to the
installation and maintenance thereof as may be prescribed in permits
granted by the township for such purpose.
§ 155-5. Application procedures.
A. Each application for a permit shall be submitted to the township in
duplicate. The township shall collect a fee as determined by the
Department of Transportation for processing the application and
another fee for making the inspection. Each application shall be
accompanied by both fees.
B. When the township grants the permit, the Board of Supervisors or its
agent shall inspect the work authorized by the permit upon completion
thereof and, when necessary, enforce compliance with the conditions,
restrictions and regulations specified by the township. In addition to
that inspection, the Board of Supervisors or its agents may reinspect
the work not more than two years after its completion, and if any
settlement of the road surface or other defect appears in the work
contrary to the condition, restriction and regulations of the township, it
may enforce compliance therewith.
C. If the applicant fails to rectify a defect which presents an immediate or
imminent safety or health problem within 48 hours or any other defect
within 60 days after written notice from the Board of Supervisors to do
so, the Board or its agents may do the work and impose upon the
applicant the cost thereof, together with an additional 20%, which may
be recovered by action in assumpsit in the court of common pleas of the
county. All fees received by the township shall be paid into the township
treasury.
D. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require a permit in advance
for emergency repairs necessary for the safety of the public or the
restoration or continuance of public utility service or other public
service, but application for the permit and the fees shall be submitted
71.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 67322.
§ 155-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 155-5
155:275
§ 155-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
within five days after completion of the work, after which time the
remaining provisions of this article apply. Nothing in this article
authorizes the township to regulate or control the operation of any
permittee, except as specified in this article.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provision of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
§ 155-5 CONCORD CODE § 155-6
155:276
Chapter 160
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer Authority — See Ch. 7, Art. I.
Open Space Committee — See Ch. 35.
Park and Recreation Board — See Ch. 41.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 53.
Zoning Officer — See Ch. 60.
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 70.
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 87.
Excavation and soil removal — See Ch. 98.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 112.
Sewers — See Ch. 136.
Solid waste — See Ch. 142.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 148.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
Water conservation — See Ch. 196.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
§ 155-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 155-6
155:277

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 160-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Concord Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 1990."
§ 160-2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted for purposes which are to provide for and
accomplish the following:
A. To assist in the harmonious, orderly, efficient and integrated
development of Concord Township.
B. To ensure that the arrangement and design of subdivisions and land
developments conform to the Comprehensive Plan,72 the Official
Sewage Facilities Plan, Chapter 210, Zoning, and all other ordinances,
codes, regulations, plans and maps adopted in furtherance thereof.
C. To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents
of the Township.
D. To assure sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation and
use.
E. To facilitate and accommodate prospective pedestrian and vehicular
movement, fire protection and the rendition of other essential services
through a coordinated system and design of streets.
F. To ensure the coordination and conformity of subdivision and/or land
development plans with the public improvement plans of the Township
regarding such facilities as streets, sewers and other facilities and
improvements.
G. To establish a uniform and equitable procedure for the review and
processing of subdivision and/or land development plans.
H. To establish standards to ensure that developments are
environmentally sound by requiring preservation of existing natural
features to the greatest possible extent in areas affected through
excavation, construction or other land development activities.
I. To establish minimum standards for the design and construction of
improvements which aid in the use and enjoyment of land, such as
streets, sidewalks, adequate drainage and water and sewage facilities,
and which would aid in precluding adverse environmental effects, such
as sedimentation, soil erosion, flooding, deforestation and water
pollution.
72.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-2
155:279
§ 160-3. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be the minimum
requirements necessary to meet the foregoing purposes. However, when
interpreting such requirements, the following shall be noted:
§ 160-4. Statutory authority.
In accordance with Article V, Section 501 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended,73 the Concord Township Board of
Supervisors shall have the authority to regulate subdivision and/or land
development within the Township by enacting this chapter. Through such
authority, the following shall apply:
J. To establish standards for the administration of this chapter.
A. Where, owing to special or unique conditions, the life, health, safety or
property of persons may be menaced or jeopardized by the application
of any of the requirements of this chapter, more stringent or restrictive
requirements necessary to eliminate or alleviate such menace or
jeopardy may be applied or imposed by the Board of Supervisors.
B. Where, owing to special or unique conditions, the provisions of this
chapter will inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant,
reasonable exceptions to such provisions may be made by the Board of
Supervisors as will not be contrary to the foregoing purposes or to the
public interest upon prior recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
C. Where the provisions of this chapter impose more stringent
requirements than those of any statute, ordinance or regulation, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail; where the provisions of any
statute, ordinance, code or regulation impose more stringent
requirements than those of this chapter, such statute, ordinance, code
or regulation shall prevail.
D. Where it is desirable to effect economy and ingenuity in the layout of
subdivisions and land developments and to protect sensitive natural
areas, modifications of site requirements may be made in accordance
with the guidelines set forth in § 160-81 herein, and the Board of
Supervisors may alter site requirements for encouraging other
practices which are in accordance with modern and evolving principles
of site planning and development.
A. No subdivision, resubdivision or land development of any lot, tract or
parcel of land within the Township shall be made and no street, alley,
sanitary sewer, capped sewer, storm sewer, water main or other such
facilities in connection therewith or other improvements of any kind
shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or
73.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501.
§ 160-2 CONCORD CODE § 160-4
155:280
§ 160-5. Jurisdiction.
travel or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting
thereon, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
Chapter 210, Zoning, as amended, and all other Township ordinances,
codes, regulations, plans and maps, as amended from time to time.
B. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit to erect, alter or add to
any building or other structure or portion thereof upon land in a
subdivision or land development may be issued and no building may be
erected in a subdivision or land development unless and until a
subdivision and/or land development plan, filed in accordance with this
chapter, has been approved and, where required, recorded and proof of
such supplied to the Township in accordance with § 160-15, unless and
until the required improvements in connection therewith along, upon or
through the lot or lots to be sold or built upon and to an existing
improved street have been constructed and approved or, in lieu thereof,
the Township has been assured of the completion of such construction
and the maintenance thereof by means of a completion and
maintenance guaranty in the form of a bond or other security sufficient
to cover the cost of the required improvements and their maintenance,
as set forth in Article X.
C. The following are subject to the regulations of this chapter:
(1) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or more
residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially
or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots,
regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or the division or
allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively,
between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of or for the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features;
except that the addition of an accessory building, not to exceed 360
square feet in area, on a lot or lots subordinate to an existing
principal building is exempt only from the aforementioned
definition and plan review and requirements process of this chapter
and not the building permit process and other applicable Township
regulations.
(2) A subdivision of land, including the division or redivision of a lot,
tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot
lines for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease,
partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer
of ownership or building or lot development.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have jurisdiction of subdivision and land
development within the Township. In order that the actions of the Board
of Supervisors under this chapter may be correlated with all relevant
§ 160-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-5
155:281
data and procedures, the Board of Supervisors hereby designates the
Township Planning Commission as the agency to which the following
responsibilities are assigned:
(1) To review, upon filing with the Township Manager, all applications
for either preliminary or final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans.
(2) To engage in all preliminary consultations with the applicant
relating to such plans.
(3) To make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning
approval, disapproval, modification and conditions of approval of
such plans.
(4) To make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning
the rationale for the granting of modifications to the provisions,
requirements and standards of this chapter.
(5) To review this chapter and make recommendations to the Board of
Supervisors on proposed amendments to it.
(6) In the performance of its functions, to enter upon any land to make
examinations and surveys with the consent of the owner.
B. The Board of Supervisors hereby designates the Concord Township
Manager as the person to determine whether or not any preliminary or
final plan submissions are complete and acceptable to the Township for
the purpose of establishing the date of filing.
(1) The Township Manager or designated representative shall, within
eight business days, inspect such submission to see if the following
have been submitted:
(a) The required application form and filing fee.
(b) The required number of copies.
(c) The required types of plans, reports and other papers.
(d) The required checklist.
(e) Planning modules, as required by the preliminary plan
submission.
(2) In the event that the submission is found to be incomplete, the
Township Manager or designated representative shall notify the
applicant, in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
and inform the applicant that the date of filing will not be effective
until all required forms, fees, types and copies of plans and papers
are submitted.
C. The Board of Supervisors may designate to additional boards or
commissions of the Township the following responsibilities:
§ 160-5 CONCORD CODE § 160-5
155:282
§ 160-6. Effective date.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed, except as they relate to pending applications submitted prior
to the effective date of this chapter and previously approved subdivision
and/or land development plans in accordance with Section 508.4 of the
Municipalities Planning Code.74
(1) To the Open Space Committee and Park and Recreation Board, to
review and make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors
concerning the adequacy or appropriateness of open space, parks
or recreation proposed by either preliminary or final subdivision
and/or land development plans.
(2) To the Historical Society, to review and make recommendations to
the Board of Supervisors concerning the impact upon historic
resources of the Township by proposed preliminary or final
subdivision and/or land development plans.
(3) To the Sewer Authority, to review and make recommendations to
the Board of Supervisors concerning the consistency with the
Township Act 537 Plan and the adequacy of any public sanitary
sewerage system proposed by preliminary or final subdivision and/
or land development plans.
D. The Board of Supervisors shall appoint one or more Code Enforcement
Officers to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the accompanying
design standards and requirements.
E. Inspection of actual construction under any approved subdivision and/
or land development plan shall be the sole responsibility of the
Township, which shall undertake reasonable measures to provide an
adequate inspection of all projects.
F. In the event of any action inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter, the Board of Supervisors or its authorized representative may
issue a cease and desist order or take such other appropriate action as
is deemed necessary under the circumstances.
74.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.4.
§ 160-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-6
155:283

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 160-7. Word usage.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated below:
§ 160-8. Definitions.
A. The present tense includes all other tenses; the singular includes the
plural and the plural includes the singular; the masculine gender
includes the feminine and neuter; the word "used" includes the words
"designed or "arranged"; the word "person" includes any individual,
estate, trust, fiduciary, partnership, association, corporation or any
other organization or entity, including the principal officers thereof or
any person or entity acting directly or indirectly by, through or under
any of the foregoing; the word "occupied" includes the words "designed
or intended to be occupied"; the word "structure" includes "building";
the word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is always
permissive; the words "as amended," as applied to any statute,
ordinance, code, regulation, plan or map, include replacements,
supplements or restatements thereof; and reference to a particular
article, section or subsection which inherently refers to other articles,
sections or subsections includes all articles, section or subsections
referred to.
B. The word "Township" means Concord Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania; the term "Board of Supervisors" means the Board of
Supervisors of the Township; and the term "Planning Commission"
means the Planning Commission of the Township.
C. The terms "such as" and "including" are intended to introduce matters
which are illustrative of the meaning of the sentence, clause or phrase
in which such terms appear without limiting or derogating from the
general application of the sentence, clause or phrase in which such
terms appear.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and
phrases shall have the meanings indicated herein:
ABUTTING OWNER — The owner of record of a lot which is contiguous
at any point to the lot in question or which is contiguous to that section
of street on which the subject lot has frontage, i.e., a lot across from the
subject lot.
ACCELERATED EROSION — Removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of man's activities and natural processes
at a rate greater than would occur from natural processes alone.
§ 160-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:285
ACCELERATION LANE — An added roadway lane which permits
integration and merging of slower moving vehicles into lanes of the
main vehicular flow.
ACCEPTABLE OUTFALL — The point where stormwater can be
released to a channel or other body of water without causing erosion
to or sedimentation of the receiving channel or other body of water.
The outlet shall include structural and vegetative measures to assure
nonerosive velocities or rates of flow.
ACCESS — A way or means of approach to provide physical ingress to
and egress from a parcel, tract or other lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the principal
permitted building on a lot and used for purposes customarily
incidental to those of such principal building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use conducted on the same lot as and
subordinate to a principal permitted use to which it is related and
which is located either within the same structure(s) or in an accessory
building or structure; a use which is clearly incidental to and
customarily found in connection with a particular principal permitted
use.
ACCESSWAY — A drive, driveway, aisle, private street or other
pavement which connects parking areas, buildings and other structures
to a road, street or highway.
ADVERSE EFFECTS — Results contributing to a harmful or degraded
condition and/or producing an unfavorable result, such as harmful
or degraded conditions to the environment caused by adverse
environmental impacts.
AGENT — Any person or entity, other than the landowner or developer,
who, acting upon written authority for the landowner or developer, files
subdivision and/or land development plans with the Township for the
purpose of obtaining approval thereof.
AGRICULTURAL USE or AGRICULTURE — A principal use involving
the cultivating of the soil, the raising of livestock and poultry and
the harvesting of the products of the soil, including horticulture and
forestry, but excluding commercial greenhouses, garden centers,
garden marts or nurseries.
AISLE — An accessway within a parking area or parking lot, which
provides space for the maneuvering of vehicles.
ALTERATION — Any change in the exterior or structural portions of
a building, any change to or in a building which would alter its use
classification or any change which would substantially alter an existing
sewage system, traffic condition or other infrastructure element.
ALTERATION OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — See "structural
alteration."
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:286
ALTERNATIVES — Choices between or among two or more plans,
layouts, approaches, solutions and/or results.
ANCHORING — The fastening of the mobile home to its mobile home
stand in order to prevent upset or damage due to wind, erosion,
flooding or other natural forces.
ANTECEDENT CONDITIONS — Specified characteristics of the land
surface (e.g., meadow) prior to a proposed disturbance or prior to
a rainfall event (e.g., amount of moisture in the soil); the basis for
calculating increases in runoff attributable to the disturbance or storms
which must be controlled.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed a complete
application for subdivision and/or land development, including heirs,
successors, assigns and grantees. The term "applicant" may include a
landowner or developer who has filed an application for conditional use,
special exception or variance.
APPLICATION FORM — A form available from the Township Manager
(included in the Appendixes of this chapter) which is to be used to
provide information to aid in the review of a subdivision and/or land
development plan and for general administrative purposes.
APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION AND/OR LAND DEVELOPMENT —
The action taken to complete, sign and file the application form, as
required by this chapter, which shall also include the filing of the
number and type of plans, documents and other submissions required
by this chapter for the review and/or approval of a preliminary or
tentative plan and thereafter a final plan, together with the necessary
fees in accordance with the prevailing application fees, and application,
whether preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and
approved prior to the conveyance or other transfer of lots and/or the
commencement of construction and development, including an
application for the approval of a subdivision plan and an application for
the approval of a land development plan.
ARCHITECT — A person duly registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to practice architecture.
BEARINGS AND DISTANCES — See "metes and bounds."
BENEFICIAL EFFECTS — Results contributing to an improvement in
condition and/or producing a favorable outcome or result.
BERM — An earthen embankment which serves purposes such as
directing the flow of surface water runoff, preventing soil erosion or
supporting plant materials to aid in screening.
BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES — Characteristics of the natural
environment manifest in its flora and fauna. The disposition of these
characteristics is typically expressed in vegetation and/or wildlife units
such as trees, woodland or forest stands and related understory and
ground cover growth and aquatic and terrestrial wildlife and/or their
habitats.
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:287
BUFFER AREA — An area adjacent to a property boundary which is
landscaped and maintained for a width as required in certain districts
of Chapter 210, Zoning, and for certain types of land development
in a manner as required in Article VIII, § 160-50, Landscaping
requirements. Buffer areas are divided into three types:
BUILDABLE AREA (BUILDING ENVELOPE) — The area of a lot
remaining after the minimum yard and setback requirements of
Chapter 210, Zoning, have been met within which a principal permitted
building shall be located. Such setback requirements include yard
setback and setbacks from floodway and floodway fringe areas, and
such features as areas of steep slope and very steep slope and
easements. Where a buildable area is shown on a plan as extending into
a Floodplain Conservation District, or any other area which may involve
a conditional use or special exception, those portions of the buildable
area extending into any such areas shall be delineated, depicted and
otherwise noted on all plans in an accurate and conspicuous manner
to disclose the specific uses which may occur in such areas.[Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 371]
BUILDER — A person who is not necessarily the owner of the land or
agent of the same, who, by contract or other agreement, is charged
with the construction of buildings or other structures or making any
construction improvements on any parcel of land.
BUILDING — Any structure which is built for the support, shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING AND STRUCTURE HEIGHT — A vertical distance measured
between the mean level of the ground surrounding the structure and
the highest point of the roof of the building or top of the structure.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal crosssection
areas of the buildings on a lot, excluding cornices, eaves,
SCREEN BUFFER — A buffer comprised of natural and/or manmade
material arranged in a certain specified depth, height and
density to effectively block the view from one side to another
during all seasons of the year and to reduce the transmittal of noise
and odors between the sides.
(1)
SOFTENING BUFFER — A buffer comprised of natural and/or manmade
material arranged in a certain specified depth, height and
density to ease and soften but not essentially block the view from
one side to another and to reduce the transmittal of noise and odors
between the sides.
(2)
OPEN BUFFER — A buffer normally comprised of grass, ground
cover and/or possibly other landscaping material having a specified
depth but not necessarily having significant vertical components
to achieve a certain height or density, the purpose of which is to
achieve adequate spacing and attractive landscaping between two
or more actively used areas.
(3)
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:288
gutters or chimneys projecting not more than 18 inches, bay windows
not extending through more than one story and not projecting more
than five feet, one-story open porches projecting not more than 10 feet,
steps and balconies.
BUILDING LINE — For the purpose of determining the minimum width
of a lot, building line shall mean, in the case of a normal lot, the straight
line parallel to the edge of the right-of-way and at a distance therefrom
equal to the depth of the front yard required for the district in which
the lot is located, and in the case of an interior lot not fronting on a
public street for its full width, the building line shall be a line preferably
parallel to the property line nearest and at right angles to the access
right-of-way and at a distance from that property line equal to the depth
of the front yard required for the district in which the lot is located.
BUILDING PERMIT — A document issued by the Township granting
permission for the construction, repair, alteration of or addition to a
structure.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE —
CALIPER — The diameter of new deciduous tree plantings measured
six inches at the top of the rootball at the base of the trunk of a
tree.[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 371]
CAPPED SEWERS — Sanitary sewage facilities which are installed and
capped where existing sanitary sewer facilities are not accessible and
available but are proposed in the Official Sewage Facilities Plan of the
Township. Such facilities shall include sanitary sewers, force mains,
pumping stations and all other appurtenances necessary to serve the
entire subdivision and/or land development.
CARTWAY — That area of a road or other street within which vehicles
are permitted, including travel lanes, but not including shoulders,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks or drainage swales.
CATCH BASIN — An inlet which has a sump below the pipe to collect
debris and is designed to intercept and redirect surface waters.
CENTER LINE OF STREET OR ROAD — A line equidistant from and
parallel to the street, right-of-way or property lines on each side of the
street or road.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A statement signed by the Building
Inspector, setting forth that a building, structure or use legally complies
SIDE YARD BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line normally
perpendicular to the front yard street right-of-way line and equal to
the minimum depth of the side yard designated for each district in
this chapter.
(1)
REAR YARD BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line normally
parallel to the front yard street right-of-way line and equal to the
minimum depth of the rear yard designated for each district in this
chapter.
(2)
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:289
with Chapter 210, Zoning, and other applicable codes and regulations
and that the same may be used for the purposes stated therein.
CHANNEL — An area which conveys the normal continuous or
intermittent flow of water.
CHECKLIST — Forms available from the Township Manager (included
in the Appendixes of this chapter) which are to be used to provide
information relative to the completeness of the subdivision and/or land
development plan submission.
CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE —
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of street center lines.
COMMON ELEMENTS — Any part of a development used jointly by
the occupants of the development, including but not limited to open
space, recreation facilities, roadways, parking areas, storage buildings
and maintenance facilities.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area
of water or a combination of land and water within a development
site, designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas
set aside for public facilities.
COMMON PARKING — Any parking area used by three or more
dwelling units and having space for six or more motor vehicles.
COMMUNITY FACILITIES — The services which provide for various
community health, education, safety, leisure and like needs and the
locations at which these services are provided. Typical community
facilities include schools, parks and recreation areas, libraries,
hospitals and other health-care facilities, fire protection, police,
ambulance and rescue services and postal services.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system, whether
publicly or privately owned, for the collection of sewage of a liquid
For local roads: the longest line of unobstructed vision along a
street cartway from a point 3.5 feet above the center line of the
street to the top of an object six inches high on the same center line
(object sight distance).
(1)
For all other roads: the longest line of unobstructed vision along
a street cartway from a point 3.5 feet above the center line to an
object 4.25 inches above the pavement (vehicle sight distance).
(2)
The American Association of State Highway Officials' (AASHTO)
publication entitled "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and
Streets," latest edition, shall govern all sight distance situations,
unless the Township requires more stringent control to improve
known or potentially hazardous conditions.
(3)
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:290
nature from two or more lots, and the treatment and/or disposal of the
sewage on one or more of the lots or at any other site for final disposal
in whole or in part into the soil.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — An individual well or series
thereof serving more than one lot or more than one building which,
along with its appurtenant facilities, is administered and maintained by
such private organizations as a homeowners' association, community
association or other like organization or agency and is in compliance
with the prevailing federal, state and county regulations, as well as
those of any entity which may have a permitted franchise within the
Township.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — Constitutes the requisite number of
plans, all supplementary information, data and documents, together
with a completed and signed application form provided by the
Township, and the appropriate filing fee, as required by this chapter.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Concord Township Comprehensive
Plan, as may be amended from time to time, including maps, tables and
text which constitute a policy guide for decisions regarding land use,
circulation, community facilities and utilities within the Township.75
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which, because of its potential for impact
on the surrounding neighborhood and the community at large, is
permitted only after the Board of Supervisors determines, following
a recommendation by the Planning Commission, that the applicable
standards and criteria stated in Chapter 210, Zoning, have been
complied with.
CONDOMINIUM — Any dwelling unit, regardless of dwelling type,
which has all of the following characteristics:
CONSTRUCTION — Any disturbance of the land or the erection of
structures thereon, including the cutting of trees or clearing of brush;
provided, however, that staking or clearing for survey lines or
performing engineering or other scientific tests to obtain data shall not
be deemed as construction.
The unit (the interior and associated exterior areas designated for
private use in the development plan) is owned by the occupant.
(1)
All or a portion of the exterior open space and any community
interior spaces are owned and maintained in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980, as amended,76
and in accordance with the provisions of open space, streets or
other development features in Chapter 210, Zoning, and this
chapter.
(2)
75.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
76.Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 1601 et seq.
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:291
CONTINUOUS VISUAL BUFFER — A visually impenetrable screen
created through the effective use of plant materials, fencing, walls and/
or earthen berms.
CONTOUR — An invisible line on the surface of the earth along which
all points are at the same elevation above sea level. Such lines are
represented on maps relative to data furnished by such agencies as
the United States Geological Survey (USGS) or other organizations duly
certified to produce such information.
CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL CENTER — A minor commercial
facility generally containing no more than five units and occupying no
more than three acres, designed to serve everyday needs of residents
in its immediate vicinity and whose commercial goods and hours of
operation encourage short stops for specific items rather than extensive
shopping trips. Its primary component is a drugstore or a small food
and household goods store but not a supermarket, and the center may
contain a few other establishments as well, such as a beauty shop or a
laundry and dry-cleaning establishment.
CUL-DE-SAC — A single access street intersecting a through street at
one end and terminating in a permanent vehicular turnaround at the
other end.
CULTURAL ENVIRONMENT — A representation of man's influence
on land and/or water through the use, organization, adornment and
maintenance of property and structures.
CULVERT — A structure designed to convey water under a street or
pedestrian walk.
CURB — A stone or concrete boundary marking the edge of the cartway
or paved area.
CUT — A portion of land or other area from which earth has been
removed or will be removed by excavation, or the depth below the
original ground surface or excavated surface.
DATE OF FILING — The date on which a complete application for
subdivision and/or land development has been submitted to the
Township Manager and accepted by the Township.
DATUM — A reference point from which elevations are measured.
The standard datum is sea level as established by the United States
Geological Survey (USGS).
DECELERATION LANE — An added roadway lane that permits vehicles
to slow down and leave the main vehicular flow.
DEDICATION — A gift or other donation of property by the owner
thereof to the Township or other entity.
DEED — A legal document conveying an estate or other right, title or
interest in property.
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:292
DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS — Characteristics related to the
distribution, density and vital statistics of populations.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Standards appearing in Article VIII.
DETENTION BASIN — A structure designed, built and used to retard
surface water runoff for a period of time sufficient to cause the
deposition of sediment and to reduce the rate of runoff leaving a site to
the predevelopment rate.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, equitable owner, authorized agent of
such landowner or tenant with permission of such landowner, who
makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land
development.
DEVELOPMENT — The construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure, any
mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance and any use or
extension of the use of land.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree trunk
measured 4.5 feet above the natural grade at the base of trunk of a
tree.[Added 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 371]
DITCH — A small drainage channel.
DIVERSION TERRACE — A channel or ditch and a ridge, constructed
across a sloping land surface on the contour or with predetermined
grades, to intercept and divert surface runoff before it gains sufficient
volume and velocity to create harmful erosion.
DRAINAGE — A system for conveying stormwater runoff, surface water
or groundwater from the land by facilities or structures which serve
to control or otherwise manage runoff and minimize sedimentation and
soil erosion during and after construction or development.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted to use private land
to facilitate the flow of water, as deemed necessary by the Township,
within which the owner shall erect no permanent structures but may
use the land in any other way not inconsistent with the grantee's rights.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any trench, ditch, swale, gutter, pipe, culvert,
storm sewer or other similar depression or structure designed,
intended or constructed for the purpose of controlling stormwater
runoff within a subdivision or conveying stormwater runoff or
groundwater within and away from a subdivision, land development
area or contiguous areas.
DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan which depicts existing and proposed
drainage as required by this chapter.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any watercourse or trench, ditch, swale, gutter,
piped flow or other similar depression or structure in which water flows
in a definite direction, either continuously or intermittently, and has a
definite channel, bed and banks, and includes any area adjacent thereto
subject to inundation by reason of overflow.
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:293
DRIVEWAY — A gravel or paved surface on a lot which provides access
for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other structure
from a street.
DRIVEWAY (LANE) — A private means of vehicle access from a public
or private street to a single lot; provided, however, that two contiguous
lots may share a common driveway where the applicable requirements
of this chapter and Chapter 210, Zoning, are complied with on each lot.
DRIVEWAY, SHARED — A commonly shared or used gravel or paved
way on a lot, which provides access for vehicles to a maximum of two
dwellings or other structures from a street.
DRYWELL — A covered pit with open-jointed lining, through which
water from roofs, basement floors or areaways may seep or leech into
the surrounding soil.
DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied exclusively for
residential purposes, including a mobile home.
DWELLING UNIT — A residential building or portion thereof forming
a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family.
EARTHMOVING ACTIVITY — Land disturbance activity resulting in
the movement of earth or the stripping of vegetative cover from the
earth, as regulated by this chapter and Chapter 148, Stormwater
Management.
EASEMENT — A right, privilege or other interest granted or reserved
for the use of land for a particular purpose; the land to which such right
or privilege pertains.
ECONOMIC AND FISCAL CHARACTERISTICS — Characteristics
related to the expenditures and revenues in conjunction with the
management of income of a household, private business, community,
association and/or government.
EGRESS — An exit.
END LINE — The line which represents the termination area of a
shared driveway.
ENGINEER — A person duly registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to practice professional engineering.
ELEVATION — A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference
level, or a scale drawing of the front, rear or side of a building.
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building,
an increase in size of another existing structure or an increase in that
portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.
ENVIRONMENT — The conditions, resources and/or characteristics
which exist within and surround the area to be affected by a proposed
subdivision and/or land development, including natural elements, such
as land, water, air, minerals, natural flora and natural fauna, and man-
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:294
made components, such as objects of historic or aesthetic significance
infrastructure, and man-related attributes of a social and economic
nature.
EXCAVATION — Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of soil,
rock, minerals, mineral substances or organic substances other than
vegetation from water or land or beneath the surface thereof, whether
exposed or submerged.
FILED or DULY FILED — The complete submission of a preliminary
or final plan with the proper forms, plans, documents and other
submissions and fees, as required by this chapter, according to the
timetable set forth herein.
FILL — Material such as sand, gravel, earth and other suitable and
approved composition, or any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or
moved to a new location above the natural surface of the ground or on
top of a stripped or otherwise cut surface.
FLOOD — The general and temporary inundation or partial and
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of
streams, rivers, watercourses or other inland water from any source.
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR — A flood that, on the average, is likely
to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a 1% chance of occurring
each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOODING — A general or temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of areas from the overflow of inland waters and/or the
unusual and rapid accumulation of water on or under the ground.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a creek,
stream or other watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete
inundation; an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or
runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry
and discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of
this chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of
the one-hundred-year magnitude.
FLOODWAY FRINGE — The area as described in § 210-186B(2) of
Chapter 210, Zoning, and delineated on the Floodplain Conservation
District Map.77
FORESTED AREAS — Those areas of extensive vegetation in which the
dominant plants are trees that are indigenous to the area, such areas
being illustrated on the Conservation Areas Map in the Comprehensive
Plan.78
77.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
78.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:295
FRONTAGE — The length of any one property line of a lot, which
property line abuts a street line, ordinarily regarded as the front of the
lot. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots,
all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered front lot lines
and shall be subject to the applicable yard requirements.
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION OF STREETS, ROADS AND
HIGHWAYS — The categorization of streets, roads and highways in
the Comprehensive Plan79 according to a hierarchy of service
characteristics for which various design standards have been
established (refer to the Appendixes of this chapter).
GRADE — The slope of a street, road or other installation, expressed as
a percent, or the elevation of existing, finished or proposed conditions,
as hereinafter defined.
GRADE, EXISTING — The elevation, relative to a given datum, of the
ground surface prior to any excavation, cut or fill.
GRADE, FINISHED — The elevation, relative to a given datum, of the
ground surface after completion of any excavation, cut or fill.
GRADING — The changing of the surface of the ground by cutting,
filling or excavation, including land in its cut or filled condition.
GRADE, PROPOSED — The elevation, relative to a given datum, of the
ground surface proposed to be achieved by excavation, cut or fill.
GROSS ACREAGE — The acreage of a lot within the title lines.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
floors of a building, measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or
from the center line of a common wall separating two buildings, but not
including interior parking spaces, loading spaces for motor vehicles or
any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of geologic structures
and rock or soil interstices which have the capacity to store water or
permit the transfer of water to a geologic storage area.
GUARANTY, COMPLETION — The financial security that may be
accepted by the Township as a guaranty that improvements required
as part of an application for subdivision and/or land development are
completed to the satisfaction of the Township.
GUARANTY, MAINTENANCE — The financial security that may be
accepted by the Township as a guaranty that improvements required as
part of an application for subdivision and/or land development will be
in first-class condition, state of repair and working order for a specific
period of time. Such financial security shall be similar to that accepted
for a completion guaranty.
79.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:296
GUTTER — That portion within a street right-of-way, outside the
cartway, designed for surface drainage, whether paved or otherwise.
HERITAGE TREE — A tree included on the List of Heritage Trees
of Concord Township.80 In the context of a subdivision or land
development plan review or in consideration of any application for
approval of special exception, variance, or conditional use, and based
upon a report prepared by a qualified forester or arborist, the Township
may designate as additional heritage trees any tree selected as
uniquely representative of a class or group in terms of size, shape, form,
age, historical importance and/or visual prominence. Trees determined
to be dead or diseased or in any manner constituting a safety hazard
shall not be considered heritage trees.[Added 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 371]
HISTORIC RESOURCE — All buildings, sites, structures, objects, trees
and other landscape features and districts as shown on the Concord
Township Historic Sites Map (see Appendix B-9 in the Open Space and
Recreation Plan; this plan was adopted as part of the Comprehensive
Plan for Concord Township81).[Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
HITCH — A device which is part of the frame or attaches to the frame
of a mobile home and connects it to a power source for the purpose of
transporting the unit.
HYDRIC SOILS — A soil that formed under saturated conditions. See
the Appendixes for the list of hydric soils in Concord Township.
IMPACT — The power of an event to produce changes in a condition. In
the context of impact exerted on the environment, changes which affect
the existing conditions and/or quality are of greatest concern.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which has materials that do not
normally absorb rainfall or surface water, such as buildings, paved
parking areas, paved walks and similar surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A body of water, such as a pond, detention or
retention basin, confined by a headwall, dike, floodgate or other barrier
in the nature of a dam.
IMPROVEMENT — The act of creating improvements.
IMPROVEMENTS — Physical additions and changes to land, such as
grading, paving, curbing, fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers,
capped sewers, storm sewers, storm drains, catch basins, culverts,
sidewalks, monuments, crosswalks, bridges, earthworks, streetlights,
wells, on-site sewage disposal systems, street trees and other plantings,
and other structures that may be necessary to produce usable and
desirable land development.
80.Editor's Note: The List of Heritage Trees is included as an attachment to this chapter.
81.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:297
IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT — A list of improvements approved by
the Township which the landowner or developer agrees to install as a
prerequisite to final plan approval.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE — A structure designed to direct the flow
of rain into storage in geologic structures, e.g., french drains, seepage
beds, seepage trenches and the like.
INFRASTRUCTURE — The basic installations and facilities on which
the continuance and growth of a community depend, such as roads,
schools, electrical transmission facilities, transportation and
communication systems.
INGRESS — An entrance.
INTERIOR LOT — See "lot, interior."
INTERIOR WALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian travel across or
within a block, having a minimum width of 10 feet.
INVERT — The lowest visible surface of a drainage conduit or channel.
LAKES AND PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain
water year round. Artificial ponds may be created by dams or result
from excavation. The shoreline of such water bodies shall be measured
from the spillway crest elevation rather than the permanent pool if
there is a difference. Lakes are bodies of water two or more acres.
Ponds are any water body less than two acres.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A sketch, preliminary or final plan,
submitted in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, showing
the provision for development of a tract of land. See also "subdivision
plan."
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1). [Added
1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
(3)
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:298
LANDOWNER — The record holder of legal title to land, the rightful
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee, if he is authorized
expressly under the lease to exercise the rights of the owner, or other
person having a proprietary interest of the land which is the subject of
an application for subdivision and/or land development.
LAND PLANNER — A design professional who is recognized as a
certified planner by the American Institute of Certified Planners, an
institute of the American Planning Association.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A design professional duly registered by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to practice landscape architecture.
LANDSCAPED AREA or LANDSCAPED BUFFER — That portion of
a tract or lot in which plantings have been installed in accordance
with the landscaping requirements of Article VIII. The landscaped area
includes the buffer planting strip, as well as plantings which serve a
functional and/or aesthetic purpose when located around and between
buildings, roads, parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, sitting areas,
service or maintenance structures, courtyards and the like.
LAND USE — The use to which land is used, arranged and the like,
typically expressed in terms of the type of activity or development
which exists, such as agricultural, residential, municipal and the like,
whether such use is principal or accessory.
LOAD-BEARING FILL — Any facility, earthwork or fill placed in a
controlled manner and compacted to support structural foundations
and the buildings and other structures thereon, vehicular traffic or
improvements in accordance with the highest standards of professional
engineering.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET — A space, accessible from a street or
way, in a building or on a lot, for the temporary use of vehicles while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LONG-TERM EFFECTS — Results which are manifest for or extending
over a long period of time.
LOT — A contiguous area of land held or to be held in one ownership
and not divided by a street, not including any land within the limits of a
street right-of-way upon which said lot abuts, even if such right-of-way
is maintained by the owner of the lot; a designated parcel, tract or area
of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be
used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA[Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191; 1-4-2000 by Ord.
No. 245; 7-5-2000 by Ord. No. 249]: —
The area enclosed by the property lines of a lot, as herein defined,
exclusive of:
(a) Rights-of-way of dedicated streets;
(1)
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:299
LOT, CONTIGUOUS — A lot which shares at least one property line with
another lot.[Added 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more
streets, including shared driveways, or upon two parts of the same
street, including shared driveways, forming an interior angle of less
than 135°.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area that is occupied by
the building area.
LOT DEPTH — The distance along a straight line drawn from the
midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line. In the
case of the corner lot, the lot depth shall be achieved along the longest
dimension of the lot.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot which has no frontage on a public street but has
frontage on a private street.[Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
LOT LINE — A legally recorded property boundary line. In the case of
any lot abutting a street, the lot line for the portion of the lot abutting
the street shall be deemed to be the same as the street line and shall
not be the center line of the street or any other line within the street
line.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The front lot line is the line separating the lot
from the street right-of-way. For interior lots, the front lot line is the line
generally parallel to the street right-of-way at the nearest point to the
right-of-way where the lot attains substantially the minimum required
lot width.
(b) Fire lanes;
(c) Rights-of-way or easements proposed for dedication;
Utility easements and other underground lines beyond those
directly servicing the lot, except for Concord Township Sewer
Authority easements which may be included in the
computation of lot area; and
(d)
(e) Stormwater management basins.
(f) Any land within a floodway;
(g) Any wetlands; and
(h) Any land with a slope in excess of 25%.
The area of land comprised by any additional road rights-of-way
(i.e., in addition to the 50 feet, 60 feet or 80 feet set forth in
Appendix G of this chapter), which the Board of Supervisors may
require, shall not be subtracted when computing a minimum lot
area.
(2)
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:300
LOT, REAR — A lot which has frontage on a public street but does
not have at least 70% of the required lot width at the curbline.[Added
5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines at the
required building setback line. When there is only one side lot line, as in
the case of two-family or single-family attached dwellings, the lot width
shall be measured between the side lot line and the center line of the
party wall of the end dwelling unit. In the case of a corner lot, the lot
width shall be measured between the side lot line and the front lot line
opposite.
METES AND BOUNDS — A method of describing the boundaries of
land by directions or bearings and distances from a known point of
reference, including the content of the land and each lot, in square feet
and acres and fractions thereof.
MITIGATION — The act of precluding a potentially adverse effect and/
or making a potentially adverse effect less severe through measures
which will improve a condition and/or lessen the impact.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT — A parcel or contiguous parcels of
land which has been so designated and improved that it contains two or
more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home development,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erections thereon of a single mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual lot which has been
reserved and prepared for the placement of the mobile home.
MONUMENTS AND MARKERS — Structures which mark and identify
lot lines and street lines or corners of lots and streets in accordance
with Article VIII.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — See "Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code."
NATURAL ENVIRONMENT — A composition of land, water and/or air
represented by its inherent physical and biological resources.
NET ACREAGE — See "Lot area."[Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No.
191]
NET FLOOR AREA — The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:301
parking or loading, and all floors below the first or ground floor, except
when used or intended to be used for human habitation or service to
the public.
NOTABLE TREES — Trees having a diameter of 24 inches DBH or
greater, which are located outside of a tree mass.[Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 371]
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article IV
of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.82
OFFICIAL SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — The plan adopted by the
Township and approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) which sets forth recommendations for
the provision of adequate sewage systems in the Township in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537.83
ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL — A single system of piping, septic tanks
or other facilities serving a single lot, collecting and disposing of
sewage into the soil on the lot where such system is used through septic
tank filter fields and in compliance with the prevailing federal, state,
county and municipal regulations.
ON-SITE WATER SUPPLY — An individual well on the lot where the well
services one lot and/or water supply on a lot occupied or to be occupied
serving a permitted building and in compliance with the prevailing
federal, state and county regulations.
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space available for the
temporary parking of one motor vehicle, exclusive of passageways,
driveways or other means of circulation or access. A parking space shall
include either covered garage spaces or uncovered parking lot space
located off the street right-of-way and in back of the front yard building
setback line. The size of parking spaces shall be as required in Article
VIII.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of water at a given
point and time resulting from a predetermined storm.
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — Pennsylvania
Act 247 of 1968, P.L. 805, as amended 6-23-1982, P.L. 613, No. 173,
and further amended by Act 170 of 1988, also cited as 53 P.S. § 10101
et seq., or any subsequent act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
which replaces, supplements or repeals any or all of the provisions of
Act 247.
PERMEABLE — Porous and/or pervious to water or other liquids.
PHYSICAL RESOURCES — Characteristics of the natural environment
manifest in its landforms, soils, geological structure of surface and/
or man-made impoundments, watercourses, groundwater and the like.
The disposition of these characteristics is typically expressed in
82.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
83.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:302
physiographic, topographic and/or hydrologic units, such as rock
formations, slopes, elevations, soil types, watersheds, surface water
types, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers or aquifer recharge areas and the
like.
PLAN — A draft, diagram or drawing or set thereof showing the present
and proposed physical features of and improvement to land and the
proposed development thereto; see also Article III for classification and
requirements of plans. The term "plan" includes profiles, cross sections
and the like.
PLAN, AS-BUILT — A plan prepared by a surveyor or engineer, showing
dimensions and locations of all improvements as actually constructed.
PLAN, FINAL — A subdivision plan and/or land development plan
prepared for official recording purposes depicting all features required
in Articles VI and VII and all plans, documents and submissions
required therein.
PLAN, LAND DEVELOPMENT — See "land development plan."
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A subdivision and/or land development plan
filed as a basis for consideration and approval prior to preparation of a
final plan, depicting all features required in Articles V and VII, including
an improvements construction plan, conservation plan and all other
plans, documents and submissions required therein.
PLAN, PROFILE — A plan prepared by an engineer, architect or
landscape architect, showing the vertical section of the existing grade
and proposed grade along the center line of any proposed street and
any street appurtenances to be constructed or installed and which
must include cross sections of the street and other improvements
construction.
PLAN, RECORD — A final plan prepared for recording by an engineer
or surveyor, showing the ultimate width of streets, the lot lines,
easements, existing structures, streams, floodplains, building setback
lines and the original required endorsements of the Township and
any other relevant information pertaining to a subdivision and/or land
development as required by this chapter.
PLAN, SITE DEVELOPMENT — See "site development plan."
PLAN, SKETCH — A schematic plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating topographic, vegetative and other salient existing features
of a tract and its surroundings and the general layout of the proposed
subdivision and/or land development in sufficient detail to allow for
disclosure of all significant review matters prior to the filing of a
preliminary plan for a proposed subdivision and/or land development.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a
number of dwelling units or combination of residential and
nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not
correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling or use, density, or intensity,
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:303
lot coverage and required open space to the regulations established
in any one district created, from time to time, under the provisions of
Chapter 210, Zoning.
PLANTINGS, PLANTING SCREEN — Trees, shrubs and ground covers
which are installed and maintained in accordance with a landscaping
plan as set forth in Article V.
PLAT — A map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries
and location of individual properties and streets, or a map or plan of a
subdivision or land development, whether preliminary or final.
POND — See "lakes and ponds."[Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No.
221]
PRIMARY EFFECTS — Results of a direct nature which have a principal
influence on a particular condition or state.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes the following: parks, playgrounds,
trails, paths and other recreational areas and public areas, sites for
schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned
and operated facilities and publicly owned or operated scenic and
historic sites.[Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Board of Supervisors or the Planning Commission, intended to
inform and obtain public comment prior to taking action in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM — Any system other than
an on-lot sewage disposal system which is administered and operated
by a governmental agency, authority or commission for the collection,
conveyance, treatment and disposal of wastes from customers in
compliance with prevailing federal, state and municipal regulations.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — Any system for water distribution and
water supply, other than an on-lot water supply system, which is owned,
administered and operated by an organization which is regulated by a
governmental agency, authority or commission.
REGULARLY SCHEDULED PUBLIC MEETING — A meeting of the
Planning Commission which is open to the public and is advertised,
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:304
during which various items of business are reviewed and discussed at
regular, scheduled intervals throughout the year.
RESTRICTION — A limitation on property which may be created in
a deed, lease, mortgage, through certain zoning, subdivision or other
Township codes, ordinances, regulations, plans or maps or conditions
of approval of an application for subdivision and/or land development.
RESTRICTIVE COVENANT — A restriction on the use and enjoyment of
land usually set forth in the deed.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division of lots or the relocation of
lot lines of any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and
approved or recorded, or the alteration of any streets or the
establishment of any new streets within any such subdivision.
Resubdivision does not include conveyances made so as to combine
entire existing lots by deed or other instrument.
RETENTION BASIN — A reservoir, formed from soil or other material,
which is designed to retain permanently a certain amount of
stormwater from a catchment area and which also may be designed
to detain temporarily additional stormwater runoff from the catchment
area. Retention basins also may receive fresh water from year-round
streams. Retention basins always contain water and thus may be
considered man-made lakes or ponds.
REUSE — A use for an existing building or parcel or lot of land other
than the use for which it was originally intended or made.
REVIEW — An examination of the sketch, preliminary and/or final
plan by the Township Planning Commission, Township Engineer other
Township officials, representatives and bodies and the Board of
Supervisors to determine compliance with this chapter and its
regulations, design standards and all other Township ordinances,
codes, regulations, plans or maps.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land granted or reserved for public or
private use.
RIPARIAN BUFFER — An area of vegetation and trees adjacent to
a watercourse that provides a transition between the aquatic and
terrestrial environments, and intercepts stormwater runoff and reduce
pollutants entering into surface waters.[Added 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 371]
ROAD — A type of street, and has the same meaning as such.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution, or the water-carried waste resulting
from the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing machines,
sinks, dishwashers or any other source of water-carried waste of human
origin.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe that conveys sanitary sewage.
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:305
SCALE — The relationship between distances on a map and the actual
ground distances.
SCREENING — The use of plant materials, fencing, walls and/or
earthen berms or combinations thereof to aid in the concealment of
such features as parking areas and vehicles within them and to provide
privacy between two or more different land uses or activities; a visual
and/or sound buffer or other barrier.
SCREEN PLANTING — The plantings which are used in a buffer
planting strip or other landscaping arrangement to create a continuous
visual buffer.
SECONDARY EFFECTS — Results of an indirect nature which have
an influence on a particular condition or state derived from a primary
effect.
SECTION — An area or tract which is part of a proposed planned
residential development which will be developed according to a
timetable for development over a period of years included by the
applicant in the development plan.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of
origin by water.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A retention or detention basin located and
designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt and other stormwatertransported
material through trapping, screening, settling, etc.
SEPTIC SYSTEM — An underground system with a septic tank and
filter field used for the decomposition of domestic wastes and its safe
disposal.
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle that receives the discharge
of sewage from a building, sewer or part thereof and is designed and
constructed so as to permit settling of solids from this liquid, digestion
of the organic matter and discharge of the liquid portion into a disposal
area.
SEPTIC TANK FILTER FIELD — A system of open-jointed pipes
intended to distribute septic tank effluent into the ground for
absorption and evaporation.
SETBACK LINE — That line that is the required minimum distance
from the ultimate right-of-way of a street line or any other lot line that
establishes the area within which any permitted use must be erected or
placed (see "building setback line").
SEWAGE — The total of organic waste and wastewater generated
by residential, industrial, commercial, institutional or other
establishments.
SEWERAGE — All effluent carried by sewers, whether it is sanitary
sewage, residential, commercial or industrial wastes or stormwater
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:306
runoff, or the entire system of sewage collection, conveyance,
treatment and disposal.
SEWER CONNECTION — Consists of all pipes, fittings and
appurtenances from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of
the corresponding sewer riser pipe.
SEWERED AREA — That portion of the Township designated in the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan in which there is or may be constructed
a public sewer system.
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home
space.
SHADE TREE — A woody plant, usually deciduous, which normally
grows with one main trunk and has a canopy which screens and filters
the sun in the summer and winter, respectively.
SHORT-TERM EFFECTS — Results which occur immediately or within
a short period of time, such as a week.
SIDEWALK — A paved, surfaced or leveled area, paralleling and
separated from the cartway of the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
SIGN — For purposes of this chapter, a sign is a visual communication
that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the
attention of others. Signs include letters, numbers, symbols,
trademarks, illustrations or designs as they may appear on signs,
billboards, banners, storefronts, marquees, canopies and other
stationary locations on or off the premises of the activity to which the
message pertains.
SILT — Finely divided particles of soil or rock, often carried in cloudy
suspension in water and eventually deposited as sediment.
SITE — A tract or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots on a
tract which form an area for a development project.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan illustrating the proposed
development of a property.
SKIRTS — Panels specifically designed for the purpose of screening the
underside of a mobile home by forming an extension of the vertical
exterior walls of the mobile home and covering the entire distance
between the bottom of the exterior walls and the ground elevation
below.
SOIL EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments, or the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind and
ice.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — A plan and
related narrative report required in accordance with Article VIII.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test, in accordance with criteria
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:307
Sewage Enforcement Officer, conducted to determine the suitability of
the soil for on-site sewage disposal facilities and infiltration structures
by measuring the absorptive capacity of the soil at a given location and
depth.
SOIL SURVEY —
A REPORT ENTITLED "SOIL SURVEY — Chester and Delaware
Counties, Pennsylvania," published May, 1963 by the United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, and updated
from time to time.
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, refuse or other discarded materials,
including but not limited to nonliquid waste materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, institutional, agricultural and residential
activities.
SPECIMEN TREE — A shade tree or street tree.
STAGE — A section or sections of which an applicant proposes to
commence development at the same time, as part of a timetable for
development of any development over a period of years.
STEEP SLOPE(S) — Those areas of land which are characterized by a
change in elevation of 15% or more but not exceeding 25% over the
specified distance or contour, as specified in § 160-49.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries stormwater, surface water
and groundwater drainage but excludes sewage and residential,
commercial and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Water which surfaces, flows or collects during and
subsequent to rain or snowfall.
STORMWATER DETENTION — Any storm drainage technique that
retards or detains runoff in rate, volume or otherwise, such as a
detention or retention basin, parking lot storage, rooftop storage,
porous pavement, dry wells or any combination thereof.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan for controlling surface
water runoff so that it will preclude erosion or flooding and/or the
adverse effects of impervious areas on surface water runoff as required
by the Township ordinances, codes, regulations, plans and maps.
STREAM — Any perennial current or flow of water, especially one
running along the surface of the earth.
STREET — A public or privately owned right-of-way abutting and
furnishing access to more than one lot and serving primarily as a means
of motor vehicle travel; also used to provide space for installation
of improvements such as sewers, other utilities, street trees and
sidewalks.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street intended to serve a principal role
in collecting traffic from minor collectors and local streets, and used
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:308
primarily as the means of access for through traffic within the Township
and to areas adjacent thereto and from principal arterial streets.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the outside
boundary or right-of-way line of a street, road or highway legally open
or officially platted or between a lot and a privately owned street or
road.
STREET, LOCAL ACCESS — See "street, local collector."
STREET, LOCAL COLLECTOR — A street intended to serve a principal
role in collecting traffic from local streets and used primarily as the
means of access for through traffic between residential neighborhoods
and other areas within the Township and to areas adjacent thereto and
from collector and principal highways.
STREET, LOCAL CUL-DE-SAC — See "cul-de-sac."
STREET, LOCAL SECONDARY — A street intended to serve a principal
role in providing access to lots abutting thereon and as a means of
collecting traffic from local secondary streets and gaining access to
collector streets.
STREET, OTHER LOCAL — A street intended to serve a principal role
in providing access to lots abutting thereon and cul-de-sac streets and
as the means for gaining access to local streets.
STREET, PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL — A street intended to serve a
principal role in accommodating traffic from collector streets and in
carrying relatively large volumes of long distance traffic between other
principal arterials.
STREET, PRIVATE — A street not offered or required to be offered for
dedication or duly accepted by the Board of Supervisors as a public
street and designed to public street standards.
STREET, SINGLE-ACCESS — An interior street, including but not
limited to cul-de-sac and loop designs, which is designed to provide only
one point of intersection with an existing through street.
STREET TREE — A shade tree within a street right-of-way in
accordance with Article VIII. Street trees recommended for use within
the Township are listed in the Appendixes of this chapter.
STRIPPING — Cutting or any other activity which removes the
vegetative surface cover, such as tree removal, clearing, grubbing and
removal of topsoil.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in or addition to the
supporting or structural members of a structure, such as the bearing
walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any change which could
convert an existing structure into a different structure or adapt the
structure to a different use.
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:309
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object or improvement having an
ascertainable stationary location on land or in the water, whether or not
affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, conveyance or other transfer of
ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres not involving any new street or easement of access
of any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION PLAN — A sketch, preliminary or final plan submitted in
compliance with this chapter, showing the provision for the subdivision
of a tract of land. See also "land development plan."
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the
Township Engineer, at least 90% of those improvements required as
a condition of final plan approval have been completed in accordance
with the approved plan so that the project will be able to be used,
occupied or operated for its intended use (90% shall be determined
based on the cost of the required improvements for which financial
security is posted pursuant to Article X).
SURVEYOR — A person duly registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania to practice surveying.
SWALE — An elongated depression in the ground which collects and
channels surface water runoff.
TENURE — The form of occupancy of a unit, i.e., fee simple sale, rental,
condominium, cooperative, etc.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer (PE) licensed as
such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the
engineer for the Township, or a firm of such engineers employed by the
Township or retained as a consultant thereto.
TRACT — An area, lot, parcel, site or property which is the subject of a
subdivision and/or land development application.
TRANSPORTATION (CIRCULATION) — A system for the movement of
people or goods, including conveyors such as streets and highways,
accessory facilities such as parking facilities and driveways, attributes
of conveyance such as traffic volumes, trip generation and traffic
controls.
TREE MASS — Naturally occurring vegetation characterized by trees
whose crowns meet to form a 70% to 100% closed canopy. Tree masses
shall be at least 0.5 acre in area and contain trees at least 20 feet tall
or 12 inches DBH, although not all trees need be this size. Tree masses
smaller than 0.5 acre on a tract or lot shall also be considered tree
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:310
masses if they are part of a larger continuous tree mass that extends
onto other tracts or lots.[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 371]
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is proposed
to be subdivided and/or developed or is otherwise designed, arranged,
intended or for which it is proposed or may be occupied or maintained.
UTILITIES — Facilities such as sewers, water mains, fire hydrants,
streetlights and other facilities of the same general character;
installations of a community which pertain to their consumption and
emission characteristics, including facilities such as those used for
water supply, sewage disposal, refuse disposal, storm drainage,
communications and electrical transmission.
VERY STEEP SLOPE(S) — The area of land which is characterized by
a change in elevation of 25% or more over the specified distance or
contour as specified in § 160-49.
VISUAL RESOURCES — Characteristics of the natural and/or cultural
environment which are visible. The visual resources of a particular
area are typically expressed in terms of their visibility, character and/or
attractiveness relative to their amenity value and/or quality or lack of
it.
WALKWAY — A thoroughfare for pedestrian travel.
WATER CONNECTION — The water connection consists of all pipes,
fittings and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet
pipe of the distribution system within the mobile home.
WATERCOURSE — A stream with year-round or substantially yearround
flow, such as a creek, run or other body of running water.
WATER RISER PIPE — That portion of the water service pipe which
extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a
designated point at each mobile home lot.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use
of groundwater and surface water resources within the Township.
WETLANDS — Areas with hydric soils that are inundated or saturated
by surface and/or ground water, which support hydrophytic vegetation,
such as swamps, bogs, marshes and the like, such areas being
regulated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
WETLANDS MARGIN — The transitional area extending from the outer
limit of the wetlands. For the purposes of this chapter, the wetlands
margin shall extend 75 feet from the wetland boundary or to the limit of
the hydric soils, whichever is less greater.[Amended 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. 371]
WILDLIFE HABITAT — In the context of the open space provisions
of Article XXXII, the woodland resources that are typically utilized by
animals for purposes such as shelter for deer wintering areas in a forest
§ 160-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
155:311
interior, or for browse/food supply at forest edges.[Added 12-22-2015
by Ord. No. 371]
WOODLAND AND FOREST — Those areas of extensive vegetation in
which the dominant plants are trees that are indigenous to the area,
such areas being illustrated on the Areas of Environmental Concern
Map in the Comprehensive Plan.84
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Concord Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended, Chapter 210 of the Concord Township Code.
B. Words not defined above shall have the meaning given in the
Municipalities Planning Code,85 Chapter 210, Zoning, or other
Township codes and ordinances and, if not defined in the
aforementioned documents, the most recent edition of Webster's
Unabridged Dictionary.
84.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 160-8 CONCORD CODE § 160-8
155:312
ARTICLE III
Application Procedure
§ 160-9. General procedures.
A. Whenever any subdivision and/or land development is proposed and
before any permit for the erection of a structure shall be granted, the
landowner or developer shall apply for and obtain approval of such
proposed subdivision and/or land development in accordance with the
procedures set forth herein for a preliminary plan and a final plan.
B. Whenever conditional use approval, a variance or a special exception is
required by Chapter 210, Zoning, for any use proposed or inherent in
any proposed subdivision and/or land development, all applications
therefor shall be filed and all plans, documents and other submissions
required to accompany the same shall be filed with and granted by the
Board of Supervisors or the Zoning Hearing Board, whichever is
applicable, prior to filing for review of a preliminary plan for subdivision
and/or land development.
C. Whenever the landowner or developer chooses to do so, a sketch plan
may be submitted in accordance with the procedures for same set forth
herein.
D. The applicant or his agent shall submit the required number of prints
and accompanying information for each subdivision and/or land
development plan to the Township Manager eight calendar days prior to
the Board of Supervisors meeting at which the plan may be reviewed.
E. Plans shall be accepted for review only when the application contains
all plan requirements, a fully completed application form, a completed
checklist (refer to the Appendixes) and payment of fees in accordance
with the fee schedule adopted by resolution by the Board of
Supervisors. The submission shall be reviewed to determine whether
the submission is complete. If the submission is incomplete, the
submission shall be returned to the applicant.
F. Plans shall be referred to the Planning Commission for advisory review
prior to review by the Board of Supervisors. Approval or disapproval by
the Board of Supervisors shall be in accordance with the procedures
specified in this chapter and in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.86 The Board of Supervisors shall act on plans and notify
the parties involved of its action within the time and in the manner as
established by this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. Each new or revised preliminary or final plan which
involves substantive change requiring an additional review shall be
considered a new submission, and the requirements as to time of review
and accompanying data required for each new or revised plan shall be
as set forth in § 160-12K.
86.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 160-9 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-9
155:313
§ 160-10. Classification of subdivision and/or land development.
G. Whenever an application for a major subdivision and/or land
development is proposed which may affect adjacent municipalities,
reviews and reports from such municipalities may be solicited by the
Township.
H. Two phases are included in the procedure for approval of subdivision
and/or land development plans: preliminary and final. These phases are
required to enable the Concord Township Planning Commission and the
Board of Supervisors to have an adequate opportunity to review the
submission and to ensure that all recommendations are reflected in the
final plan and that all ordinance requirements are addressed.
I. Plan procedures.
(1) The flow charts in the Appendixes show the procedure and time
that must be followed during the sketch, preliminary and final plan
approvals. The table below indicates the required plans for the
different types of plan submissions.
Plan Approval Phase
Type of Submission Preliminary Final
Major Subdivision and/or Required Required
Land Development Required Required
Minor Subdivision Optional Required
(2) The specific procedures for all plans shall be in accordance with
§ 160-11, § 160-12 and § 160-13 and requirements in accordance
with Articles IV, V, VI and VII.
J. All plan submissions must be accompanied by the following:
Plan Approval Phase
Required Plans, Reports
and Papers Preliminary Final
Title plan Optional Required
Conservation plan Required Required
Improvements construction
plan and profile(s) plan
Optional Required
Construction detail plan Required Required
Stormwater management
report
Required(feasibility
demonstrated)
Required (complete
report)
A. Minor subdivision and/or land development.
(1) All minor subdivisions and/or land developments shall be in
conformance with this article.
§ 160-9 CONCORD CODE § 160-10
155:314
§ 160-11. Sketch plan.
A sketch plan for any proposed subdivision and/or land development may, at
the option of the landowner or developer, be submitted to the Township for
review. The submission of a sketch plan does not constitute submission of
an application for approval of a subdivision and/or land development plan.
However, it does represent a basis for an informal discussion between the
Township and the landowner or developer, which may prove to be valuable
to the prospective applicant in formulating plans, documents and other
submissions for preliminary plan approval. In the event that the landowner
or developer submits a sketch plan, the following shall apply:
(2) The determination of which subdivisions and/or land developments
are minor shall be made in accordance with the following
conditions of eligibility:
(a) A subdivision or a land development for residential purposes
only shall be determined to be minor, provided that:
[1] The residential use is a principal permitted use and does
not involve any variance, special exception or conditional
use approval of any type, and no development is proposed
in the Floodplain Conservation District or areas of very
steep slope as set forth in § 160-49.
[2] The total number of lots shall not exceed three (if there is
only one existing dwelling unit on a lot, this means that
only two additional lots could be created).
[3] Such subdivision and/or land development does not
involve any new streets and does not involve any public
water lines, public sewer lines or storm sewer lines.
(b) The subdivision of a tract into not more than three lots for
agricultural use shall be determined to be minor, provided that
such lots are 10 acres or greater.
(c) The subdivision of a portion of a lot, the lot area of which does
not meet the minimum requirements of Chapter 210, Zoning,
for the purpose of conveyance to an adjoining property shall be
determined to be minor. Such substandard lot area shall not be
considered as a building lot.
(d) During any five-year period, no more than three lots may be
subdivided by an applicant for a single tract through the minor
subdivision or land development process, otherwise the
subdivision shall be considered a major subdivision.
B. Major subdivision and/or land development. All major subdivisions and/
or land developments shall be in conformance with this article and
Articles IV, V and VI.
§ 160-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-11
155:315
A. The applicant shall submit the required fees, a sketch plan checklist,
and 16 copies of the sketch plan to the Township Manager at least 14
days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the plan may
be reviewed. The Township Manager shall forward the required number
of the properly submitted sketch plans and required application form
and checklist to the agencies as designated below:
(1) One copy shall be retained by the Township Manager for Township
files.
(2) One copy shall be forwarded to the Township Road Foreman for
review and comment.
(3) One copy shall be forwarded to the Township Engineer for review
and comment.
(4) Five copies shall be forwarded to the Board of Supervisors.
(5) Three copies of the plan(s), documents and other submissions and
one copy of the application form shall be used for informal review
purposes by the Planning Commission.
(6) One copy shall be forwarded to the Township Fire Marshal.
(7) One copy of the plan(s), documents and other submissions shall be
forwarded to the Township Code Enforcement Officers and one
copy to the Building Inspector for review and comment.
(8) Two copies shall be available for referral to other planning
agencies or consultants.
B. In addition to furnishing copies of the sketch plan, the landowner or
developer shall identify the name, address and telephone number of the
holder of legal title to the land involved, the nature of the landowner's
interest in the land (whether holder of legal or equitable title or
otherwise), and the name, address and telephone number of the agent,
if any. Such information shall be provided in writing.
C. The Township may submit the necessary copies of the sketch plan to the
Delaware County Planning Department, which may provide an advisory
recommendation to the Township Planning Commission.
D. The Planning Commission shall review the sketch plan, and the Project
Manager shall indicate any and all review comments pertaining to the
plan to the landowner or developer by written correspondence per the
standards of the Township Planning Commission.
E. The Planning Commission's review shall take into consideration the
requirements of this chapter, Chapter 210, Zoning, and the
Comprehensive Plan87 and shall pay particular attention to the
87.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-11 CONCORD CODE § 160-11
155:316
§ 160-12. Preliminary plan.
The preliminary subdivision and/or land development plan shall be prepared
in accordance with this chapter, including this article and Articles V and VII.
When a preliminary plan is filed, the following shall apply:
following: the arrangement, location and width of streets and their
relation to the topography of the site; the arrangement, size and
location of lots and proposed structures, if any; drainage; sewage
disposal and water supply; the relation of the subdivision and/or land
development to the natural features of the site; the potential further
development of adjoining lands which may not yet be subdivided; the
compatibility of the sketch plan with the Comprehensive Plan;88 and
the requirements set forth in Article IV pertaining to the sketch plan
submission.
F. Neither the Planning Commission, the Board of Supervisors nor the
applicant shall be bound by the sketch plan.
A. The applicant shall complete and sign the application form provided by
the Township and shall accompany such application form with the type
and number of plans, preliminary plan checklist, documents and other
submissions required and the appropriate filing fee(s). The applicant
must identify the name, address and telephone number of the record
holder of legal title to the land involved (if different from the applicant),
the nature of the applicant's interest in the land (whether holder of
legal or equitable title or otherwise) and the name, address and
telephone number of the agent, if any. No application shall be deemed
filed unless all requirements have been met and all fees therefor paid in
full.
B. Thirteen black-line or blue-line prints of the plans forming the
preliminary plan and 12 neatly bound, clear and legible copies of all
required documents and other submissions shall be submitted to the
Township Manager to be distributed along with copies of the
application form as follows: [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
(1) One copy of the application form and one copy of the plan(s) and
profiles shall be retained by the Township Manager for the
Township files.
(2) One copy of the plan shall be forwarded to the Township Road
Foreman for review and comment.
(3) One copy of the application form and one copy of the plan(s),
documents and other submissions shall be forwarded to the
Township Engineer for review and comment.
88.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-12
155:317
(4) Five copies of the plan(s), documents and other submissions shall
be forwarded to the Board of Supervisors.
(5) Three copies of the plan(s) and one copy of documents and other
submissions and one copy of the application form shall be used for
review purposes by the Planning Commission.
(6) One copy of the plan shall be forwarded to the Township Fire
Marshal.
(7) One copy of the plan(s), documents and other submissions and one
copy of the application form shall be forwarded to the Delaware
County Planning Department for review and comment.
(8) One copy of the plan(s), documents and other submissions shall be
forwarded to the Township Code Enforcement Officers and one
copy to the Building Inspector for review and comment.
(9) Two copies of the plan and one copy of documents and submissions
shall be available for referral to other planning agencies or
consultants.
C. Where any one or combination of the following items are involved,
additional sets of plans shall be required and submitted for the
Township Engineer and to the Township:
(1) Pumping stations.
(2) Sewage treatment plants.
(3) Retaining walls.
(4) Public water supply systems or community water supply systems.
(5) Traffic control systems.
D. The preliminary plan and application for subdivision and/or land
development shall be submitted at least eight days prior to the regular
monthly public meeting of the Board of Supervisors. If deemed a
complete application, the preliminary plan shall be formally accepted
by the Board of Supervisors, and the ninety-day review period shall
commence at the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission
meeting following the Board of Supervisors meeting where formal
acceptance was granted.
E. The Township Engineer shall submit review comments on said plan by
letter or memorandum to the Planning Commission with copies to the
Township Manager and the Board of Supervisors.
F. The applicant shall notify the abutting owners that a preliminary plan
proposed for the subject tract has been filed. Such notification shall
occur at least 10 days prior to the meeting at which time the
preliminary plan is to be presented to and discussed by the Planning
§ 160-12 CONCORD CODE § 160-12
155:318
Commission. Evidence of such notification in the form of a certified mail
receipt shall be presented to the Planning Commission at said meeting.
G. The Township shall request the County Planning Department to review
the preliminary plan and submit an advisory recommendation report to
the Township Planning Commission.
H. The Township Planning Commission may perform the following:
(1) Review all applicable reports from the County Planning
Department, Township Engineer, Township Planning Consultant,
appropriate Water and/or Sewer Authority, Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, Soil Conservation District and other
reviewing agencies;
(2) Discuss the submission with the applicant; and
(3) Recommend revisions so that the plan will conform to Township
ordinances;
I. The Township Planning Commission shall perform the following:
(1) Determine whether the preliminary plan meets the requirements of
this chapter, Chapter 210, Zoning, and the Comprehensive Plan of
the Township;89 and
(2) Recommend approval, approval with conditions or disapproval of
the preliminary plan and communicate such by letter to the Board
of Supervisors and the applicant. In the case of a recommended
disapproval, the Planning Commission shall indicate the specific
deficiencies and the ordinance provisions which have not been met.
J. The Township Planning Commission may not be prepared to review the
application at its scheduled public meeting first following the date of
filing, in which case the discussion of the application may be scheduled
for a subsequent meeting.
K. During the course of the Planning Commission's review of the
preliminary plan and prior to any action by the Board of Supervisors
within the required ninety-day period, the preliminary plan may be
revised by the applicant as requested by the Township. The submittal of
a revised plan not precipitated by Township comment which involves
substantive change requiring an additional review shall restart the
required ninety-day period. Sixteen copies of any revised preliminary
plan and accompanying data shall be submitted which shall note the
dates of any and all revisions and a summary of the nature thereof. The
revised preliminary plan shall be submitted to the Township Manager at
least eight days prior to the regular monthly public meeting of the
Board of Supervisors. The revised preliminary plan shall be distributed
by the Township Manager on the basis as set forth in § 160-12B.
89.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-12
155:319
L. After a report on the preliminary plan has been submitted to the Board
of Supervisors by the Planning Commission, the Board shall place such
preliminary plan on its agenda for review and action.
M. Before acting on any preliminary plan, the Board of Supervisors or the
Planning Commission may hold a public hearing thereon after public
notice.
N. The Board of Supervisors shall, within the review period:
(1) Review the recommendation of the Township Planning Commission
and other reviewing agencies;
(2) Determine whether the preliminary plan meets the objectives and
requirements of this chapter, other ordinances of Concord
Township and other applicable regulations.
(3) Approve or disapprove the preliminary plan.
(4) The Board may make its decision to grant approval of a preliminary
plan subject to conditions, changes or additions.
(5) Whenever the Board of Supervisors approves a preliminary plan
subject to conditions, the applicant shall indicate, in writing,
whether such conditions are accepted or rejected within 15 days of
notification of the decision by the Board. Any approval by the Board
of Supervisors subject to conditions which is not accepted or
rejected by the applicant within the fifteen-day period shall be
rescinded automatically.
(6) In the case where the Planning Commission has concluded that the
preliminary plan meets all requirements of a final plan, then upon
the recommendation of the Planning Commission the Board of
Supervisors may consider the preliminary plan as a final plan and
may act thereupon accordingly.
O. Approval of the preliminary plan shall constitute approval of the
subdivision and/or land development as to the character and intensity
but shall not constitute approval of the detail required of the final plan
nor authorize the sale of lots or construction of buildings.
P. If the preliminary plan is disapproved, the applicant, if he desires to
proceed, shall file a revised preliminary plan following the same
submission and review procedures required for the previous
preliminary plan submission.
Q. The Board of Supervisors shall render a decision on every preliminary
plan and communicate it to the applicant not later than 90 days
following the date of the regular monthly public meeting of the
Planning Commission next following the date of the meeting of the
Board of Supervisors where formal acceptance of the complete
application was granted, provided that should the Planning Commission
meeting occur more than 30 days following the filing of such
§ 160-12 CONCORD CODE § 160-12
155:320
§ 160-13. Final plan.
The procedure for approval of final subdivision and/or land development
plans shall be identical to the procedure as outlined for preliminary plans in
§ 160-12, except that:
application, said ninety-day period shall be measured from the 30th day
following the day the complete application has been filed.
R. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to the applicant at
the address shown on the application form not later than 15 days
following the decision or at the end of the above-mentioned ninety-day
period, whichever shall occur first.
S. In the event that the preliminary plan is not approved in terms as filed,
the decision shall specify the defects found in the preliminary plan for
subdivision and/or land development and describe the requirements
which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite the provisions of
the statute or ordinance relied upon.
T. If the preliminary plan is approved by the Board of Supervisors, the
applicant may proceed to submit a final plan for approval as set forth in
§ 160-13 and Article VI.
U. A preliminary minor subdivision and/or land development plan, upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission, may be permitted to
proceed to a final minor plan submission in accordance with the
comments of the Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors.
A. Within one year after the date of approval of the preliminary plan, the
applicant shall file a final plan and all supplementary information, data
and documents, together with a completed and signed application form
provided by the Township and the appropriate filing fees, at least eight
days prior to the regularly monthly public meeting of the Board of
Supervisors. No such application shall be deemed filed unless all
requirements have been met and all fees therefor paid in full.
B. Unless an extension of time has been granted by the Board of
Supervisors upon written request of the applicant, a final plan filed
after the one-year period shall be considered a new preliminary plan
which shall be required to comply with all preliminary plan application
procedures of this chapter and shall be subject to a preliminary plan
application fee.
C. The Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of the final plan in
sections, each covering approximately 1/3 of the entire area proposed
for subdivision and/or land development or 1/3 of the number of
buildings or other structures proposed for land development as shown
on the approved preliminary plan, provided that the first final plan
section shall be submitted within the aforementioned one-year period
§ 160-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-13
155:321
and the last final plan section shall be submitted within three years
after the date of preliminary plan approval.
D. The final plan shall conform in all respects to the preliminary plan.
E. Thirteen copies of the plans, including the final plan checklist,
documents and other submissions comprising the final plan shall be
filed with the Township Manager, who shall distribute copies of the final
plan along with copies of the application form to those who also
received the preliminary plan as set forth in § 160-12B, provided that
the required fees and financial security associated with the completion
guaranty have been filed therewith.
F. The applicant shall prepare a planning module for land development, as
required by Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.90
G. The applicant shall submit a final plan that includes all the
requirements set forth in Article VI.
H. As per § 160-9J, all final plan submissions must include the following
plans: [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
(1) Title plan (required).
(2) Conservation plan (required).
(3) Improvements construction plan (required).
(4) Profile(s) plan (required).
(5) Construction detail plan (required).
I. Highway occupancy permit.
(1) No plan which will require access onto a road under the jurisdiction
of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) shall
be finally approved unless the plan contains a notice that a highway
occupancy permit is required and has received preliminary
approval from PennDOT pursuant to Section 420 of Act 428, P.L.
1242, No. 428, 36 P.S. § 670-420, as amended, known as the "State
Highway Law," before access to a state road is permitted. The
Department of Transportation shall, within 60 days of the date of
receipt of an application for a highway occupancy permit:
(a) Approve the permit, which shall be valid thereafter unless,
prior to commencement of construction thereunder, the
geographic, physical or other conditions under which the
permit is approved change, requiring modification or denial of
the permit, in which event the Department shall give notice
thereof in accordance with regulations;
(b) Deny the permit;
90.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 160-13 CONCORD CODE § 160-13
155:322
(c) Return the application for additional information or correction
to conform with Department regulations; or
(d) Determine that no permit is required, in which case, the
Department shall notify the Township and the applicant, in
writing.
(2) If the Department shall fail to take any action within the sixty-day
period, the permit will be deemed to be issued. The plan shall be
marked to indicate that access to the state road shall be only as
authorized by a highway occupancy permit. The Department shall
not be liable in damages for any injury to persons or property
arising out of the issuance or denial of a permit or for failure to
regulate any access. Furthermore, the Township shall not be held
liable for damages to persons or property arising out of the
issuance or denial of a permit by the Department.
J. The Board of Supervisors shall, within the review period:
(1) Review the recommendations of the Township Planning
Commission and other reviewing agencies.
(2) Determine whether the final plan meets the requirements of this
chapter, other ordinances of the Township and other applicable
regulations.
(3) Review the recommendations of the Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP), if any, and determine whether the plan is in
conformance with the Township's Official Sewage Facilities Plan.
(4) Approve or disapprove the final plan. Approval of the final plan may
include certain conditions of approval. Whenever the final plan is
approved subject to conditions, the applicant shall indicate, in
writing, whether such conditions are accepted or rejected within
15 days of notification of the decision by the Board. Any approval by
the Board of Supervisors subject to conditions which is not
accepted or rejected by the applicant within the fifteen-day period
shall be rescinded automatically.
K. The decision of the Board of Supervisors shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to the applicant at
the address shown on the application form not later than 15 days
following the decision or at the end of the above mentioned ninety-day
period, whichever shall occur first.
L. In the event that the final plan is not approved in terms as filed, the
decision shall specify the defects found in the final plan and describe
the requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
to the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
§ 160-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-13
155:323
§ 160-14. Subdivision and land development agreement.
Every applicant who seeks to obtain final plan approval, unless exempted as
a minor plan, shall execute an agreement satisfactory to the Township (see
the Appendixes) before the final plan is signed by the Board of Supervisors
M. The applicant, if he desires to proceed, shall file a revised final plan
with the Township Manager, following the same submission and review
procedures required for the initial final plan submission.
N. If the final plan is approved:
(1) Approval shall not be final until entry into a contract and the
production of completion and maintenance guaranties as set forth
in Article X.
(2) Eight exact copies of the approved final plan shall be signed in
accordance with § 160-15. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
O. Approval of the final plan shall not authorize the sale or transfer of lots
or the development of land until construction is permitted to commence
in accordance with § 160-16. Nor shall such approval constitute a
waiver or release or assumption by the Township of any requirements of
any Township ordinances, codes, regulations, plans or maps.
P. Every final plan approval shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) The applicant shall execute a subdivision and land development
agreement, in accordance with § 160-14, unless exempted as a
minor plan submission.
(2) The applicant shall execute a completion guaranty, in accordance
with Article X, where deemed applicable by the Board of
Supervisors.
(3) The applicant shall tender a deed of dedication to the Township, if
requested by the Board of Supervisors, for public improvements,
easements and other appurtenances and improvements thereto
after such improvements are completed and such completion is
certified as being satisfactory by the Township Engineer.
(4) The filing with the Township of copies of all required permits,
approvals, agreements, clearances and the like from all required
governmental agencies (such as the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and/or the Township); authorities and companies which
may provide water supply or sewage disposal facilities; and
pipeline easement holders or others.
(5) The applicant shall pay any fees which may be outstanding in
accordance with Article XII.
(6) Proof of recording the final plan in accordance with § 160-15.
§ 160-13 CONCORD CODE § 160-14
155:324
and recorded in accordance with § 160-15, respectively. The agreement
shall include but need not be limited to the following:
A. That the applicant agrees that he will accurately lay out and properly
construct all improvements and follow all practices according to the
plans, profiles, notes and other forms of documentation filed as part of
the final plan as approved or where any or all of these improvements or
practices are required as conditions of approval and that the applicant
will file an as-built plan in accordance with § 160-17 to confirm the
same.
B. That the applicant shall complete the improvements and engage in the
practices as referenced in § 160-14A within the time or times specified
by the Board of Supervisors and in accordance with § 160-16.
C. That the applicant guarantees completion and maintenance of all
improvements by means of acceptable forms of financial security to the
Township as set forth in Article X.
D. That the applicant agrees to tender a deed of dedication to the
Township if requested by the Board of Supervisors for public
improvements, easements and other appurtenances and improvements
thereto, except that the Township shall not accept any offer of
dedication of the same by ordinance or resolution until their completion
is certified as being satisfactory by the Township Engineer and an asbuilt
plan is submitted and approved by the Township.
E. That the applicant shall pay the Township all of its costs in connection
with snow removal from the streets in the subdivision or land
development that are to be offered for dedication until such time as
such dedication is duly accepted by the Board of Supervisors.
F. That the applicant shall comply fully with all of the terms and conditions
of this chapter as the same relate to the subdivision or land
development and all other Township ordinances, codes, regulations,
plans and maps.
G. That the applicant shall pay to the Township plan review fees.
Additionally, the applicant shall establish a three-party agreement and
account for the creation, maintenance and/or inspection of
improvements, Sewer Authority security and the park and recreation
facilities required by this chapter. In lieu of the park and recreation
facilities, the applicant shall pay to the Township an amount calculated
in accordance with § 160-52 of this chapter. [Amended 1-5-1998 by
Ord. No. 221]
H. That the applicant shall obtain all necessary permits, as applicable,
including a land disturbance permit, a building permit and those from
the DEP, PennDOT and the Zoning Hearing Board.
I. That the applicant, in the event that any proposed street is not intended
to be offered for dedication or is not accepted by the Board of
§ 160-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-14
155:325
§ 160-15. Recording of final plan.
Supervisors, accept stipulations which shall be noted on the final plan,
such as the following:
(1) That the Township shall not be responsible for repairing or
otherwise maintaining any undedicated streets.
(2) That the method of assessing repair and maintenance costs of
undedicated streets shall be established in recorded deed
restrictions so as to be binding on all successors, assigns or
grantees.
(3) That if dedication be sought at any time, the street shall conform in
its entirety to Township design standards for the same in all
respects or that the owners of the lots shown on the approved final
plan, at their own expense, restore the street to conform with or
otherwise render the street in conformance with such standards.
J. The subdivision and land development agreement shall be structured
by the Township Solicitor to include provisions relating to the above, as
well as other matters pertaining to certificates of insurance, water and
sewer availability, emergency access, a three-party escrow agreement
and the like.
A. Within 90 days after the approval of the final plan by the Board of
Supervisors and after the applicant executes the subdivision and land
development agreement and the completion and maintenance
guaranties, as set forth in Article X, the applicant shall thereupon cause
one copy of the final plan to be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds in and for the County of Delaware, Pennsylvania, and shall notify
the Board of Supervisors, in writing, certified mail return receipt
requested, of the date of such recording and the plan book and page in
which the same has been recorded. Should the plan not be recorded
within such period, the action of the Board of Supervisors in approving
the final plan shall be considered automatically rescinded. [Amended
1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
B. The final plan to be recorded shall be an exact counterpart of the
approved final plan and shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds before
proceeding with the sale of lots or the construction of buildings or other
structures or improvements (while the Township will accept a maximum
sheet size of 30 inches by 42 inches, please note that the Recorder of
Deeds of Delaware County will not accept prints larger than 24 inches
by 36 inches for recording purposes).
(1) Eight prints of the completed and signed record plan shall be
provided and distributed in the following manner:
§ 160-14 CONCORD CODE § 160-15
155:326
Recipient Number of Prints
Applicant 1
Recording 1
Township files 2
Delaware County Planning
Department
1
Township Engineer 1
Attached to escrow agreement 2
(2) The following information shall appear on the record plan, in
addition to the information required in § 160-27 for the final plan:
(a) The impressed seal of the surveyor who prepared the plan.
(b) The impressed corporation seal, if the applicant is a
corporation.
(c) The pressed seal of a notary public or other qualified officer
acknowledging owner's statement of intent.
(d) A statement to the effect that the applicant is the owner of the
land proposed to be subdivided and that the subdivision shown
on the final plan is made with his or their free consent and that
it is desired to record the same.
(e) The following signatures shall be placed directly on the plan in
black ink:
[1] The signature of the owner or owners of the land. If the
owner of the land is a corporation, the signatures of the
president and secretary of the corporation shall appear.
[2] The signature of the notary public or other qualified
officer, acknowledging the owner's statement of intent.
[3] The signatures of the licensed professional engineer or
surveyor who prepared the plan(s).
[4] The signature of the Township Engineer.
[5] The signature of the Chairman or member of the Board of
Supervisors.
[6] The signature of the Township Manager.
[7] The signatures of the Chairman and one member of the
Township Planning Commission.
(f) The Delaware County Planning Department stamp certifying
that it reviewed the final plan.
(g) The Concord Township seal certifying approval.
§ 160-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-15
155:327
§ 160-16. Commencement and completion of construction and
improvements.
C. Effect of recording.
(1) After a subdivision or land development has been duly recorded,
the streets, parks and other public improvements shown thereon
shall be considered to be a part of the Official Map of the Township.
(2) Streets, parks and other public improvements shown on a
subdivision and/or land development plan to be recorded may be
offered for dedication to the Township by formal deed of dedication,
and intent thereof shall be noted on the plan, or the owner may
note on the plan that such improvements have not been offered for
dedication to the Township.
(3) Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision
and/or land development plan that is recorded, as provided herein,
shall be deemed to be a private street, park or improvement until
such time as the same has been offered for dedication to the
Township and accepted, by resolution, and recorded in the Office of
the Clerk of the Court of Delaware County or until it has been
condemned for use as a public street, park or improvement.
D. Amendments to approved final plans. Proposed amendments to
approved final plans shall be acted on in the same manner as the
original approved plan.
A. No construction shall be commenced until the Township has issued
permits, when applicable, such as a grading, soil erosion and
sedimentation control permit and/or a building permit.
B. No construction shall be commenced until the applicant files with the
Township Manager all permits, approvals, clearances and the like from
government agencies (such as those from the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and/or the Township); authorities and companies which may
provide water supply or sewage disposal facilities; and pipeline
easement holders or others.
C. The applicant shall commence construction of improvements within one
year from the approval date of the final plan, unless approved otherwise
by the Board of Supervisors.
D. In the case where development is projected over a number of years,
each section, except for the last section, shall contain a minimum of
25% of the total number of lots, dwelling units or buildings as depicted
in the final plan, unless a lesser percentage is approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
E. A copy of the recorded plan shall be available at the construction site.
§ 160-15 CONCORD CODE § 160-17
155:328
§ 160-17. As-built plan.
A. After final plan approval and upon completion of all required
improvements, the applicant shall submit an as-built plan, prepared by
an engineer or surveyor, showing the location, dimension and elevation
of all improvements in accordance with § 160-31 and § 160-73B.
B. Said plan shall indicate that the resultant construction grading,
drainage and sedimentation and soil erosion control practices are in
conformance with the previously approved drawings and specifications.
Said plan shall note any and all deviations from the previously approved
drawings and specifications.
C. Two copies of the as-built plan shall be filed with the Township, which
shall distribute one copy to the Board of Supervisors and one to the
Township Engineer.
D. The as-built plan shall be submitted before the final release of escrow
funds for any major subdivision and/or land development.
§ 160-17 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-17
155:329

ARTICLE IV
Sketch Plan
§ 160-18. Purpose.
The purpose of the sketch plan is to provide an opportunity for the applicant
to consult early with the Township before preparing a preliminary plan.
During the sketch plan review process, matters pertaining to access,
circulation, lot layout, building layout and conceptual drainage design are
analyzed relative to existing natural and man-made conditions, the
Comprehensive Plan,91 Chapter 210, Zoning, and proposals for water supply
and sewage disposal.
§ 160-19. General requirements.
§ 160-20. Sketch plan requirements.92
A. Subdivision and/or land development plans may be prepared by an
architect, landscape architect, engineer, surveyor, land planner or other
design professional. When a sketch plan is prepared by someone other
than the above-mentioned professional, a property owner can submit a
to-scale drawing, provided that the plan is in conformance with
§ 160-20.
B. The applicant may identify the name, address and telephone number of
the holder of legal title of the land involved and the nature of the
landowner's interest, whether holder of legal title, equitable title or
other.
C. All sketch plans should be in conformance with Article III, § 160-11,
regarding sketch plan procedure.
D. All sketch plans should meet the plan requirements of § 160-20.
E. Upon submission of a sketch plan, the landowner or developer shall and
does authorize the Township and its representatives to enter the site for
the purpose of site evaluation.
A. A sketch plan at a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet
should be submitted. It should depict and note the following:
(1) The name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) The name and address of the owner of record and the applicant.
(3) The name and address of the person who prepared the plan.
91.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
92.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 227, adopted 12-1-1998, the following provisions have
been changed to reflect additional provisions pertaining to historic preservation. See Art.
XIXA Historic Preservation, of Ch. 210, Zoning.
§ 160-18 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-20
155:331
(4) Zoning requirements and the degree to which the plan conforms to
such requirements, including:
(a) Applicable districts, including overlay districts.
(5) Location map showing the relation of the site to adjoining
properties and streets within 1,000 feet.
(6) North arrow and date.
(7) Written and graphic scale.
(8) Total acreage of the site, together with the approximate gross and
net lot area for each proposed lot.
(9) Tract boundaries.
(10) Names of the abutting owners, adjoining lot lines and structures on
abutting lots within 100 feet of the tract.
(11) Streets on or adjacent to the site with existing cartways and
existing and proposed rights-of-way.
(12) Existing man-made features such as buildings and their uses,
driveways, sewer lines, storm drains, culverts, bridges, utility
easements, water lines and other significant man-made features
within the site. Any structure which is contained within the
Delaware County Historic Resources Study of 1983 for Concord
Township shall be so identified on the plan.
(13) The proposed general street and lot layout, with building setback
lines and buildable areas as defined in Article II.
(14) Types and number of buildings proposed.
(15) Proposed open space and/or recreation areas, including notes on
the plan describing the proposed use, activity area and
improvement.
(16) Proposed methods of water supply and sewage disposal.
(17) A note pertaining to the uses proposed for the tract in the
Comprehensive Plan.93
(18) Natural Features Map. The following information shall be clearly
and legibly depicted on a Natural Features Map, which shall be a
separate sheet of the sketch plan submission:
(a) Contour lines measured at vertical intervals of not less than 10
feet, including the date and source of the contours.
Topographic data derived from the United States Geological
93.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-20 CONCORD CODE § 160-20
155:332
Survey Quadrangle Maps may be used for the sketch plan
submission.
(b) Steep and very steep slopes as specified in § 160-49.
(c) Floodway and floodway fringe areas as related to the
Floodplain Conservation District Map.
(d) Wetlands derived from sources such as the National Wetland
Inventory Maps. Sources for any wetlands plotted shall be
indicated.
(e) Conservation areas as depicted in the Comprehensive Plan.94
(f) Other significant natural features within the lot, including
watercourses, ponds, lakes, soils, wetlands and tree masses
and any proposed changes in these features; and the
approximate location of such features within 200 feet of the lot
(this includes properties across streets).
(19) In the case of a land development, the following additional
requirements shall apply:
(a) Proposed location of all buildings and major structures.
(b) Proposed location of parking areas and parking lots.
(20) A copy of the sketch plan checklist for a major subdivision and/or
land development, completed and signed by the engineer or other
design professional who prepared the plan.
(21) A note indicating ownership of the subject tract, or proof that the
applicant is an authorized agent of the owner.
94.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-20 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-20
155:333

ARTICLE V
Preliminary Plan
§ 160-21. Purpose.
§ 160-22. General requirements.
§ 160-23. Preliminary plan requirements.95
A. The purpose of the preliminary plan is to obtain formal approval before
proceeding with the preparation of detailed final plans.
B. The preliminary plan submitted shall reflect any changes which may
have been recommended during a sketch plan review. All information
and procedures relating to the preliminary plan shall comply with this
chapter, except where variations therefrom may be specifically
recommended by the Township Planning Commission and approved by
the Board of Supervisors pursuant to the requirements of § 160-3 and
§ 160-81.
A. The preliminary subdivision and/or land development plan and all plans
forming a part thereof required by this chapter shall be submitted on
clear and legible black-line or blue-line paper prints (while the
Township will accept a maximum sheet size of 30 inches by 42 inches,
please note that the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County will not
accept prints larger than 24 inches by 36 inches for recording
purposes). The preliminary plan shall reflect the following:
(1) Conformance with § 160-12 regarding preliminary plan procedure.
(2) All preliminary plans shall meet the requirements of this section
and § 160-23.
B. Upon submission of a preliminary plan, the landowner or developer
shall authorize the Township and its representatives to enter the site for
the purpose of site evaluation.
C. The preliminary plan checklist, which appears in the Appendixes to this
chapter, shall be completed and submitted as part of the preliminary
plan application.
A. A preliminary plan shall reflect the following drafting standards:
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of no less than one inch equals
50 feet, unless the average size of the proposed lots of the
subdivision is in excess of five acres, in which case, a scale of not
more than one inch equals 100 feet may be used.
95.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 227, adopted 12-1-1998, the following provisions have
been changed to reflect additional provisions pertaining to historic preservation. See Art.
XIXA Historic Preservation, of Ch. 210, Zoning.
§ 160-21 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-23
155:335
(2) Each sheet shall be numbered and shall show its relationship to the
total number of sheets.
B. The preliminary plan shall include the following:
(1) A location map which highlights the location of the tract within the
Township and depicts properties of abutting owners, adjoining and
nearby roads, zoning district boundaries and municipal boundaries
within 1,000 feet. The location map shall be drawn at the scale of
one inch equals 600 feet. In the case of development of a section of
the entire tract, the location map shall show the relationship of the
section to the entire tract.
(2) Proposed subdivision or land development name or identifying title.
(3) North arrow, date and written and graphic scales.
(4) Name, complete mailing address and telephone number of the
applicant, landowner, developer and the authorized agent, if any.
(5) Name, complete mailing address, signature and seal of the
engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, land planner or architect
responsible for having prepared the plans forming a part of the
preliminary plan and any other documents or submissions forming
a part of the preliminary plan.
(6) Tract boundaries, with dimensions, bearings and distances and the
source of boundary information such as deed, survey or existing
recorded plans.
(7) When the preliminary plan includes only a portion of a landowner
or developer's entire tract or such portion is contiguous to another
tract of the landowner or developer, the dimensions, metes and
bounds of the balance of such entire tract or other tract shall also
be shown.
(8) Names of abutting owners and tax parcel numbers.
(9) Zoning on and adjacent to the tract, including notes regarding the
relevant area and bulk regulations for each zoning district that
pertains to the tract, with an indication of conformance to the
same, such as the percent of any lot area covered by impervious
surfaces and the percent of any lot covered by buildings.
(10) If the Floodplain Conservation District overlays the tract, floodway
areas and floodway fringe areas shall be accurately and
conspicuously delineated, depicted and noted as described in
Article XX of Chapter 210, Zoning, and shown on the Floodplain
Conservation District Map. Such delineation and notation shall
include graphic symbolism to distinguish the floodway area and the
floodway fringe area.
§ 160-23 CONCORD CODE § 160-23
155:336
(11) The use(s) proposed in the Concord Township Comprehensive Plan
which pertain to the tract.96
(12) Existing contours at vertical intervals of two feet based on contour
information derived from an actual topographic survey for the
property, due evidence of which may be required by the Planning
Commission, including the date and source of the contours. Slopes
shall be accurately and conspicuously directed as follows:
(a) Very steep slopes (25% or greater) and steep slopes (15% to
25%) shall be shown for all portions of the tract on the basis of
a two-foot contour interval.
(b) The plan shall also include a legend which clearly
differentiates between such steep and very steep slopes
specified in § 160-49.
(13) Datum to which contour elevations refer and reference to known,
established bench marks and elevations.
(14) All existing surface water resources, such as watercourses,
wetlands, ponds and springs, and other natural drainage features.
(15) Existing tree masses, hedgerows and freestanding trees of 12
inches in caliper or greater, indicating which are to be removed and
which are to remain. The edge of the woodland to remain shall be
shown as a scalloped line. In addition, the types of vegetation
associations which exist on the tract shall be noted in terms of their
species, type and sizes.
(16) Soil types as identified in the Soil Survey of Chester and Delaware
Counties, including a table listing the soil characteristics
pertaining to slope, depth to seasonal high-water table and depth to
bedrock, flood hazard potential and limitations for septic filter field.
(17) Man-made features.
(a) Location of existing man-made features such as buildings and
their uses, driveways, wells, sewer lines, septic tanks and other
on-lot sewage disposal systems, storm drains, culverts,
bridges, utility easements, utility poles, waterlines and mains,
fire hydrants and other significant man-made features within
the lot and the approximate location of such features within
100 feet of the lot (this includes properties across streets).
(b) The applicant is urged to use existing aerial photography
available from the Delaware County Planning Department,
existing community facilities and utilities data from the
Comprehensive Plan;97 data from the United States Geological
Survey Quadrangle Maps; and other available information.
96.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-23 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-23
155:337
(18) All existing streets, on or adjacent to the tract, including the name,
right-of-way width and cartway width. Show names and state route
numbers and Township street names and numbers (refer to
Appendix).
(19) The functional classification of the street(s) or highway(s) adjoining
the tract as defined on Figure 4 of the Comprehensive Plan (refer to
the Appendixes).
(20) All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way, and
dimensions, bearings and distances for same, and the purpose for
which such easements or rights-of-way have been established.
(21) Total acreage of the tract and the gross and net acreage of
individual lots proposed therein; and the number of lots, dwelling
units, buildings, other structures and all uses proposed.
(22) Proposed lot lines with dimensions, lot numbers in consecutive
numerical order, proposed minimum setback areas and the
proposed buildable area (using a dashed line to reflect the
minimum yard and setback requirements). Where a buildable area
is shown on a plan as extending into a Floodplain Conservation
District, or any other area which may involve a conditional use or
special exception, those portions of the buildable area extending
into any such areas shall be delineated, depicted and otherwise
noted on all plans in an accurate and conspicuous manner to
disclose the specific uses which may occur in such areas.
(23) Proposed location and method of water supply and sanitary sewage
disposal on each lot.
(24) An identification of the historic resources associated with the lot
such as areas, structures and/or routes and trails which are
significant. Areas, structures and/or routes and trails included on
the National Register of Historic Places, the Pennsylvania
Inventory of Historic Places and the Historic American Building
Survey and any which may be identified in the Comprehensive Plan
shall be identified.98
(25) In the case of a land development, the following additional
requirements shall apply:
(a) Location, alignment and width of all proposed streets,
driveways, rights-of-way and easements, the identification of
street names (as provided in § 160-39) and the purpose for
which private rights-of-way or other easements are proposed.
97.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
98.Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-23 CONCORD CODE § 160-23
155:338
(b) Building locations and parking areas when applicable,
preliminary provisions for traffic control, loading areas and
docks, lighting, signage, curbing and other proposed site
structures.
(c) A preliminary landscaping plan depicting proposed street
trees, buffer area plantings and other plantings as required, in
accordance with the landscaping design standards of Article
VIII.
(d) A preliminary lighting plan depicting proposed light standards,
locations, height, cut-off angle and illumination value in
accordance with § 210-200C.
(e) A schematic diagram of the proposed method for stormwater
management.
(f) Proposed method of water supply and sanitary sewage disposal
for each lot and a schematic layout of water lines, sewer lines
and capped sewers when applicable.
(g) A plan depicting recreational and open space areas with
acreages.
(h) The location and description of all off-site improvements.
C. The preliminary plan shall also be accompanied by the following:
(1) A copy of the deed for the subject tract.
(2) A statement on the plan of the types of buildings, other structures
and/or dwelling units proposed to be constructed, indicating
whether the same will be of uniform construction or different in
design, and whether same will be custom or production styled. The
statement is to be accompanied by an elevation drawing of the
proposed buildings or dwelling units.
(3) A preliminary phasing schedule, if applicable, for the proposed
sequence of the subdivision and/or land development. The phasing
schedule shall indicate the order in which construction activities
will occur. Phases shall be shown on the stormwater management
plan required by § 148-16 of Chapter 148, Stormwater
Management (see Appendix F).
(4) A planning module for land development as required by Act 537 of
1967, known as the "Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act."99
(5) A written report indicating the feasibility for public water supply
and sanitary sewage disposal. Whenever on-lot systems are
proposed, the feasibility report shall reflect the following:
99.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 160-23 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-23
155:339
(a) With regard to water supply, there shall be an objective
description of the ability of achieving a reliable, safe and
adequate water supply for an individual or community well,
whenever such well is proposed, within the capacity of
available resources. The description shall reference geologic
and hydrogeologic data relative to groundwater conditions and
potential yields. In addition to such information regarding
water supply, the description shall indicate the demand for
water from the proposed subdivision and/or land development
and its related uses and users.
(b) With regard to sanitary sewage disposal, there shall be an
objective description of the ability of achieving a successful
system for the disposal of sewage. The description shall
reference soils data relative to limitations for septic tank, filter
fields or other systems and shall indicate various indices of
suitability for such a system, such as permeability and depth to
seasonal high-water table. In addition, percolation test results
shall be discussed and exhibited.
(6) When connection to public water and/or public sewer facilities is
proposed, assurance of the availability of such service. This
assurance shall be in the form of a letter signed by an officer of the
company or authority concerned, indicating their ability and
willingness to make such service available within the phasing
schedule cited under § 160-23C(3).
(7) A preliminary stormwater management plan, in accordance with
§ 160-24.
(8) Whenever improvements are to be constructed or installed, a
preliminary improvements construction plan in accordance with
§ 160-25.
(9) A preliminary construction detail plan, including such items as
cross-sections, planting details, inlets, manholes and similar
improvements, as per § 160-9J.
(10) A draft of any proposed covenants or restrictions upon or against
the property, subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor.
(11) When the proposed tract involves a gas pipeline, petroleum
products transmission line, electric power transmission line or any
other pipeline or cable located thereon, a letter from the owner or
authorized agent of such a facility indicating minimum setback
distance requirements or a true and correct copy of the easement
or grant of record shall be filed.
(12) When the preliminary plan includes only a portion of the entire or
contiguous tract owned by the applicant, a conceptual plan which
shows the prospective future street system and other
§ 160-23 CONCORD CODE § 160-23
155:340
§ 160-24. Stormwater management plan.100
A stormwater management plan, which shall accompany and become a part
of the preliminary and final subdivision and/or land development plan, shall
be drawn at the same scale as that of other plans forming a part of the
preliminary plan and the final plan. The stormwater management plan shall
be filed as a separate sheet or drawing in addition to that submitted in
accordance with §§ 160-23 and 160-28. However, the information contained
in said plan shall be added so as to overlay with that delineated in
conformance with the requirements of §§ 160-23 and 160-28, whereby the
attributes of the proposal such as tract boundaries, existing and proposed
contours, existing natural features, proposed subdivision and land
development layout and the like are reflected. In addition to the foregoing
improvements of the remaining land shall be submitted when
required by the Board of Supervisors.
(13) A list of all permits, agreements, approvals, clearances and the like
required to be obtained in connection with the proposed
subdivision and/or land development and the federal, state, county
or other agencies, authorities and companies from which the same
are to be obtained.
(14) A draft of all other plans, documents and submissions which by
terms of any Township ordinance, code or regulation may be
required by the Board of Supervisors for final plan approval, shall
be required in preliminary form and shall accompany and form a
part of any preliminary plan when the application form for approval
thereof is filed.
(15) If the applicant is not the landowner, a notarized statement signed
by the landowner, indicating that the applicant has the approval of
the owner for submitting the subdivision and/or land development.
(16) Certification as to the accuracy of the plan and details of such plans
shall be prepared in accordance with Act 367 of 1945, known as the
"Engineer, Land Surveyor and Geologist Registration Law," P.L.
913, No. 367, 63 P.S. § 148 et seq., as amended.
(17) If the proposed lot(s) abuts on a street under the jurisdiction of the
state, a note shall be added to the preliminary plan to indicate that
a highway occupancy permit is required before a driveway or street
can access a state highway.
(18) Historic resource study if property is, or within 300 feet of an
historic resource, listed on Historic Resources Inventory (See
Article XIXA, Historic Preservation, of the Code of the Township of
Concord).
100. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 227, adopted 12-1-1998, the following provisions have
been changed to reflect additional provisions pertaining to historic preservation. See Art.
XIXA Historic Preservation, of Ch. 210, Zoning.
§ 160-23 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-24
155:341
and requirements of § 148-16 of Chapter 148 (see Appendix F), the
stormwater management plan shall also include all proposed buildings,
driveways, parking areas and lot layout.
§ 160-25. Improvements construction plan.101
Whenever improvements are proposed such as a new street or the
upgrading of an existing street, the improvements construction plan shall
accompany and become a part of the preliminary and final subdivision and/
or land development plans. Said plan shall be drawn at a ten-to-one ratio
of horizontal to vertical scale, whereby the horizontal scale shall be at least
50 feet to the inch and the vertical scale shall be five feet. However, the
horizontal scale may be 40 feet to the inch with a vertical scale of four feet
to the inch; or, 20 feet to the inch and two feet, respectively, when directed
by the Township Engineer. Said plan shall be prepared by an engineer and
shall show thereon or be accompanied by the following:
A. On all plans, profiles and other sheets which depict the information
required in this section, the following shall be provided:
(1) Proposed subdivision and/or land development name or identifying
title.
(2) North arrow, scale and date.
(3) Name of the landowner, developer and the authorized agent, if any.
(4) Name of the engineer responsible for having prepared the plan(s),
profile(s), cross section(s), documents and/or other submissions
forming the improvement construction plan.
B. The horizontal plan shall show details of the horizontal layout of streets,
including:
(1) Center line with bearings, distances, curve data and stations
corresponding to the profile.
(2) Right-of-way and curblines with radii at intersections.
(3) Tie-ins by bearings and distances to intersections of all public
streets, with the names and widths thereof.
(4) Location of all proposed monuments with references thereto.
(5) Property lines and ownership of abutting properties.
(6) Proposed lot lines, storm and sanitary sewers, water and other
utility lines and fire hydrants.
101. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 227, adopted 12-1-1998, the following provisions have
been changed to reflect additional provisions pertaining to historic preservation. See Art.
XIXA Historic Preservation, of Ch. 210, Zoning.
§ 160-24 CONCORD CODE § 160-25
155:342
(7) Location and size of all drainage structures, public utilities,
sidewalks, lighting standards, street name signs and other
improvements.
C. The profile shall be a vertical section of streets, with details of vertical
alignment, including:
(1) Profiles and elevations at fifty-foot stations along the center line of
the existing ground surface and along both right-of-way lines as
well as the profile of the nearest connecting streets for a distance
of 100 feet beyond the boundary of the subdivision and/or land
development.
(2) Profiles and percentage of grade along the proposed center line
and elevations at fifty-foot intervals.
(3) The length of vertical curves and elevations at twenty-five-foot
intervals.
(4) Profile of any storm or sanitary sewer location under any proposed
street, showing the length, size, grades, material, inverts and rim
elevations of manholes and outlets.
D. The cross section of streets prepared in accordance with the design
standards and requirements in Article VIII, including:
(1) Right-of-way width and location and width of paving within the
right-of-way.
(2) Type, thickness and crown of paving.
(3) Type and size of curb, with detail of curb.
(4) Grading of sidewalk areas.
(5) Location, width, type and thickness of sidewalk, if required.
§ 160-25 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-25
155:343

ARTICLE VI
Final Plan
§ 160-26. Purpose.
The purpose of the final plan is to require formal approval by the Board
of Supervisors before plans for all subdivisions and land developments are
recorded as required by § 160-15 of this chapter.
§ 160-27. General requirements.
§ 160-28. Final plan requirements.102
A. The final subdivision and/or land development plan and all plans
forming a part thereof required by this chapter shall be submitted on
clear and legible black-line or blue-line paper prints. If two or more
sheets are required, a key map shall be shown on each sheet. An overall
index of sheets shall be submitted. The plan scale and size shall be the
same as that described in § 160-22A. The final plan shall reflect the
following:
(1) Conformance with § 160-13 regarding final plan procedure.
(2) All final plans shall meet the requirements of this section and
§ 160-28.
B. The final plan checklist, which appears in the Appendixes to this
chapter, shall be completed and submitted as part of the final plan
application.
A. In addition to all the requirements set forth in Article V, the final plan
shall contain the following:
(1) All dimensions shall be shown and noted in feet and onehundredths
of a foot.
(2) Tract boundaries and individual lot boundaries with dimensions,
bearings and distances, closing with an error of not more than one
foot in 10,000 feet.
(3) Total gross acreage and net acreage of the tract and total net
acreage of the individual lots proposed therein to the hundredths of
a foot; and the number of lots, dwelling units, buildings and other
structures proposed.
(4) Lots numbered in a logical sequence.
102. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 227, adopted 12-1-1998, the following provisions have
been changed to reflect additional provisions pertaining to historic preservation. See Art.
XIXA Historic Preservation, of Ch. 210, Zoning.
§ 160-26 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-28
155:345
(5) Location of existing and proposed permanent reference
monuments and markers and a note indicating the materials and
size of the same.
(6) Pedestrian ways, including all sidewalks, walkways and pedestrian
rights-of-way and other improvements to be used for general public
use.
(7) A final landscaping plan indicating precise types, quantities and
sizes of proposed trees, shrubs and ground covers and other
landscaping elements, in accordance with the design standards in
Article VIII and the Appendixes.
(8) A final lighting plan indicating the precise location and height of
light standards, their cut-off angle and illumination value in
accordance with § 210-200C.
(9) Signature blocks used for signing the final plan in accordance with
§ 160-15.
(10) The location of percolation test pits, whenever on-site sewage
disposal is proposed, and the location of the proposed on-site
sewage systems.
(11) The location of test pits where stormwater is to be disposed and a
listing of absorption rates, whenever seepage pits are proposed.
(12) The location of the proposed well for on-site water supply.
(13) The following shall also be noted on the final plan:
(a) Certification of adequacy, by an engineer, of the proposed site
for the type of sewage disposal system which is proposed.
(b) The seal of the engineer responsible for having prepared the
plans forming a part of the final plan.
(c) A certification indicating the intent to make an offer of
dedication of the streets and other improvements.
(d) A certification indicating any area, street and other
improvement not to be offered for dedication or not to be
accepted.
(e) A certification indicating who is responsible for the
maintenance of the site improvements.
(f) Certification as to the accuracy of the plan and details of such
plans shall be prepared in accordance with Act 367 of 1945,
known as the "Engineer, Land Surveyor and Geologist
Registration Law," P.L. 913, No. 367, 63 P.S. § 148 et seq., as
amended.
§ 160-28 CONCORD CODE § 160-28
155:346
B. In addition to all materials required under § 160-23C to accompany the
preliminary plan, the following shall be submitted:
(1) A final phasing schedule, if applicable, for the proposed sequence
of the subdivision and/or land development. The phasing schedule
shall indicate the order in which construction activities will occur.
Phases shall be shown on the stormwater management plan
required by § 148-16 of Chapter 148, Stormwater Management
(see Appendix F).
(2) A final stormwater management plan reflecting, in final form, the
information required by §§ 160-24 and 160-29 of this chapter and
§ 148-16 of Chapter 148, Stormwater Management.
(3) Whenever improvements are to be constructed or installed, a final
improvements construction plan and a final profile(s) plan,
reflecting in final form the information required under § 160-25.
(4) Final documents for any proposed covenants or restrictions upon
the property subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor and
the final legal descriptions for all lots.
(5) An approved planning module for land development as required by
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537 of 1967.103
(6) An engineer's report describing percolation test results and the
ability to create a successful system for on-site sewage disposal
whenever such a system is proposed.
(7) An engineer's report evidencing the ability to create a successful
system for on-site water supply whenever such a system is
proposed.
(8) A bond, certified check or other security to guarantee the
completion and maintenance of improvements in accordance with
the provisions of Article X.
(9) All other plans, documents and submissions which were filed in
preliminary form as required in § 160-23 shall be filed in final form
to accompany and form part of any final plan.
(10) If the proposed lot(s) abuts on a street under the jurisdiction of the
state, a note shall be added to the final plan to indicate that a
highway occupancy permit is required before a driveway or street
can access a state highway.
(11) A list of permits, agreements, approvals, clearances and the like
required to be obtained in connection with the proposed
subdivision and/or land development and the federal, state, county
or other agencies, authorities and companies from which the same
are to be obtained.
103. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 160-28 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-29
155:347
§ 160-29. Stormwater management plan.
§ 160-30. Improvements construction plan.104
In addition to all illustrations and notes required under § 160-25 and this
section, the plan shall contain the following:
A. In addition to all illustrations and notes required under § 160-24 to
accompany the preliminary plan and § 148-16 of Chapter 148 (see
Appendix F) ., the following shall be submitted:
(1) Profiles of all proposed sewers, including elevation, sizes, slopes
and materials, at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet (1" = 50')
horizontal and one inch equals five feet (1" = 5') vertical, as per
§ 160-25.
A. A horizontal plan of storm drains and sanitary sewers, which may be
shown on a separate drainage plan, including:
(1) The location and size of the line with stations corresponding to the
profile.
(2) Locations of manholes or inlets with the grade between and
elevation of the flow line and the top of each manhole or inlet.
(3) Property lines and properties of abutting owners, with details of
easements.
(4) The beginning and end of the proposed construction.
(5) Locations of laterals.
(6) Locations of all other drainage facilities and utilities in the vicinity
of storm and/or sanitary sewer lines.
(7) Hydraulic design data for culverts and/or bridge structures and
details of proposed handling of surface and/or subsurface drainage
problems.
B. Profiles of storm drains and sanitary sewers, which may be shown on a
separate drainage plan, including:
(1) Profile of existing and proposed ground surface with elevations at
the top of manholes or inlets.
(2) Profile of storm drains or sewers showing the type and size of pipe,
grade, cradle (if any), manhole or inlet locations with the length
and slope of the pipe between structures shown and elevations at
the flow line.
104. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 227, adopted 12-1-1998, the following provisions have
been changed to reflect additional provisions pertaining to historic preservation. See Art.
XIXA Historic Preservation, of Ch. 210, Zoning.
§ 160-29 CONCORD CODE § 160-30
155:348
§ 160-31. As-built plan.
The as-built plan shall be drawn to the same scale as the final plan,
conservation plan, improvements construction plan and profile plan and
shall be certified to by the engineer of the landowner or developer and
approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 160-32. Agreements.
A subdivision and land development agreement shall be executed in
accordance with § 160-14.
C. Plans and details of bridges, street trees, retaining walls, stormwater
management structures, erosion and sedimentation control structures
and all other proposed improvements, containing sufficient information
which would customarily be included in working drawings and
specifications for the proposed construction and which would enable
the Township Engineer to perform an effective evaluation of the
proposed improvements, and with specific detail which would allow the
contractor to build the same.
A. Said plan shall indicate the actual location, dimensions and/or
elevations of all completed improvements, including but not limited to:
(1) Principal permitted buildings.
(2) Concrete monuments.
(3) The location of the cartway and curb for both sides of each street.
(4) The sanitary sewer main, manholes, rim and invert elevations and
laterals.
(5) The storm sewer main, inlets, rim and invert elevations and
culverts.
(6) Water mains and fire hydrants.
(7) Streetlights.
(8) Landscaping and screen planting.
(9) Berms.
(10) Permanent sedimentation, erosion control and stormwater
management structures, with as-built storage volume and outlet
structure elevations and as-built elevations for the basin.
(11) All easements.
B. The as-built plan shall be submitted in complete and accurate form
prior to the final release of funds being withheld, as provided in
§ 160-73.
§ 160-30 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-33
155:349
§ 160-33. Recording of final plan.
The recording of an approved final major subdivision and/or land
development plan shall be as described in § 160-15.
§ 160-33 CONCORD CODE § 160-33
155:350
ARTICLE VII
Minor Subdivision
§ 160-34. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to set forth a streamlined set of plan
requirements for minor subdivision and/or land development that meet the
conditions of eligibility set forth in § 160-35.
§ 160-35. Plan requirements.105
The procedures of § 160-13 and the following shall apply to preliminary and
final plans:
A. Drafting standards.
(1) The plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet.
(2) Plans shall be legible.
(3) Metes and bounds shall be in degrees, minutes and seconds and in
feet and decimal parts thereof.
(4) The boundary line of the subdivision shall be shown as a heavy line.
(5) Plans shall be on sheets 24 inches by 34 inches, unless otherwise
permitted by the Township.
B. The plan shall depict, note or be accompanied by the following
information:
(1) Name of subdivision or land development.
(2) Name and address of the owner of record and applicant.
(3) Name, address and seal of the surveyor who prepared the plan.
(4) Zoning requirements, including:
(a) Applicable district, including overlay districts, pertaining to
the Floodplain Conservation District.
(b) Lot area and yard requirements (area and bulk requirements).
(c) The percentage of the lot(s) allowed to be covered by
impervious surfaces and buildings.
(5) Location map showing the relation of site to adjoining properties
and streets within 1,000 feet at a scale no less than one inch equals
800 feet. In addition, a plan depicting the proposed lot lines must
be included at a scale of one inch equals 800 feet.
105. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ord. No. 227, adopted 12-1-1998, the following provisions have
been changed to reflect additional provisions pertaining to historic preservation. See Art.
XIXA Historic Preservation, of Ch. 210, Zoning.
§ 160-34 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-35
155:351
(6) North arrow and date of the plan or drawing, including revision
dates.
(7) Written and graphic scales.
(8) Gross and net acreage of lots.
(9) Tract boundaries.
(10) Contiguous boundaries of all adjoining properties and the names of
owners and tax parcel numbers of such properties.
(11) Existing streets on or adjacent to the site with existing and future
rights-of-way, names and cartway widths.
(12) Buildings (and their uses), driveways, wells, sewer lines, water
mains, fire hydrants, utility poles, septic tanks, storm drains,
culverts, bridges, utility easements and other significant man-made
features within the lot which is being subdivided. Any structure
which is contained within the Delaware County Historic Resources
Study of 1983 for Concord Township shall be so identified on the
plan.
(13) Existing contours at two-foot intervals, including the date and
source of the contours. The United States Geological Survey
topography may be used to fulfill this requirement.
(14) Existing natural features, including:
(a) Streams, ponds, springs and wetlands.
(b) Soil types and description.
(c) Tree masses and notable trees, indicating which are to be
removed and which are to remain.
(15) Proposed lot boundaries, lot layout and building setback lines.
(16) Proposed driveway location(s).
(17) Any areas within the Floodplain Conservation District.
(18) A grading plan indicating proposed contour and final grades at twofoot
intervals and all proposed improvements.
(19) A stormwater management plan as required by § 148-16 of Chapter
148, Stormwater Management (see Appendix F).
(20) Tract and lot boundaries with dimensions, metes and bounds,
closing with an error of not more than one foot in 10,000 feet.
(21) Location of permanent reference monuments and corner markers.
(22) Locations of percolation test pits and proposed on-lot sewage
disposal system.
§ 160-35 CONCORD CODE § 160-35
155:352
§ 160-36. Recording of final plan.
The recording of an approved final minor subdivision plan shall be as
prescribed in § 160-15.
(23) A planning module for land development shall be submitted as
required by Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act.106
(24) Locations of proposed wells for on-site water supply.
(25) A graphic depiction and a list of all easements shall be shown on
the plan and, if appearing on record, the book and page numbers.
(26) Such private deed restrictions, including building setback lines, as
may be imposed upon the property as a condition to sale, together
with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may
affect the title to the land being subdivided. The plans must clearly
differentiate between existing and proposed deed restrictions. If
there are no deed restrictions a note to that effect must be placed
on the plan.
(27) A written agreement pursuant to § 160-14.
(28) Copies of the proposed legal description for each lot, based on net
acreage.
(29) If the proposed lot(s) abuts on a street under the jurisdiction of the
state, a note shall be added to the final plan to indicate that a
highway occupancy permit is required before a driveway or street
can access a state highway.
(30) A list of all permits, agreements, approvals, clearances and the like
required to be obtained in connection with the proposed
subdivision and/or land development and the federal, state, county
or other agencies, authorities and companies from which the same
are to be obtained.
(31) Certification as to the accuracy of the plan and details of such plans
shall be prepared in accordance with Act 367 of 1945, known as the
"Engineer, Land Surveyor and Geologist Registration Law," P.L.
913, No. 367, 63 P.S. § 148 et seq., as amended.
106. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 160-35 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-36
155:353

ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards
§ 160-37. General standards.
A. All subdivision and/or land development plans to be approved by the
Board of Supervisors must comply with the standards contained within
this article. Such standards shall be considered minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. These standards shall not be construed to be complete specifications
for construction. Detailed and complete specifications shall be the
responsibility of the applicant's engineer.
C. Where literal compliance with the standards hereinafter specified is not
possible, the Board of Supervisors may modify or adjust the standards
to permit reasonable utilization of property, while securing substantial
conformance with the objectives of these regulations, in accordance
with Article XI, § 160-81.
D. Land shall be developed only with uses permitted in conformance with
the Comprehensive Plan,107 Chapter 210, Zoning, and other ordinances,
codes and regulations in effect in the Township and with the Official
Sewage Facilities Plan and other Township plans and maps.
E. Land shall be developed in conformance with all pertinent statutes,
regulations, rules and codes of federal, state and county agencies
concerned with subdivision, land development, construction and
improvements or any activity arising out of or related thereto in any
way whatsoever.
F. The design of subdivisions and land developments shall preserve,
insofar as possible, the natural terrain, natural drainage, existing
topsoil and existing trees.
G. Land subject to hazards to life, health or property, such as may arise
from fire, floods, disease or other causes, shall not be developed for
building purposes unless such hazards have been eliminated or unless
the plan shall show adequate safeguards against them.
H. All portions of a tract shall be developed so that landlocked areas shall
not be created unless approved by the Board of Supervisors pursuant to
and in accordance with the requirements of § 160-81, Modification of
site and plan requirements, of this chapter. [Amended 5-3-1994 by
Ord. No. 191]
I. Property subject to flooding as defined by the Floodplain Conservation
District and Map and lots deemed by the Board of Supervisors to be
uninhabitable shall not be considered for residential occupancy nor for
107. Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-37 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-37
155:355
§ 160-38. Monuments and markers.
such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property
or aggravate the flood hazard. Such land with a subdivision or land
development shall be set aside for such uses that will not be affected
by periodic or occasional inundation or conditions which produce
unsatisfactory living conditions.
J. Proposed subdivisions and/or land developments shall be coordinated
with existing nearby neighborhoods, within or adjacent to the
Township, so that the community as a whole may develop harmoniously.
K. The name of any subdivision or land development shall not be similar to
or conflict with the name of any existing project in or adjacent to the
Township and shall be subject to the approval of both the Board of
Supervisors and fire company serving the Township.
L. All planning, design, construction and maintenance of lots and uses and
structures thereon shall be in accordance with recognized
architectural, engineering and related standards. All work performed in
accordance with this chapter shall be accomplished in a professional
and workmanlike manner.
A. Monument locations must be shown on the final plan to define the exact
location of all street rights-of-way and to enable the reestablishment of
all street right-of-way lines. Monuments shall be placed at the following
locations:
(1) At each intersection.
(2) At changes in direction of street lines.
(3) At each end of every street line.
(4) At locations where topographical conditions obstruct sighting
between two otherwise required monuments.
(5) At other locations along the lines of streets as may be determined
to be necessary by the Township Engineer.
B. Monument locations defining the perimeter of the tract shall be
determined by the Township Engineer.
C. Markers shall be set at locations shown on the final plan as follows:
(1) At all points where lot lines intersect curves, either front or rear.
(2) At all angles in property lines of lots.
(3) At all other lot corners.
D. Markers required under § 160-38C shall be placed by an engineer or
surveyor when final grading has been completed. Such markers shall be
clearly visible and placed before the issuance of any occupancy permit.
§ 160-37 CONCORD CODE § 160-38
155:356
§ 160-39. Streets.
Prior to the release of escrow funds, lots and streets must have markers
in place, and the same shall be noted on the as-built plan as having been
set.
E. Monuments and markers shall be placed so that the scored and marked
point shall coincide exactly with the intersection of lines to be marked
and shall be set so that the top of the monument or marker is level with
the surface of the surrounding ground. Monuments and markers shall
consist of the following:
(1) Monuments shall be of concrete or granite, with a minimum
dimension of four inches by four inches at the top, six inches by six
inches at the bottom and 24 inches in length. Concrete monuments
shall be permanently marked on top with an indented cross or drill
hole of 1/4 inch in diameter, which shall coincide exactly with the
point of intersection of the lines being monumented.
(2) Markers shall consist of iron pipes or steel bars a minimum of 24
inches in length and 5/8 inch in diameter.
F. Monuments shall be placed for all areas of land, improvements or
public easement to be offered for dedication prior to acceptance thereof
by the Township or other entity to which the same are offered.
Monuments shall be placed by an engineer or surveyor. The engineer or
surveyor shall certify, in writing, that the monuments were placed in
accordance with the as-built plan.
G. Monuments shall be placed for all areas of common open space and
community on-lot sewage disposal owned and maintained by a
homeowners' association or similar organization.
A. Streets shall be designed in accordance with the following general
principles and criteria:
(1) Proposed streets shall conform to such county and state street and
highway plans as have been prepared, adopted and/or filed as
prescribed by law.
(2) Residential streets shall be so laid out as to discourage through
traffic. However, the arrangement of streets shall provide for
continuation of existing or platted streets and for proper access to
adjoining undeveloped tracts suitable for future subdivision.
Further, provisions for emergency access and provisions for
accessibility by emergency vehicles shall be made.
(3) The proposed street pattern and layout shall be properly and
logically related to existing streets and their functional
characteristics (refer to Appendix G for the functional classification
of streets).
§ 160-38 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-39
155:357
(4) The proposed street pattern and layout shall be properly and
logically related to the topography of the land with regard to
grades and conditions of drainage. Grades of streets shall conform
as closely as possible to the existing grade so as to produce usable
lots and minimize cuts and fills.
(5) The ultimate right-of-way of a street shall be shown in any
subdivision and/or land development plans. Further, the Board of
Supervisors may prescribe additional right-of-way requirements in
accordance with § 160-39C.
(6) The proposed street pattern shall be designed to enhance views
from the road and to create a greater variety of lot appearance
through a curvilinear alignment.
(7) The proposed street pattern and layout shall provide suitable
access to each lot and permit safe and convenient circulation of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(8) Every lot shall have access to a public street, unless the Board of
Supervisors approves otherwise pursuant to and in accordance
with the requirements of § 160-81, Modification of site and plan
requirements, of this chapter. [Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No.
191]
(9) Provisions shall be made for the extension and continuation of
collector streets and local primary streets into and from adjoining
areas, except when topographical or hydrological conditions shall
make the same impractical.
(10) All streets shall be platted to the boundary lines of the subdivision
or land development if the subdivision or land development adjoins
lands which may be developed in the future, and the same shall be
provided with easements and/or rights-of-way for turnarounds and,
if required by the Board of Supervisors, improved to the property
boundary, including improved turnaround areas.
(11) If lots resulting from subdivision are large enough to permit
resubdivision or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, a
notification requiring adequate street rights-of-way to permit
further subdivision and whether such is available shall be placed in
the plan.
(12) Streets that are extensions of or in alignment with existing named
streets shall bear the names of such existing streets, new street
names shall not duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing
street names in and adjacent to the Township and all street names
shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors and fire company
serving the Township.
(13) Where streets continue into adjoining municipalities, compatibility
of design, particularly with regard to cartway widths, shall be
§ 160-39 CONCORD CODE § 160-39
155:358
employed to avoid abrupt changes in the cartway width or to other
improvements within the right-of-way.
(14) Any street not designed as a through street shall be designed to
Township cul-de-sac requirements found in Subsection B hereof.
[Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
(15) Whenever a cul-de-sac or other street with a single point of ingress
and egress is proposed, the Board of Supervisors may require that
a right-of-way be shown on subdivision and/or land development
plans to allow for a future connection of such streets to streets on
an adjoining property.
(16) The Township may require the use of double frontage lots
whenever a subdivision and/or land development abuts an arterial
or collector street. Access to such double frontage lots shall be
from the local or interior subdivision street.
(17) Streets shall be designed so as to avoid edge deterioration through
the use of curbs as required in § 160-40.
(18) In the event that any part of a development abuts a Township or
state road that is not fully improved to the design standards which
correspond to the road classification enumerated in the
Comprehensive Plan108 and contained in the Appendixes, said
street shall be improved to meet the applicable design standard for
the street in question, especially in terms of cartway and right-ofway
widths and § 160-39C(21), unless approved otherwise by the
Board of Supervisors.
(19) Where a subdivision or land development abuts a railroad, streets
crossing the rail line shall be kept to a minimum and placed to
facilitate grade separation.
(20) Streets shall be designed for maximum safety for fire trucks and
other emergency vehicles and shall be approved by the Board of
Supervisors upon the recommendation of the Fire Marshal.
B. Cul-de-sac streets shall be designed as follows:
(1) Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 700 feet and shall be at least
250 feet in length. If the cul-de-sac street intersects another cul-desac
street, the maximum total length of the sum of the streets shall
not exceed 700 feet. [Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
(2) Culs-de-sac shall have a closed-end turnaround with a right-of-way
having a minimum outside radius of 50 feet and shall be paved to a
radius of not less than 40 feet.
(3) When required for future extension, the turnaround right-of-way
shall be placed adjacent to the tract boundary with sufficient width
108. Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 160-39 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-39
155:359
along the boundary line to permit extension of the street at full
width.
(4) Drainage of culs-de-sac shall be directed to flow along the curbline.
Drainage shall be toward the open end of the cul-de-sac whenever
possible. Superelevated culs-de-sac shall be prohibited.
(5) No cul-de-sac turnaround shall have a grade which exceeds 4%.
(6) The minimum grade for a cul-de-sac shall be 1%.
(7) All design standards in § 160-39C which are pertinent to culs-desac
shall apply.
C. In addition to the aforementioned principles and criteria set forth in
§ 160-39A and B, the following shall apply to all streets:
(1) The determination of which proposed streets are to be considered
as collector roads and which proposed streets are to be considered
as local roads shall be made by the Township Engineer in
accordance with the definitions of Article II and the traffic
capacities for such streets.
(2) Streets shall be designed according to their function and laid out to
preserve the integrity of their design. Streets shall be classified by
functions, as follows: [Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
Classification of
Streets
Right-of-Way
(feet)
Cartway
(feet)
Curb/
Shoulder
Improvements
Principal arterial
highway
120 * *
Collector highway 80 * *
Local access highway
and collector road
60 36 *
Local secondary roads 50 27 Vertical curb
Other local roads and
culs-de-sac
50 24 Vertical curb
Private streets 50 18 Rolled curb
*NOTE: Per Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
(3) Additional rights-of-way and cartway widths may be required by
the Board of Supervisors due to densities of dwelling units,
increased usage of existing roadways or topographical conditions.
Before during so, a special study shall be made by the Township
Engineer or other consultant to determine whether or not these
additional requirements are necessary, and the Board shall, upon
conclusion of said study, have the discretion to change these
§ 160-39 CONCORD CODE § 160-39
155:360
standards accordingly in order to lessen traffic congestion; secure
safety from fire, panic and other dangers; facilitate the adequate
provision for transportation and other public requirements; and
promote the general welfare.
(4) Right-of-way widths in excess of the aforementioned standards
shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is
necessary to provide adequate road embankments. Such slopes
shall not be in excess of three to one in cut and fill.
(5) There shall be a minimum center-line grade of 1% and a maximum
center-line grade of 10% on all private streets and local roads. A
maximum center-line grade of 7% is required on all local secondary
roads, local access highways, collector roads and principal arterial
highways. [Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
(6) Maximum grade within any intersection shall not exceed 2%, and
approaches to any intersection shall follow a straight course within
100 feet of the intersection. The grade of any street at the approach
to an intersection shall have a leveling area and shall be provided
with a maximum grade of 4% within 50 feet of the nearest right-ofway
line of the intersecting street.
(7) The slope of the crown on proposed streets shall be more than 1/4
inch per foot and less than 1/2 inch per foot, except on
superelevated curves where the slope shall be not less than 1/4
inch per foot and shall extend from the inside to the outside edge of
the paving.
(8) The finished road grade on all streets shall be carried the entire
width of the right-of-way. However, grading behind the curbs or
beyond the edge of the cartway may be modified, as determined by
the Township Engineer, provided that the minimum sight distances
are maintained along the vertical and horizontal curvatures of the
street, provided that no obstructions exist at intersections within
the clear sight triangle and provided that no sidewalks are
required.
(9) Maximum slopes of banks measured perpendicular to the center
line of the street shall be four feet horizontal to one foot vertical in
fill areas and four feet horizontal to one foot vertical in cut areas
and shall be planted and vegetated to prevent erosion.
(10) Vertical curves are required for changes in grade greater than 1%.
The rate of change of grade on vertical curves shall be no more
than 4% per 125 feet of road and no more than 4% per 100 feet for
sags, provided that clear sight distance for summits is maintained
at all points along the center line. Any street classified higher than
a local road shall be designed to PennDOT standards relative to
vertical curves.
§ 160-39 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-39
155:361
(11) Changes in street direction shall be made by horizontal curves with
a minimum center line radius of 500 feet for principal arterial and
collector highways, 300 feet for local access highways and collector
roads and 150 feet for local secondary and cul-de-sac streets.
Tangents of at least 100 feet shall be required between reverse
curves and shall be measured at the center line. The foregoing
minimum radii shall apply in all cases where the street deflects 10°
or more. Variations in radii may be permitted when topographic or
other conditions so require.
(12) A minimum curb or paving radius of 35 feet and minimum radius of
25 feet for right-of-way lines shall be provided at all local street
intersections, and minimum radii of 50 feet and 40 feet,
respectively, as above shall be provided on all other street
intersections.
(13) Any person who proposes access to the right-of-way of a state
highway is required to obtain a highway occupancy permit from the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Prior to the issuance
of a permit, the Township shall review the application and forward
its comments to PennDOT.
(14) Proper sight distance shall be provided with respect to both
horizontal and vertical alignment. A clear sight distance, as defined
in Article II, shall be provided along the center line of streets as
follows: [Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
Required Sight Distance in Feet (Grade of Road)
Posted Speed
(miles per hour) -10% to -5% -5% to 0% 0% 0% to 5% +5% to 10%
25 175 160 150 145 140
30 230 210 195 185 175
35 305 275 250 235 225
40 390 345 315 290 275
45 485 425 385 355 330
50 600 515 460 420 390
55 705 605 540 490 455
NOTE: Reference: 1990 AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets.
(15) Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all street intersections
where there shall be a clear sight triangle of 75 feet, measured
along the center lines from the point of intersection. The triangular
shaped portion of land forming the clear sight triangle shall not
have anything erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists
§ 160-39 CONCORD CODE § 160-39
155:362
entering or leaving the intersection, except for utility poles, light
standards, street signs and fire hydrants.
(16) Right angle intersections shall be used whenever practical, and no
intersection angle, measured at the center line, shall be less than
60°.
(17) No more than two streets shall cross at the same point.
(18) Proposed intersections along one side of an existing street shall
coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such
street or offset by at least 200 feet from center line to center line.
(19) If possible, intersections along principal arterial and collector
highways and local access highways and collector roads shall be a
minimum of 800 feet apart.
(20) Where a subdivision or land development borders an existing street
or intersection which is determined to be in need of improvement
based on the traffic/transportation analysis conducted in
accordance to the traffic control standards of Chapter 210, Zoning,
said street or intersection shall be improved to the full extent as
required in § 160-39C(2), with the following considerations:
(a) This requirement shall apply only to Township roads and those
sides of intersections which pertain to Township roads, unless
the state concurs with the improvements and imposes certain
requirements along roads which they own and maintain.
(b) Should the tract border an undersized road or intersection on
only one side, then the improvements shall take place only on
the side of the road or intersection which is tangent to the
tract.
(c) All improvements to be made to said roads and intersections
shall be determined by the Township Engineer or Traffic
Engineer employed by the Township.
(d) Land associated with the rights-of-way for undersized roads
and intersections shall be delineated, depicted and otherwise
noted on all subdivision and/or land development plans for the
subject tract and shall be offered for dedication with the
improvements associated therewith.
(21) When a subdivision or land development fronts on an existing
street having a right-of-way less than the minimum width required
in this chapter, an ultimate right-of-way line shall be established
and dedicated with the following considerations:
(a) The distance of the ultimate right-of-way line from the center
line of the existing right-of-way shall be 1/2 the width of the
required minimum right-of-way.
§ 160-39 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-39
155:363
(b) The ultimate right-of-way shall be delineated, depicted and
otherwise noted on all subdivision and land development plans
and shall be offered for dedication with the improvements
associated therewith.
(c) Any required setback shall be measured from the ultimate
right-of-way line. However, only the lot area contained within
the existing right-of-way width shall be subtracted when
computing the minimum lot area requirements for compliance
with Chapter 210, Zoning.
(22) Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided to aid in
ingress and egress relative to principal arterial and collector
highways, and local access highways and collector roads, with the
following considerations:
(a) Where a subdivision or land development borders a state road,
the landowner or developer shall confer with the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (PennDOT) regarding specific
design standards for such lanes.
(b) Where a subdivision or land development borders a Township
road, the landowner or developer shall confer with the
Township Engineer or Traffic Engineer employed by the
Township regarding specific design standards for such lanes.
(23) Street signs and numbers.
(a) Street signs similar to those which exist in the vicinity of the
property shall be provided and erected by the developer at the
onset of road construction. Said street signs and posts of
standard size and approved by the Board of Supervisors shall
be set four feet back from the cartway. [Amended 5-3-1994
as Ord. No. 191]
(b) Stop signs on all roads to be dedicated to the Township and all
private streets will be required as directed by the Township
Public Works Foreman and approved by the Board of
Supervisors. Said stop signs shall be erected at the same time
as the road base is applied.
(c) House numbers (E911 numbers) will be assigned to each
proposed lot in conjunction with the newly created street
name. This system shall be used for public and private streets
alike.
(24)No dwelling or other principal permitted building which depends
upon the improvement of any street for ingress and egress shall be
permitted to be occupied until all improvements are fully
completed from an existing street to and across the front of the lot
on which the building is located and/or to a sufficient depth along
§ 160-39 CONCORD CODE § 160-39
155:364
the side of the lot to service any driveways and parking spaces as
required by this chapter.
(25)No street shall be paved between December 1 and March 15
without written permission of the Board of Supervisors.
(26) Adequate drainage shall be provided for low points along streets
and where required to intercept runoff.
(27) When requested by the Township, streetlighting shall be in
accordance with a plan approved by the Board of Supervisors and
shall be installed prior to dedication of streets. A copy of the
proposed final plan shall be submitted by the applicant to the
electric company for the preparation of said streetlighting plan.
(28) Streets constructed to serve five or fewer residential lots will not
be accepted for dedication by the Township. Streets within land
developments will be accepted at the discretion of the Board of
Supervisors.
D. Existing streets. Along existing streets which adjoin proposed
subdivisions and/or land developments, the Township may require
additional cartway, right-of-way, shoulder or other paving to create
stable and/or safe conditions, as determined by the Board of
Supervisors, upon recommendation by the Township Engineer or Traffic
Engineer employed by the Township.
E. Private streets. [Amended 9-3-1991 by Ord. No. 182; 5-3-1994 by
Ord. No. 191]
(1) Private residential streets are permitted only if they serve as access
to no more than five lots. A maximum of three interior lots may
access the private street. All lots which abut a private street shall
use the private street for access exclusively. Access for a maximum
of five lots remains in effect regardless of whether or not the lots
are large enough to be further subdivided. Private residential
streets shall be designed to meet the following standards:
(a) A fifty-foot right-of-way shall be provided.
(b) An eighteen-foot cartway shall be provided. No on-street
parking will be allowed.
(c) Lot area and setback requirements for lots which abut private
streets shall be the same as are required along public streets in
addition to the interior lot standards as set forth in § 160-43H.
(d) The private street shall otherwise be in conformance with all
design standards, except that conformance with § 160-42 is not
required. Additionally, rolled curbing instead of vertical
curbing is required for use on private streets.
§ 160-39 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-39
155:365
§ 160-40. Curbs and gutters.
(2) Private streets shall be indicated as such on the record plan and
shall be subject to contract and guaranty requirements outlined in
Article X. The private street shall be owned and maintained by a
homeowners' association comprised of the lot owners or pursuant
to alternate arrangements approved by the Township such as a
recorded maintenance/easement agreement.
(3) Refer to § 160-41 for design standards and requirements for
driveways serving one or two dwellings or buildings.
F. Construction of streets, including private streets. [Amended 5-3-1994
by Ord. No. 191]
(1) All materials used in the construction of streets and the methods of
construction and drainage thereof shall be in accordance with the
most current requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Form 408 Specifications. This shall include but not
be limited to the following sections of the Form 408 Specifications:
(a) Subgrade construction, Section 210.
(b) Base Course, Section 300.
(c) Bituminous Pavement Construction, Sections 420 and 421.
(2) All streets shall be constructed in accordance with any other
standards required by the Township Engineer.
(3) All streets maintained by the state shall conform to the PennDOT
design standards.
(4) Underground utilities shall be installed before the streets are
constructed.
(5) All utility companies shall be notified of street openings in
accordance with the Act of December 10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287,
as amended, 73 P.S. § 176 et seq.
A. The Board of Supervisors may approve concrete curbs for Township
streets in lieu of granite curbs at street intersections where the curb
radius is 40 feet or less. At driveways, a depressed curb may be
constructed of concrete according to the Township specifications.
B. Concrete curbs, constructed along state roads shall be in accordance
with PennDOT's Form 408 Specifications, Section 630.
C. The dimensions of the curbs, unless specified otherwise by the
Township Engineer, shall be as follows:
(1) Vertical curbing shall be poured in place, shall be Class A Cement
Concrete, 18 inches in depth and shall be in accordance with those
requirements set forth in the latest edition of the Pennsylvania
§ 160-39 CONCORD CODE § 160-40
155:366
§ 160-41. Driveways. [Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
Department of Transportation Specifications, Form 408, Section
630. The exposed face of the curb shall be seven inches high on
all Township roads and six inches high in all parking areas. After
completion of the bituminous paving, Class BM-1 or AC-20 asphalt
shall be applied to paving and Class BM-1 asphalt shall be applied
to the joint between the curb and the bituminous paving for a
distance of one foot from the curb towards the center of the road
to effectively seal the joint between the curbing and the bituminous
paving. All dimensions, except those as noted above, shall be as
shown on Drawing RC-64 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Standards for Roadway Construction, 1987 Edition,
and amendments thereto related to the detail entitled "Plain
Cement Concrete Curb."
D. Catch basins shall be installed along roadways in accordance with
PennDOT's Form 408 Specifications.
A. Individual driveways shall be provided to furnish access on any lot,
unless shared driveways are utilized in accordance with Subsection J.
B. Driveways serving more than two single-family dwellings shall be
prohibited. A driveway shall lie in a strip of land as part of the lot it
serves. For one lot, the driveway shall not be less than 10 feet wide in
cartway and 16 feet in right-of-way. For two lots, the driveway shall be
not less than 16 feet wide in cartway and 25 feet in right-of-way.
C. The width of a driveway in a nonresidential district shall be 11 feet in
cartway and 18 feet in right-of-way for individual driveways and 22 feet
in cartway and 30 feet in right-of-way for shared driveways. Such
driveways shall have a radius at the curbline so that the driveway width
shall be a minimum of 14 feet in cartway for individual driveways and a
minimum of 25 feet in cartway for shared driveways.
D. A minimum grade of 1% shall be provided on all driveways. A maximum
grade of any driveway within the right-of-way of any street shall be 4%.
Within the property line, exclusive of the right-of-way, the maximum
grade of a driveway shall be not greater than 15% percent. Grades
adjacent to garages shall not exceed 7%.
E. Nonresidential entrance and exit driveways crossing the right-of-way of
a street shall be limited to two per lot along the frontage of any single
street, and their center lines shall be spaced at least 100 feet apart. On
all corner properties, there shall be a minimum spacing of 100 feet,
measured at the curbline, between the center line of any entrance or
exit drive and the nearest curbline of the street parallel to said access
drive.
§ 160-40 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-41
155:367
§ 160-42. Sidewalks, crosswalks and pedestrian paths.
F. The center line of all residential driveways shall be located not less than
40 feet from the nearest curbline of the street parallel to said access
drive.
G. All driveways shall be paved with a hard surface material, approved by
the Township Engineer, from the edge of the street cartway to a point in
the lot 30 feet from the edge of the cartway. The remainder of the
cartway shall be surfaced with erosion-resistant materials approved by
the Township Engineer. Nonsurfaced dirt driveways are prohibited.
H. A clear sight distance, as defined in Article II, shall be provided in
accordance with § 160-39C(14).
I. No private driveway shall have access to a principal arterial highway if
access onto another street is possible.
J. Shared driveways shall be designed to serve no more than two
dwellings or other principal buildings. A shared driveway must be
located on a single lot and the right of passage by easement shall be
provided to the other lot. Unless approved otherwise by the Board of
Supervisors, a shared driveway will be located on land belonging to the
lot which has its dwelling unit located farthest from the street. Any
approvals by the Board of Supervisors shall be pursuant to and in
accordance with § 160-81, Modification of site and plan requirements,
of this chapter.
K. Access and maintenance easements and/or agreements must be
provided for the shared portion of any shared driveway and recorded
with the plan.
L. For new or improved driveways accessing a Township road, a Township
driveway permit is required. All pertinent provisions of this section
shall apply. Said permit will be applied for and issued prior to accepting
an application for a building permit for either new construction or
substantial additions to existing structures. Upon the filing of an
application for a Township driveway permit, the landowner or
developer shall pay, to the use of the Township, such fee as the Board of
Supervisors shall from time to time provide by resolution.
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed along all streets as follows:
Classification
of Street
R-1, R-2 R-2D and
R-3 Districts
R-A, R-AH, R-MHD, RPRD,
R-4 and All
Nonresidential Zoning
Districts1
Local Not required Required one side
Collector Not required Required both sides
§ 160-41 CONCORD CODE § 160-42
155:368
Classification
of Street
R-1, R-2 R-2D and
R-3 Districts
R-A, R-AH, R-MHD, RPRD,
R-4 and All
Nonresidential Zoning
Districts1
Arterial As required by the
Pennsylvania
Department of
Transportation
NOTES:
1[Amended 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 235]
(1) Sidewalks shall be located to avoid pedestrian-vehicular conflict
and promote safe pedestrian movement. The location of required
sidewalks shall be approved by the Township.
(2) The minimum width of all sidewalks shall be four feet.
(3) Sidewalks shall be located within a public right-of-way, a public
easement or a common area.
(4) Curb cuts for handicapped access shall be provided at street
crossings, nonresidential or nonagricultural driveway crossings
and in other locations as required by the Board of Supervisors.
(5) Depressed curbs shall be placed where sidewalks cross residential
driveways.
(6) Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall be pitched laterally at a slope
of not less than 1/4 inch per foot to provide for adequate surface
drainage.
(7) Sidewalks and pedestrian paths shall not exceed the allowable
street grade.
(8) Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, and pedestrian paths
shall be of a hard surface composition if heavy pedestrian or bicycle
traffic will be served. A footpath with low volume use may be built
with gravel, wood chips or other material as approved by the
Township.
(9) Sidewalks adjacent to angle parking areas shall be set back a
minimum of five feet to prevent car overhang from restricting
pedestrian movement along the sidewalk.
(10) When proposed sidewalks adjoin existing sidewalks which are
wider than four feet, a tapered transition shall be constructed.
(11) A grass planting strip of at least two feet in width shall be provided
between the curb and the sidewalk. The planting strip shall be
§ 160-42 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-42
155:369
§ 160-43. Lots. [Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
adequately graded and sodded to provide for proper stormwater
runoff.
(12) Pedestrian paths shall be constructed in all cluster development
subdivisions and planned residential development projects and
shall be a minimum of four feet in width. Such paths shall be paved
and shall be provided with adequate drainage beneath the path in
low areas.
(13) The location of all proposed pedestrian paths shall be reviewed and
approved by the Board of Supervisors upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission.
B. Crosswalks shall be created as follows:
(1) Crosswalks shall be provided within R-A, R-AH, R-MHD, R-PRD and
all nonresidential zoning districts, as directed by the Board of
Supervisors.
(2) A line-striped crosswalk shall be painted across any street at
intersections.
(3) Crosswalks shall be a minimum of eight feet in width.
A. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
street lines and radial to curved street lines and cul-de-sac
turnarounds.
B. Where feasible, lot lines shall follow municipal boundaries, rather than
cross them, in order to avoid jurisdictional problems.
C. No lots below the minimum lot area, as required in Chapter 210,
Zoning, shall be permitted for any use including any principal permitted
use or any community on-lot sewage disposal system.
D. Every lot shall have access to a street.
E. In general, the depths of lots should not be less than one nor more than
three times their width.
F. Odd-shaped lots.
(1) Odd-shaped lots shall not be created. The preliminary
determination of when a lot is odd-shaped shall be made by the
Planning Commission and shall be based in part on whether or not
there is any other practical way to design the lot.
(2) When presented with a lot design that appears to be odd-shaped,
the Planning Commission will communicate its opinion to the
applicant and may recommend revision of the lot layout to the
Board of Supervisors.
§ 160-42 CONCORD CODE § 160-43
155:370
(3) Examples of odd-shaped lots are those which are extremely narrow,
extremely angular, or contain an unusual number of abrupt
changes in direction.
G. Lot lines shall not cross any surface water body, such as a lake or pond.
To the extent possible, lot lines shall run parallel to or in the center of
watercourses.
H. Interior lots. [Amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 234]
(1) See § 160-8, Definitions, and Appendix N.109
(2) This design is limited to a maximum of three interior lots on any
private streets.
(3) A minimum of 60 feet of frontage on the private street is required
for all interior lots; provided, however, that a minimum of 40 feet of
frontage on a private street is required for all interior lots located
in an adult residential community mobile home development; and
provided further the minimum of 40 feet of frontage may be
reduced to a minimum of 25 feet of frontage on a private street
along curves and/or culs-de-sac.
(4) Private streets (which serve as the only means of access for interior
lots) are prohibited on any public cul-de-sac road.
(5) Interior lot design is limited to use in residential zones only.
(6) Under no circumstances shall the developer be permitted to use
private streets and interior lot design to avoid constructing or
extending public streets.
I. Rear lots.
(1) See § 160-8, Definitions, and Appendix N.
(2) This design is restricted to use on parcels of five acres or fewer.
(3) This design is restricted to use in residential zones only.
(4) Only one lot using this design may be created on each parcel.
(5) The lot area which provides for accessway shall be a minimum of 16
feet in width at the curbline and along its entire length.
(6) No rear lots shall be created to access a principal arterial highway.
(7) No more than two lots in depths (i.e., one tier of rear lots) shall be
created along a new or existing street. Access to any other lots
shall be directly from a new street.
(8) Rear lots, regardless of lot area, must be deed restricted against
further subdivision.
109. Editor's Note: Appendix N is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 160-43 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-43
155:371
§ 160-44. Parking areas and parking lots. [Amended 5-3-1994 by
Ord. No. 191; 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 230; 6-8-2004 by Ord. No.
279]
(9) Buffer landscaping may be required along both sides of the
accessway and along the front property line.
(10)On a cul-de-sac street, no more than four lots may have frontage on
the circumference of the turnaround or its reverse radius. Rear lots
are prohibited on the turnaround of a cul-de-sac or its reverse
radius.
A. All parking areas and parking lots shall be in accordance with the
requirements of Article XXII, Off-Street Parking and Loading
Requirements, as set forth in Chapter 210, Zoning, and the following:
(1) The accepted parking stall size and configuration must conform to
Figures No. 1 and No. 2110 except the stall size for those spaces
designated for handicapped use, for which the net interior line area
shall be as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of
1990, P.L. 101-336, as it may be amended from time to time, which
spaces shall be located as close as possible to the entrance of the
building.
(2) The minimum dimensions of stalls and aisles shall be as follows:
(a) Stall width measured from the center of the double side stripes
shall be at least nine feet, except that all handicapped stalls
shall meet the minimum requirements established by the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(b) Stall depth shall be at least 18 feet, with said dimensions
measured on the angle for all angle parking, and 22 feet for
parallel parking.
(c) Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for one-way
traffic only, varying with the angle of the parking, shall be:
Angle of Parking Minimum Aisle Width
Parallel 12
30° 12
45° 14
60° 18
90° 20
(d) Minimum width of aisles providing access to stalls for two-way
traffic shall be 25 feet.
110. Editor's Note: Said Figures 1 and 2, Typical Parking Space Dimensions, are included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 160-43 CONCORD CODE § 160-44
155:372
§ 160-45. Sanitary sewers.
(3) All parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with
§ 210-201, Landscaping, of Chapter 210, Zoning.
(4) All parking shall be paved in accordance with PennDOT 408,
Specifications. Conventional parking lots for cars shall be paved
with minimum of three inches asphalt on a six-inch stone base
course, or equivalent pavement section approved by the Township
Engineer. For parking lots with truck traffic and industrial uses, a
paving design shall be prepared and submitted by the applicant for
review and approval by the Township.
(5) All parking areas shall be illuminated in accordance with
§ 210-200, Lighting, of Chapter 210, Zoning.
A. The following requirements shall apply to sanitary sewage facilities:
(1) Chapter 136, Sewers, Article I, Operation and Maintenance of
Sanitary Sewers.
(2) Township Sewer Authority Standard Specifications for
Construction of Sanitary Sewers and Appurtenances, Chapters I to
V.
B. In addition to the foregoing requirements, the following shall also apply
to sewage supply.
(1) In accordance with the Official Sewage Facilities Plan, dwellings
and/or lots within a subdivision or land development shall be
connected with a public sanitary sewer system where accessible
and available. Where such sewer system is not yet accessible and
available but is planned for extension to the tract, the landowner or
developer shall install sewer lines and other facilities, including
lateral connections, force mains, pumping stations and all other
appurtenances to provide adequate service to each lot when
connection with said sewer system is made. Sewer lines shall be
suitably capped at the limits of the subdivision or land
development, and the laterals shall be capped at the street right-ofway.
When capped sewers are so provided, on-site sewage disposal
facilities shall also be installed, provided that they are so located as
to permit the easiest and least expensive connection to use the
public sanitary sewer system when such connection becomes
available. [Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
(2) Prior to the approval of any subdivision and/or land development
involving a public sanitary sewer (either live or capped), sewage
pumping stations, sewage treatment plants and community sewage
disposal systems, a properly detailed construction plan shall be
submitted to the Township and Township Sewer Authority for
review and approval. The detail of the plan shall be determined by
the Township Engineer.
§ 160-44 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-45
155:373
(3) A sewer shall be considered to be planned for extension to a given
area any time after preliminary engineering and related studies
have been initiated preparatory to the construction of facilities
adequate to serve the area containing a subdivision or land
development or when the area is shown to be in a proposed sewer
service area in the Official Sewage Facilities Plan.
(4) All sanitary sewer lines, lateral connections and manholes and
other facilities shall be constructed and installed and shall provide
service to each lot in conformity with standards of the Township
Sewer Authority at the cost and expense of the landowner or
developer.
(5) When such sanitary sewer facilities are installed in accordance
with this section, the same shall be inspected by the Township
Engineer during such construction at the cost and expense of the
landowner or developer, in accordance with the standards and
procedures established for inspection in Article XII.
(6) When such sanitary sewer facilities are not to be constructed or
otherwise installed, on-lot, community on-lot and on-site sewage
disposal systems shall be constructed in accordance with statutes
and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and the Township and as approved by the Sewage
Enforcement Officer. The ownership and maintenance of such
system shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
When on-lot sewage disposal systems are to be utilized, the
landowner or developer shall furnish evidence of the feasibility and
satisfactory operation of the system to be utilized in the subdivision
or land development as required in Articles V and VI.
(7) Where community on-lot sewage disposal systems are proposed,
such a system shall be no closer than 200 feet to any adjacent
property lines. Where such a system requires a building or
structure to be located above ground, the building or structure
shall be completely screened from the view of any adjacent
properties according to the screening provisions of Article XXI of
Chapter 210, Zoning.
(8) Any community on-lot sewage disposal system shall: [Amended
5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
(a) Be located on the same property being subdivided or
developed.
(b) Be on a lot, the area for which meets the minimum size
requirements of the district in which it is located.
(9) Where on-site sanitary sewage facilities are to be utilized, each lot
so served shall be of a size and shape to accommodate the
necessary length of tile fields at a safe distance from and at a lower
elevation than the proposed well and building(s) to facilitate
§ 160-45 CONCORD CODE § 160-45
155:374
gravity flow in accordance with Township and state regulations and
shall be so plotted.
(10) If on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities are to be utilized, the
Township Planning Commission may require that the developer
submit a feasibility report. Such report shall compare the cost of
providing on-site facilities with a sewage treatment plant. Based on
the analysis of this report, the Township may require the
installation of a public sanitary sewer system or capped sewer.
(11) Whenever a developer proposes that individual on-site sanitary
sewage disposal systems shall be utilized within the subdivision,
the developer shall either install such a facility approved by the
Sewage Enforcement Officer or shall guarantee (by deed
restriction or otherwise), as a condition of the sale of each lot or
parcel within the subdivision, that such facilities can be installed by
the purchaser of such lot or parcel. The on-site system shall be
located on the lot it is intended to serve.
(12) Soil percolation test requirement.
(a) Soil percolation tests shall be performed for all lots within
subdivisions and/or land developments of fewer than 10 lots,
prior to final plan approval, wherein buildings, at the time of
construction, will not be connected to a public or community
sanitary sewage disposal system in operation. In lieu of soil
percolation tests for individual lots in subdivisions and/or land
developments greater than 10 lots, soil percolation tests shall
be performed on a cross section of soil types to determine their
suitability for on-site sewage disposal. Deep-hole test pits are
recommended as a further means of guaranteeing suitability of
a site.
(b) Soil percolation tests shall be made in accordance with the
procedure required by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, by either a registered professional
engineer or registered sanitarian and/or the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act Sewage Enforcement Officer.111
(c) Soil percolation tests shall be performed on each lot within the
site of the proposed on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities.
[Amended 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 191]
(d) The results of the soil percolation tests shall be analyzed in
relation to the physical characteristics of of the tract being
subdivided and of the general area surrounding the tract being
subdivided. The final plan lot layout shall be based on this
analysis.
111. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 160-45 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-45
155:375
§ 160-46. Water supply.
(e) Where applicable, the plan should note that "lot ______ has
failed to obtain acceptable percolation." The lot shall not be
developed without a sewage disposal system approved by the
Township and its Sewage Enforcement Officer and a sewage
disposal permit issued. A building permit shall not be applied
for or acted upon until proof of the sewage disposal permit is
provided to the Building Inspector.
A. Adequate and potable water supply system(s) shall be installed
consistent with design principles and requirements contained in this
chapter and Township standards, which are the United Sates public
health criteria for drinking water as administered by the existing
Environmental Protection Agency Safe Drinking Water Act.112
B. All subdivisions which create 10 or more lots shall be provided with a
complete public or community water distribution system. Land
developments shall be subject to the same standard unless a water
distribution system is not readily available. The design and installation
of such public system shall be subject to the approval of the Township,
and the design and installation of such community distribution system
shall be subject to the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, and such system shall be further subject to
satisfactory provision for the maintenance thereof. Where a permit is
required by said Department, it shall be presented as evidence of such
review and approval in the case of private or public systems before
construction commences.
C. Wherever a public or community water system is provided, fire
hydrants or acceptable alternatives shall be installed for fire protection,
as approved by the local fire company and Township Engineer. Where
fire hydrants are installed, they shall meet the specifications of the
Insurance Services Office of Pennsylvania. Location of hydrants shall be
approved by the Township.
(1) Generally, all fire hydrants will be located on a minimum looped sixinch
line. Where a dead-end line is required to contain a fire
hydrant, the portion of the line between the main loop and the
hydrant shall be an eight-inch minimum diameter.
(2) Fire hydrants shall be spaced in a development so that all proposed
buildings will be no more than 600 feet from the hydrant measured
along traveled ways.
(3) All community water systems must provide a minimum of 500
gallons per minute at a residual pressure of 20 pounds per square
inch for a two-hour period.
112. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 721.1 et seq.
§ 160-45 CONCORD CODE § 160-46
155:376
(4) For additional fire protection, a dry hydrant may be required and
incorporated into existing or proposed ponds or reservoirs and an
access easement provided for emergency use.
D. Wherever a public or community water system is provided, applicants
shall present evidence to the Board of Supervisors that the subdivision
or land development is to be supplied by a certificated public utility, a
bona fide cooperative association of lot owners or a municipal authority
or utility. A copy of a certificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such
certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to
serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be
acceptable evidence.
E. Where the developer proposes that individual on-site water supply
systems shall be utilized within the subdivision, the developer shall
either install such facilities or shall guarantee (by deed restriction or
otherwise), as a condition of the sale of each lot or parcel within the
subdivision, that the facilities can be installed by the purchaser of such
lot or parcel. Individual on-site wells shall be subject to the standards
provided for within.
F. Minimum water supply requirements. In all subdivisions and land
developments served by public water, the following water pressure and
gallonage requirements shall apply:
(1) Residential use.
(a) A minimum domestic pressure of 30 pounds per square inch
shall be provided at each house to be connected to the water
main. The system to which the residential unit is connected
shall have sufficient capacity to supply a minimum of 300
gallons of water per residential unit per day within the
subdivision or land development.
(b) For purposes of fire protection in residential districts, the
system shall be demonstrably capable of providing fire flowwater
requirements, for a minimum duration of two hours, of
not less than 500 gallons per minute at a residual pressure of
20 pounds per square inch or more as required for
International Standards Organization (ISO) certification.
(2) Commercial or industrial use.
(a) A minimum pressure of 30 pounds per square inch shall be
provided at each commercial or industrial building connected
to the water supply main. When a builder wishes to connect to
a public water system, a study will be made to determine if
there is adequate water to supply the building and use.
(b) For purposes of fire protection in commercial and industrial
districts, 1,000 gallons per minute at 20 pounds per square
§ 160-46 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-46
155:377
inch residual pressure is required or the requirements for ISO
certification shall be met.
G. Approvals conditioned upon adequacy of public water supply. No
subdivision or land development application proposing a public water
supply system shall be granted preliminary or final plan approval unless
the applicant demonstrates, by a fair preponderance of the credible
evidence, full compliance with the provisions of this section.
H. Construction standards.
(1) Water mains shall be constructed of the cement-lined, ductile iron,
minimum Class 52 pipe, or as approved by the Township Engineer.
No extension of water mains shall be permitted for a pipe having a
diameter of less than six inches.
(2) All pipe shall have a minimum cover of three feet six inches from
grade to the crown of pipe.
(3) Generally, water mains shall be so designed as to form a loop
system to enhance the continual supply of fresh water. When dead
ends occur on new mains, they shall all be closed with cast iron
plugs and caps, a blowoff valve, a concrete anchor or a fire hydrant.
(4) Mains shall be drained through drainage branches or blowoffs to
dry wells from which the water can be pumped. Drainage branches,
blowoffs, air vents and appurtenances shall be provided with
valves.
(5) Blowoffs shall not be connected to any sewer or submerged in any
manner that will permit back siphonage in the distribution system.
All blowoffs should be located out of paving.
(6) Valves in water mains shall, where possible, be located on the
street property lines extended. A cast iron valve box or a masonry
pit shall be provided for every valve which has no gearing or
mechanism or for which the gearing or operating mechanism is
fully protected with a cast iron grease case. A masonry valve pit
shall be provided for every valve which has exposed gearing or
operating mechanisms.
(7) Manholes shall be constructed of brick or concrete, with cast iron
frames and covers, or as approved by the Township Engineer.
(8) Fire hydrants shall be provided as an integral part of any public
water system. They shall be located no farther than 600 feet apart,
as measured along traveled ways. Each hydrant shall be connected
to the main with a minimum of six-inch ductile iron branch
controlled by a minimum of an independent six-inch gate valve.
(9) Hydrants shall be located in a manner to provide complete
accessibility and so that the possibility of damage from vehicles or
injury to pedestrians will be minimized. When placed behind the
§ 160-46 CONCORD CODE § 160-46
155:378
§ 160-47. Stormwater management.
All stormwater management practices shall be in accordance with the
applicable sections of Chapter 148, Stormwater Management (refer to the
Appendixes).
§ 160-48. Soil erosion and sedimentation control.
All soil erosion and sedimentation control practices shall be in accordance
with the applicable sections of Chapter 148, Stormwater Management
(refer to the Appendixes).
§ 160-49. Natural features protection standards. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 371]
All uses and activities established after the effective date of this chapter
shall comply with these standards, except for a minor subdivision involving
three or fewer residential dwelling units. Site alterations, regrading, filling
or clearing of vegetation prior to the approval of plans for subdivision or
curb, the hydrant barrel shall be set so that no portion of the
pumper or nozzle cap will be less than 24 inches from the gutter
face of the curb. When set in the lawn space between the curb and
the property line, no portion of the hydrant or nozzle cap shall be
within six inches of the sidewalk.
(10) All hydrant connections shall be reviewed by the fire company
having jurisdiction with a favorable recommendation by the Chief
of said fire company being required.
I. It is recommended that two sources of groundwater be provided for
each community water system due to the usual density and demand
served by such systems. Each should be capable of supplying the
average daily demand of the proposed dwelling units. Although a twowell
system is ideal, there are alternatives, as follow, which would
ensure an adequate water supply:
(1) A single well capable of providing twice the daily average demand,
as demonstrated by a pumping test of at least 48 hours duration,
producing a stabilized drawdown of unchanging water level for at
least five hours' duration.
(2) A single well capable of supplying the average daily demand with
an additional reliable surface water source.
(3) A single well capable of supplying the average daily demand, plus a
dependable connection to another satisfactory public water supply
system.
(4) A second well is recommended for use as a monitor of the aquifer
and as a standby in the event of an emergency.
§ 160-46 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-49
155:379
land development shall be a violation of this chapter. In addition to the
standards set forth in § 160-50 and § 160-81B, the following shall apply:
A. Consideration shall be shown for all natural features, such as notable
trees, heritage trees, watercourses, wetlands, rock outcroppings and
similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness
and value to the remainder of the subdivision or land development. No
property may be altered in a way that will reduce the aggregate
acreage required to be protected under this section. If any area is
subject to restriction with respect to two or more resources under this
section, the more restrictive regulation shall control.
B. Tree masses, notable trees, and heritage trees shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible, and in no event shall more than 20% of a tree
mass be graded, cleared or built upon, except for approved agricultural,
historical, and/or recreational uses. All structures should be located in
such a manner as to minimize damage to vegetation. Existing open
areas should be developed instead of wooded areas. Areas in which
trees are retained should remain undisturbed out to the canopy drip
line and at the original grade level to the maximum extent possible.
"Notable trees" are trees located outside of a tree mass having a
twenty-four-inch DBH or greater.
C. No more than 20% of the notable trees and heritage trees on any
property shall be removed, and notable trees and heritage trees shall
not be removed unless they are located within the proposed cartway or
sidewalk portion of a street right-of-way, within 15 feet of the
foundation area of a new building, within a utility easement, within a
proposed parking area or within an area where regrading necessary to
achieve land development may endanger the trees. The Board of
Supervisors may require the landowner or developer to plant one tree
of not less than three inches in caliper for each tree of 12 inches DBH or
more to be removed, and two trees of not less than three inches in
caliper for each tree of 24 inches DBH or more to be removed.
D. Where a proposed subdivision or land development necessitates the
clearing of notable trees, heritage trees, or portions of tree masses
within the limits permitted by § 160-49B and C, landowners or
developers shall be guided by the following criteria in selecting trees
for clearing:
(1) The existence of disease, rot, dieback or other damage to the tree;
(2) Susceptibility of the tree to insect and disease attack;
(3) Species longevity;
(4) Wind-throw potential and characteristic of the soil to hold trees;
and
(5) Protection of buildings (e.g., dead and large limbs hanging over a
building should be removed).
§ 160-49 CONCORD CODE § 160-49
155:380
E. Landowners or developers shall exercise care to protect trees from
damage during construction in accordance with § 160-50B(2). Tree
removal shall be limited to the actual construction site necessary to
build and move construction equipment.
F. Streams, watercourses, wetlands, wetland margins and ponds.
(1) Such areas shall not be altered, regraded, developed, filled, piped,
diverted or built upon except:
(a) Roads may cross streams, watercourses, and wetlands or
wetland margins where design approval is obtained from the
Township, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and/or other applicable agency and where no other
reasonable access is available.
(b) Stormwater management facilities and fire ponds may be
placed in conjunction with a pond in accordance with this
chapter and Chapter 210, Zoning, when approved by the
Township.
(c) "Wetland margins." For wetlands of 5,000 square feet or larger
located upon a site, a wetland margin shall be provided. The
wetlands margin shall extend from the wetlands to the limit of
hydric soils or 75 feet, whichever is greater.
(2) In the event that a wetlands delineation, validated by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers, is shown to vary from the
wetlands boundary derived from the definition in Article II of this
chapter, the Corps' delineation will govern. The wetlands margin
will then be measured from the Corps' delineated boundary.
(3) Wetlands margins shall not be altered, regraded, filled or built
upon.
(4) Federal and state wetlands regulations. Whenever activities or
improvements would entail the regrading or placement of fill in
wetlands, the applicant shall provide the Township with proof that
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (Bureau
of Dams and Waterway Management) and the United States Army
Corps of Engineers have been contacted to determine the
applicability of state and federal wetland regulations for areas
identified as wetlands on the National Wetland Inventory (NWI)
Maps, United States Fish and Wildlife Service; which meet the
agencies' definitions of wetlands; or which are in accordance with
the Unified Federal Method.
(5) Land subject to flooding.
(a) Land subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health or
property and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable
shall not be platted for residential occupancy or for such other
§ 160-49 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-49
155:381
uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or
aggravate soil erosion or flood hazard until all such hazards
have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against
such hazards are provided by the subdivision or land
development plans.
(b) Such land within the subdivision or land development shall be
set aside on the plat for uses as shall not be endangered by
periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce
unsatisfactory living conditions.
(c) Where flooding is known to have occurred within an area
shown on the plat, such area shall be clearly marked "subject
to periodic flooding" and shall not be platted in streets and lots
unless approved otherwise in accordance with Chapter 210,
Zoning.
(d) Floodplain elevations shall be as established in Chapter 210,
Zoning, Article XX, entitled "Floodplain Conservation District."
(6) Streams. Riparian buffers, extending at least 35 feet outward from
the top-of-bank of a watercourse, shall be established on each side
of each stream. These buffers shall not be altered, removed,
regraded, filled, piped, or built upon, except that roads may cross a
riparian buffer where design approval is obtained from the
Township and any other applicable governmental agency and
where no other reasonable access is available.
G. Steep and very steep slopes.
(1) The intent of these regulations is as follows:
(a) To conserve and protect steep and very steep slopes from
inappropriate development, such as excessive grading,
landform alteration and extensive vegetation removal.
(b) To avoid potential hazards to property and the disruption of
ecological balance which may be caused by increased runoff,
flooding, soil erosion and sedimentation, blasting and ripping
of rock and landslide and soil failure.
(c) To encourage the use of steep and very steep slopes for
conservation and other uses which are compatible with the
preservation of natural resources and protection of areas of
environmental concern.
(2) The following uses are permitted in a Natural Features Protection
Area within areas of very steep slope and steep slope:
(a) In areas of very steep slope, provided that they are also in
compliance with all other provisions of this Code:
[1] Parks and outdoor recreational uses.
§ 160-49 CONCORD CODE § 160-49
155:382
[2] Logging and woodcutting approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
[3] Grading for the minimum portion of a driveway necessary
to access a single-family dwelling when it can be
demonstrated that no other alignment which avoids very
steep slopes is feasible.
[4] Yard areas of any permitted building so long as such
building is itself not within the very steep slope area,
unless permitted as a conditional use.
[5] Public sewer and public water lines.
(b) In areas of steep slope, provided that they are also in
compliance with all other provisions of this Code:
[1] Parks and other outdoor recreational uses.
[2] Tree farming, forestry and other agricultural uses
conducted in conformity with good conservation practices
as approved by the Board of Supervisors.
[3] Any road necessary to provide primary access to a use
listed in § 160-49G(2) when no practical alternative exists
in an area of lesser slope.
[4] Accessory uses (other than swimming pools) necessary for
the operation and maintenance of the above uses.
[5] Yard area of any permitted building or use.
[6] Public sewer and public water lines.
(3) It is not intended by this section to repeal, abrogate or impair any
regulations set forth in any other articles herein, any regulations of
Chapter 210, Zoning, or any easements, covenants or deed
restrictions, except that where this section imposes greater
restrictions, its provisions shall prevail. Further, nothing contained
in this section shall diminish in any way the provisions of the Clean
Streams Law113 and/or Chapter 102 of the Department of
Environmental Protection's rules and regulations or any other
applicable state, federal, county or Township regulations, codes,
ordinances and the like.
(4) Areas of steep and very steep slopes are depicted on Figure A-3 of
the Comprehensive Plan114 (refer to the Topography: Slope map in
the Appendixes) and constitute only a general representation,
based on the analysis of the contours displayed on the United
States Geological Survey (USGS) Quadrangles. As such, refined
113. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
114. Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices.
§ 160-49 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-49
155:383
mapping will be required to more accurately define the district, as
specified in Subsection G(5) below.
(5) Interpretation of steep and very steep slope areas.
(a) In any application for subdivision and/or land development
where the lot includes areas of steep and very steep slopes, the
applicant shall, using two-foot contours, delineate slopes from
15% to 25% (steep slopes) and greater than or equal to 25%
(very steep slopes). Further, the applicant shall use an actual
field topographic survey or aerial survey as the source of
contour information and the basis for depicting such slope
categories.
(b) This section shall apply only to those steep or very steep slopes
which exist for three consecutive two-foot contour intervals
(six cumulative vertical feet of slope). All steep and very steep
slope areas shall be shown for the purpose of Township review
and verification, but only those occurring over three
consecutive two-foot contour intervals will invoke the
standards of Subsection G(7).
(c) Once delineated, the mapping provided by the applicant will be
reviewed by the Planning Commission and the Township
Engineer. The applicant will be required to follow all
regulations of this section for those areas which reflect steep
slope and very steep slope conditions as determined in
accordance with this section through the Planning
Commission's and Township Engineer's review.
(6) Application procedures. Before a permit is issued for any
construction or land disturbance activity on land within or affecting
steep and very steep slope areas, the following material shall be
submitted for review by the Township Engineer:
(a) Plans drawn to a scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet,
sealed by a registered professional engineer, depicting the
following:
[1] The location, dimensions and elevation of the property.
[2] Existing and proposed uses and development.
[3] An earth-moving plan of the property which indicates
existing grades with contour lines at two-foot intervals and
proposed grades within the area of any proposed activity,
disturbance or construction. All areas of steep and/or very
steep slope shall be graphically distinguished.
[4] A site plan indicating existing and proposed structures,
other impervious surfaces, storm drainage facilities and
retaining walls. The site plan also shall locate and identify
§ 160-49 CONCORD CODE § 160-49
155:384
existing vegetation, including woodlands, open areas and
their ground-cover type within areas of steep and very
steep slopes, as well as proposed landscaping material to
be installed.
[5] Typical cross sections and elevations of the property and
proposed structures at intervals prescribed by the
Township Engineer, as well as architectural plans,
elevations and sections.
[6] Photographs showing existing uses, vegetation and
topography within the steep and very steep slope areas.
[7] A statement, signed and sealed by a registered architect or
professional engineer, explaining the building methods to
be used in overcoming foundation and other structural
problems created by slope conditions, preserving the
natural drainage, preventing soil erosion and excessive
surface-water runoff to neighboring properties and/or
streets and the type of sewage disposal and water supply.
[8] Plan, profile and typical cross sections of any proposed
street, emergency access or driveway within areas of steep
and very steep slopes, with the seal of a registered
professional engineer thereon.
[9] A statement, signed by the owner or future occupant at the
time of subdivision, land development or building permit
application, that there is a full understanding of any
difficulties associated with access stemming from such
slopes. No plan shall be approved and no conditional use
shall be granted by the Board of Supervisors without the
Township Engineer's review of this material and his
recommendation thereon.
(7) Standards and criteria for applications. In evaluating any
application for subdivision, land development, building permit or
conditional use permit approval within steep slope areas and very
steep slope areas, the Board of Supervisors shall determine
consistency of the proposal with the following:
(a) Disturbance to particularly sensitive features of the site shall
be minimized; special emphasis in planning for the site shall be
given to the protection of:
[1] The steepest areas of steep slopes, i.e., those in the 20% to
25% range.
[2] Soils on the edge of steep and very steep slopes with
seasonal high-water table.
§ 160-49 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-49
155:385
§ 160-50. Landscape plan requirements. [Amended 5-3-1994 by
Ord. No. 191; 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221; 12-15-1998 by Ord. No.
230; 2-6-2001 by Ord. No. 256]
[3] Underlying geology which comprises or contributes to a
major groundwater resource, including the flow of existing
springs.
(b) Disturbances shall be minimized where the length or area of
steep and very steep slope is extensive both on the site and on
adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site. The area which is
regraded and/or stripped of vegetation shall not exceed 30% of
each steep and very steep slope area.
(c) The proposed development, any impervious ground cover and
their resultant disturbance to the land and existing vegetative
cover will not cause surface water runoff and/or related
environmental problems off the site.
(d) Removal of or disturbance to existing vegetation in steep and
very steep slope areas shall be minimized. The proposed
impacts on existing vegetation shall be evaluated in terms of
the potentially detrimental effects on slope stability,
conveyance and recharge of stormwater, aesthetic
characteristics of the landscape and existing drainage
patterns. Further, it shall be demonstrated that any and all
reasonable mitigation techniques and procedures will be
utilized or have been considered in the preparation of the
subdivision and/or land development plan, such as
revegetation measures, control of soil erosion and
sedimentation, stormwater management and the like.
(e) Important visual qualities of the site shall, to the maximum
extent feasible, be retained. In addition to vegetation, these
may include hilltops/ridgelines, rock outcroppings and the
natural terrain and contours of the site.
(f) Road construction shall follow the natural topography, with
cuts and grading minimized.
(g) Innovative, imaginative building techniques that are wellsuited
to slope conditions shall be encouraged, consistent with
other applicable codes and regulations.
(h) The stability of the slope, as characterized by the existing
interrelationships among the soil, vegetation and rock, shall be
disturbed as little as possible.
(i) Proposed buildings and structures are of sound engineering
design and footings are designed in response to the site's
slope, soil and bedrock characteristics, and footings shall
extend to stable soil and/or bedrock.
§ 160-49 CONCORD CODE § 160-50
155:386
A. Landscaping shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in
Chapter 210, Zoning, related to landscaping in general (Article XXI),
screening and buffering (§ 210-193), and Appendixes D-1 to D-8b,115
inclusive, of this chapter. In addition, all required landscaping shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with a landscape plan approved
by the Board of Supervisors. The landscape plan shall depict all
proposed plantings required to compliment, screen or accentuate
buildings, roads, parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, sitting areas,
service or maintenance structures, courtyards and other site features.
B. Street trees/shade trees shall be provided along all streets where there
are no existing street trees/shade trees. When planted, street trees/
shade trees shall be located at least five feet within the right-of-way
line, unless they conflict with sidewalks, in which case they shall be
installed to minimize conflicts. No less than one three-inch-caliper
deciduous tree shall be planted for each 30 feet of street length. Such
trees shall be planted in alternating rows, whereby trees on one side of
the street are placed at intervals of 60 feet, and shall be subject to the
following:
(1) A list of approved street trees/shade trees for planting in Concord
Township is included in the appendixes,116 according to their
botanical and common names.
(2) Naturalistic tree groupings may be proposed in lieu of regularly
spaced street trees/shade tree plantings subject to the approval of
the Board of Supervisors. Size and quantity requirements shall be
at a minimum of those illustrated in Subsection B above.
(3) Where existing trees are retained along street rights-of-way, street
trees/shade trees do not need to be planted other than to replace
diseased or undesirable varieties.
(4) At intersections, such trees shall be located no closer than 50 feet
to the intersection of the street right-of-way.
C. Landscaping of parking and loading areas.
(1) Parking lots are to be landscaped to ensure the good appearance of
vehicular parking areas in Concord Township and to protect and
preserve the appearance, character and value of surrounding
neighborhoods and thereby promote the general welfare by
providing for the installation and maintenance of landscaping for
screening and aesthetic qualities. The Board of Supervisors finds
that the particular characteristics and qualities of Concord
Township justify regulations for parking lot landscaping to
perpetuate its aesthetic appeal on a Township-wide basis.
115. Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
116. Appendix D, Street Trees and Other Plantings, is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 160-50 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-50
155:387
(2) Landscape plan and review. The landscape plan for parking lots
shall be prepared as part of the landscape plan for the overall
development. Reference to reviewing the plan is made under site
plan review requirements at the end of the requirements for the
particular zoning district in Chapter 210, Zoning.
(3) Parking lot landscaping requirements.
(a) Off-street parking areas and parking lots shall be landscaped to
reduce wind and air turbulence, heat and noise, and the glare
of automobile lights; to reduce the level of carbon dioxide; to
provide shade; to ameliorate stormwater drainage problems;
to replenish the groundwater table; and to provide for a more
attractive setting.
(b) Perimeter buffering. The outer perimeter of all parking areas
shall be screened. Effective screens shall be accomplished
through the use of plant materials, fencing or walls and/or
mounding through the use of earthen berms.
[1] Buffering along public road frontage. See Appendix D-5.117
[2] Buffering from residential uses. A screen five feet wide
(minimum), six feet high (minimum) must be planted to
buffer all residential uses from parking areas for over five
vehicles and from all service areas, and must be protected
by a two-and-one-half-foot space between the edge of the
planting and curbing or wheelstops. The screen should
consist of evergreen shrubs, planted on four-foot centers,
or evergreen trees planted on ten-foot centers. Where
proposed plantings are less than six feet in height, berms,
walls, or fencing may be used to provide the required
height.
[3] Buffering between zoning districts. A screen of at least five
feet wide and 4 1/2 feet high shall separate parking lots
from any property which is in a different zoning district.
Passageways for vehicles from one lot to the other may be
kept free from planting. The screen should consist of
evergreen trees or shrubs planted on eight-foot centers, or
deciduous shrubs placed on five-foot centers.
(c) All parking areas shall be landscaped. Each parking lot shall
have one three-inch-minimum-caliper shade tree for every five
parking spaces. The size and location of existing trees to be
preserved within 15 feet, or proposed trees within 10 feet, of
the edge of any proposed parking lot shall be considered in
satisfying this requirement.
117. Editor's Note: Appendix D-5, Parking Lot Buffers: Planting Strips within setback on Road
Frontage, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 160-50 CONCORD CODE § 160-50
155:388
(d) Shrubs, groundcovers and other plant materials are
encouraged to be used to complement the required shade
trees, but shall not be the sole contribution to the landscaping.
(e) The type of plant materials to be used shall be subject to
review and approval by the Board of Supervisors upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission and shall be of a
quality as specified in this § 160-50.
(f) The landscaping and planting areas shall be reasonably
dispersed throughout the parking lot, except where there are
20 or more parking spaces, in which case the following shall
apply:
[1] Landscaped islands shall be provided at the end of each
parking bay of no more than 20 contiguous spaces
accessed from a single aisle. Such islands shall be a
minimum of eight feet in width and 20 feet in length. Such
islands shall be provided to enhance the appearance of the
parking area and to control access and movement within
the parking area.
[2] All planting islands and planting beds within a parking lot
shall be surfaced with groundcovers and/or dwarf shrubs
and shall not be grassed. Stone mulch may be used in
conjunction with groundcovers and shrubs. Shredded
hardwood mulch shall only be used to form the plant
saucers.
(4) Loading areas shall be screened from any adjacent property or use.
The screen shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height and shall be a
complete and effective visual barrier at the time of installation.
Screening may be provided by plantings, fencing, walls, berms, or
combinations thereof. Where existing vegetation sufficiently
buffers loading areas, the Board of Supervisors may waive the
requirement for additional screening.
D. All buildings for which landscaping is required shall be landscaped in
accordance with the following criteria:
(1) A combination of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs shall
be used as foundation plantings, i.e., plantings to be installed in
reasonably close proximity to the facades.
(2) One three-inch to three-and-one-half-inch caliper specimen
deciduous tree shall be planted for every one-hundred-foot length
of building perimeter, measured from end to end, of buildings,
without regard to indentations and the like in the buildings, and
excluding any enclosed walkway connectors and elevator cores. In
addition, two eight- to ten-foot high flowering trees or evergreen
trees must be provided for every one-hundred-foot length of
building perimeter.
§ 160-50 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-50
155:389
(3) Three evergreen and/or deciduous shrubs shall be planted for
every 20 feet of length of building perimeter.
(4) In calculating building perimeter for planting requirements, the
length of the building perimeter occupied by loading bays may be
deducted from the total building perimeter.
(5) Trees and shrubs shall be grouped in accordance with specific
needs and objectives.
E. Tree protection and replacement. No trees shall be removed except in
compliance with the requirements of § 160-49 of this Code. To the
extent that the provisions of § 160-49 are more restrictive than the
provisions of this section, § 160-49 shall control. The landowner or
developer shall protect trees to be retained from damage during
construction. The following procedures shall be followed in order to so
protect such trees: [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 371]
(1) Removal and replacement.
(a) Shade trees of twelve-inch DBH or more shall not be removed
unless authorization is granted by the Township and except in
complying with the requirements of § 160-49. The Board of
Supervisors may require the landowner or developer to plant
one tree of not less than three-inch caliper for each tree of
twelve-inch DBH or more to be removed, and two trees of not
less than three inches in caliper for each tree of 24 inches DBH
or more to be removed.
(b) On large, densely wooded parcels, the Board of Supervisors
may, at its discretion, allow a forest density survey to
determine the extent of large tree loss in the course of
proposed development. Tree replacement requirements will be
calculated using the procedure set forth in Subsection E(1)(c),
in conjunction with the loss estimate as prepared by a qualified
forester.
(c) Prior to construction, the following shall occur relative to tree
replacement plantings:
[1] The landowner or developer shall stake in the field the
limits of construction including the location of the building
foundation, driveway, proposed grading and any utility
easements to be constructed and cleared in the course of
the said construction and more than 10 feet from the
edges of same.
[2] Following the placement of stakes, the landowner or
developer shall conduct an inventory of trees of twelveinch
DBH or greater, located within the limits of
construction on the lot.
§ 160-50 CONCORD CODE § 160-50
155:390
[3] The landowner or developer shall depict the location of
replacement plantings on the landscape plan.
[4] Prior to construction, the landowner or developer shall
attend a preconstruction meeting with the Township
Engineer and the Township Landscaping Consultant to
review all procedures for tree removal and tree
replacement.
[5] Following construction, the developer shall plant, and
warrant for a period of 18 months following installation, a
tree of appropriate species as shown in the approved
landscape plan, and in accordance with all parts of
Appendix D.118 Any tree which dies within the eighteenmonth
period shall be replaced immediately.
[6] Prior to the issuance of a use and occupancy permit, the
Township shall inspect the lot to determine if all required
plantings have been installed.
[7] The required plantings shall be shown on an as-built/asinstalled
landscape plan.
(2) No more than three inches of soil shall be placed around the trunks
of trees which are to remain. For those trees which are to remain,
where more than five inches of soil are to be placed, tree wells shall
be constructed to preserve such trees.
(3) Trees to remain shall be protected in accordance with the tree
protection details in Appendix D-8a.119
(4) No boards or other material shall be nailed to trees during
construction, and no trees shall be sprayed with paint.
(5) Heavy-equipment operators shall avoid damaging existing tree
trunks and roots. Feeder roots shall not be cut closer than 25 feet
to tree trunks.
(6) Tree trunks and exposed roots damaged during construction shall
be protected from further damage by being pruned flush, and if
trunks are scarred, they shall be traced out for proper healing.
(7) Tree limbs damaged during construction shall be sawed flush to
tree trunks.
(8) The operation of heavy equipment over root systems of such trees
shall be minimized in order to prevent soil compaction.
118. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
119. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 160-50 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-50
155:391
(9) Deciduous trees shall be given a heavy application of rooting
fertilizer to aid in their recovery from possible damage caused by
construction operations.
(10) Construction debris shall not be disposed of near or around the
bases of such trees.
F. All screening and buffering as required in § 210-193 of Chapter 210,
Zoning, shall comply with Appendixes D-3, D-4, D-5, D-6, D-8a and
D-8b.120
G. All landscaping shall comply with all parts of Appendix D.121
H. All required landscape plans shall be submitted at the time when all
other required applications and/or plans are submitted. Plans shall be
based on and reflect the following:
(1) The functional and aesthetic factors which relate to the tract and to
the principal and accessory buildings and other structures.
(2) Concealing views to the tract.
(3) Enhancing views from and within the tract.
(4) Screening and complimenting proposed buildings and other
structures.
(5) Creating visual interest for the users and/or residents of the
proposed project.
(6) Using plant materials which are hardy and acclimated to the
conditions at the tract and within the Township.
I. A landscaping plan shall include notes, diagrams, sketches or other
depictions to present the consideration and analysis of the following:
(1) An analysis of the site in terms of the existing views to and from the
areas which are proposed for development, existing topography
and vegetation conditions, and other existing conditions which are
relevant to the site.
(2) An analysis of proposed planting and other landscaping needs as
related to screening views of buildings, screening buildings and
sections of buildings, screening parking areas and other areas
where vehicles are parked, screening storage areas, screening site
utilities, and other appropriate types of screening.
(3) The consideration of locations where plantings and other
landscaping is needed to provide visual interest, define outdoor
spaces, compliment the proposed architectural style and achieve
120. Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
121. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 160-50 CONCORD CODE § 160-50
155:392
other functional and aesthetic requirements for buffer areas, buffer
planting strips and other landscaped areas.
J. A preliminary and/or final landscape plan shall reflect the following
detailed criteria:
(1) Buffer planting strips shall be installed and maintained in the
buffer areas at the width required in Article XXI of Chapter 210,
Zoning, to form a continuous visual buffer. In addition to
groundcovers and evergreen shrubs, the buffer planting strip shall
be comprised of evergreen trees which are a minimum of eight feet
in height at the time of planting and which shall be spaced at tenfoot
centers. The combined evergreen shrub and tree plantings
shall constitute a continuous visual screen at the time of occupancy
of any buildings and/or at the time of initiation of any use.
(2) Street trees/shade trees, as required in Subsection B.
(3) The outer perimeter of all parking areas shall be screened.
Effective screens shall be accomplished through the use of plant
materials, fencing or walls and/or mounding through the use of
earthen berms.
(4) Other landscaping, including trees, shrubs and groundcovers, shall
be provided along walkways, in courtyards, around sitting areas, at
the entrance to the site and in other highly visible locations,
especially on the outer side of any internal access roads which are
visible from a public street which may adjoin a tract, at the
entrance to buildings, around structures used for service, storage
or maintenance purposes, and around dumpsters and trash storage
areas.
(5) Requirements and standards for landscaping, in addition to the
specified above, shall be as determined by the Board of
Supervisors. The Board may require plantings to reduce glare, to
abate other nuisances, to enhance the planting area in conjunction
with streets, and to fulfill screening and other functional purposes.
(6) The location, type, size, height and other characteristics of
landscaping shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
K. The preliminary landscape plan shall be drawn at a scale of at least one
inch equals 50 feet. It shall be totally coordinated with the overall site
plan in terms of its relationship to proposed buildings, roads, parking
areas, walks, fencing, benches, signs, lighting and other like structures.
It shall contain the following:
(1) A delineation of existing and proposed plant materials, including
scalloped tree lines to indicate existing woods or trees to remain.
§ 160-50 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-50
155:393
(2) A plant list wherein the botanical and common name of proposed
plants are tabulated, along with the quantity, caliper, height,
spread and other dimensions and characteristics.
(3) A delineation of other landscaping features, such as berms,
planting beds to be used for herbaceous plants, areas to be devoted
to lawns and other elements of the proposed improvements, such
as fences, walls, berms, retaining walls, lighting, benches, signs,
paving, stone, tree wells and the like.
(4) One color rendering of the preliminary landscape plan shall be
submitted for review by the Township, in addition to the number of
prints which are otherwise required. The color rendering shall
reflect total coordination with the overall site plan in terms of its
relationship to proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, walks,
walls, fencing, benches, signs, lighting and other like structures.
(5) A written narrative of the analysis and objectives for plantings, as
required under Subsection I above.
L. A final landscape plan shall be submitted after the Township has
reviewed the preliminary landscape plan and submitted comments on
the plan to the applicant. The final landscape plan shall be drawn at a
scale of at least one inch equals 50 feet. It shall be totally coordinated
with the overall site plan and shall contain the following:
(1) A final version of all of the plan requirements stated in Subsection J
for a preliminary landscape plan.
(2) Details for the planting and staking of trees and the planting of
shrubs and any other details which depict other related installation
or protection, such as groundcover spacing, tree fencing, tree
grates and guards, tree wells and the like. Refer to Appendix
D-8b122 for tree planting details.
(3) Information regarding the continued maintenance of all plantings
and notes indicating that all plantings will be installed, maintained
and replaced, if dead or diseased, in locations as shown on the
approved landscape plan.
(4) Details, specifications, and maintenance instructions pertaining to
specialized plantings, such as wildflower meadows, wetland
plantings, stream bank stabilization plantings, or any other
landscape plantings which may have unique and specific
requirements.
(5) All final landscape plans shall be accompanied by a cost estimate
prepared by the landowner or developer. The cost estimate shall be
evaluated by the Township and revised if necessary. The cost
122. Editor's Note: Appendix D-8b is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 160-50 CONCORD CODE § 160-50
155:394
§ 160-51. Buffer areas.
§ 160-52. Recreational areas. [Amended 7-7-1998 by Ord. No. 223]
estimate shall serve as a basis of establishing an escrow account
related to landscaping.
M. Planting specifications.
(1) Refer to Appendices D-4 and D-8b123 for additional requirements.
A. All buffer areas shall be in accordance with the requirements for the
same, as set forth in Article XXI of Chapter 210, Zoning.
B. All required buffer areas shall be depicted on plans for proposed
subdivision and/or land development and shall be in accordance with
this article.
A. The public dedication of suitable land shall be provided for the use
intended; and, upon agreement with the applicant or developer, the
construction of recreational facilities, the payment of fees-in-lieu
thereof, the private reservation of the land, or a combination, for park
or recreation purposes as a condition precedent to final plan approval
shall be required in accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. The following general provisions shall apply:
(1) Each residential subdivision and/or land development shall set
aside 2,200 square feet of land for each residential dwelling unit in
the proposed development for park or recreational purposes, and
each commercial, industrial or other nonresidential subdivision or
land development shall set aside 5% of the land in the tract
proposed to be developed for park or recreational purposes.
(2) The developer of land in the R-A and R-AH Districts shall receive a
credit for any land reserved for park or recreational purposes and
accepted by the Township under this chapter towards the
requirements of any provisions within Chapter 210, Zoning,
requiring recreational facilities.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a development plan
approved and developed pursuant to the planned residential
development provisions of Article X, XI or XII of Chapter 210,
Zoning, or to subdivision or land developments creating two or less
additional residential lots making use of all contiguous land then
owned. In addition, the provisions of this § 160-52 shall not apply to
any plan application, whether preliminary or final, pending at the
time of enactment of this Chapter 160 and to which Township
Ordinance No. 163 or 174 is applicable.124
123. Editor's Note: Said appendixes are located at the end of this chapter.
§ 160-50 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-52
155:395
C. If it is determined that the land proposed to be dedicated is not suitable
for the use intended by reason of its size, shape and/or location and if
park or recreational lands are already available and accessible to the
proposed development, the applicant or developer shall make payment
of a fee-in-lieu of dedication of land. Such determination shall also be
made in accordance with Subsections I, J and K of § 160-52.
D. The amount of the fee-in-lieu shall be based upon the Open Space and
Recreational Plan of Concord Township, dated July 24, 1995, adopted
August 1, 1995, and as determined from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors. Payment shall be due and payable at the time
of final plan approval of the application for subdivision and/or land
development or, if as a condition of final plan approval, shall be included
in the required development agreement in accordance with § 160-14 of
this chapter, together with posting of financial security in accordance
with Section 509 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.125However, all such payments shall be made by the time of
application for the first building permit. [Amended 12-4-2001 by Ord.
No. 265]
E. A combination of dedicated land and fee-in-lieu shall be provided if it is
determined that suitable park or recreational land is available in a
particular subdivision and/or land development which is bisected by or
divided by a service area boundary, relative to criteria set forth in
Subsections I and J of § 160-52 of this chapter. In such cases, the fee-inlieu
shall be applied only to the number of lots or units which are within
the Service Areas for Selected Recreational Sites, Figure 2, of the
Concord Township Open Space and Recreation Plan of July 24, 1995.
F. The amount and location of land to be dedicated or the fees to be paid
are to be used for the purpose of providing park or recreational
purposes, including facilities accessible to the subdivision and/or land
development and shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the
park or recreational facilities by future inhabitants of the subdivision
and/or land development. Fees collected for park or recreational
purposes shall be utilized for the recreational sites and within the
service areas depicted on Figure 2, Service Areas for Selected
Recreational Sites, from the Concord Township Open Space and
Recreation Plan of July 1995.
G. All moneys paid to the Township pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be placed in a Neighborhood Park and Recreation
Development Fund to be established by the Board of Supervisors
clearly identifying the specific recreational facilities for which the fee
was received. Said fund shall be used by the Township for the
124. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 163 regulated the acquisition and development of park and
recreation areas upon application for improvement of land. Said ordinance was
superseded by this current Concord Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance, Ordinance No. 174 of 1990, and is only applicable to plan applications pending
at the time of adoption of this current ordinance.
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
§ 160-52 CONCORD CODE § 160-52
155:396
acquisition and improvement of park or recreational sites and land
in accordance with the Township Open Space and Recreation Plan,
recognizing that funds shall be expended only on properly allocated
portions of the cost incurred to acquire land or construct the specific
recreational facilities for which the funds were collected.
H. Land to be publicly dedicated to the Township shall be by fee-simple
deed, free and clear of all encumbrances. The executed deed shall be
delivered to the Township for recording at the time of final plan
approval and prior to signing of the approved plan by the Township
Supervisors, subject to the following:
(1) If public dedication of the land is rejected by the Township, the land
may alternatively be conveyed to a legally constituted homeowners'
association or retained by and managed by such private ownership
as the Board of Supervisors may approve so long as its use remains
open to the residents of the proposed development. In the event
that the recreational land is to be privately owned, adequate
provision shall be made for its maintenance and the posting of
adequate financial security in accordance with Section 509 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.126
(2) All criteria of Subsections I, J and K of § 160-52 shall apply.
I. In the event that the applicant or developer of land located within any
service area shown in Figure 2, Service Areas for Selected Recreational
Sites, in the Concord Township Open Space and Recreation Plan, dated
July 24, 1995, proposes to dedicate land and/or construct recreational
facilities, the applicant or developer shall submit a recreational study
prepared by a recreational planner or a certified planner to verify that:
(1) All criteria of Subsection J(1) through (11), inclusive of § 160-52
have been met, as well as all criteria of Subsection B(1) of § 160-52.
(2) The proposed recreational facilities and/or improvements are not
available within the service areas shown in Figure 2.
(3) The proposed recreational facilities and/or improvements will be
properly owned, managed and maintained by a responsible entity
such as a homeowners' association, the governing documents for
which shall be approved by the Township Solicitor.
(4) The proposed recreational facilities shall be subject to a
declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions which shall be
approved by the Township Solicitor.
(5) The proposed park or recreational area shall be suitably
landscaped as depicted on a landscape plan in accordance with the
provisions of § 160-50 of the Township Code (Subdivision and Land
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10509.
§ 160-52 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-52
155:397
Development, Landscaping requirements) and which is approved
by the Township.
J. The determination of the suitability of land which is acceptable for
dedication or use for park or recreational purposes shall be based on
the following additional criteria:
(1) The land must be readily accessible to all residents or expected
users of the development by virtue of at least one side of each site
abutting a public street for a minimum distance of 50 feet.
(2) The land shall be located so that it equally serves all residents or
expected users of the subdivision and/or land development.
(3) The shape of the land shall be suitable to accommodate those park
or recreational activities appropriate to the location and needs of
the residents or expected users of the development.
(4) Any parcel of the land shall be at least one acre in size and no less
than 50 feet in width.
(5) Soil and drainage shall be suitable for the intended park or
recreational uses.
(6) The intended land shall be contiguous.
(7) Such land shall have an average slope of less than 7% and shall
have no more than 30% of the land contained within the boundaries
of a floodplain, or steep slope area greater than 15%, or a
combination of floodplain and steep slope.
(8) Provisions shall be made for vehicular parking so that any site can
be adequately served and accessed pursuant to the provisions of
§ 160-44 of the Township Code (Subdivision and Land
Development, Parking areas and parking lots).
(9) Provisions shall be made for trails, footpaths, bicycle paths,
crosswalks and other pedestrian circulation systems and
accessways pursuant to the provisions of § 160-42 of the Township
Code (Subdivision and Land Development, Sidewalks, crosswalks
and pedestrian paths).
(10) Such land shall be consistent with the findings and
recommendations set forth in the Concord Township Open Space
and Recreation Plan, dated July 24, 1995, adopted August 1, 1995.
(11) The overall design of all park or recreational land shall be in
accordance with the Guidelines of the National Recreation and
Park Association (NRPA) in their Park, Recreation, Open Space and
Greenway Guidelines, dated 1995, as may be amended from time to
time.
§ 160-52 CONCORD CODE § 160-52
155:398
§ 160-53. Utility easements and rights-of-way.
§ 160-54. Other utilities.
K. If the recreational study and related documents are not approved by the
Township, then the Board of Supervisors shall require the payment of a
fee in lieu of the dedication of land and/or the construction of
recreational facilities.
A. Utility easements shall be required to facilitate the maintenance and
repair of utility lines, sewers, community on-lot sewage disposal
systems, wells and drainage structures. Facilities shall be located
within a street right-of-way or in the center of an easement.
B. Utility easements with a minimum of 30 feet shall be provided as
necessary for utilities and storm drainage, except for petroleum
transmission lines, as described in § 160-54B, and for multipurpose
easements where the minimum width shall be at least 10 feet outside
any such structure or subeasement.
C. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream within a stabilized structure (such as
concrete culverts, concrete gutters, gabions, pipes and the like), there
shall be a drainage easement conforming substantially with the line of
the watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve
natural drainage but not less than 30 feet or as may be required or
requested by the Township Engineer. The landowner or developer shall
properly grade and seed slopes and fence any open ditches when it is
deemed necessary by the Township.
D. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
E. Nothing shall be permitted to be placed or planted within the area of a
utility easement. The area shall be maintained as lawn or meadow.
Shrubbery may be planted when approved by the Township.
F. Utility easements shall be described in a deed as shown on the
approved plan.
G. Petroleum products or natural gas transmission lines. Unless otherwise
indicated by various transmission line companies, a minimum easement
of 50 feet shall be provided.
H. There shall be a minimum distance of 50 feet, measured at the shortest
distance, between any proposed dwelling and any existing natural gas
or petroleum product transmission right-of-way line.
A. All other utility lines, including but not limited to electric, gas,
streetlight supply, cable television and telephone, shall be placed
underground. Installation of all utilities shall be in strict accordance
§ 160-52 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-54
155:399
§ 160-55. Grading.
All grading practices shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of
Chapter 148, Stormwater Management (refer to the Appendixes).
§ 160-56. Retaining walls.
§ 160-56.1. Buildings. [Added 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 230]
with the engineering standards and specifications of the Township and
public utility concerned.
B. In accordance with the provisions of the Act of December 10, 1974, P.L.
852, No. 287, as amended (73 P.S. § 176 et seq.), all developers,
contractors, etc., will contact all applicable utilities and accurately
determine the locations and depth of all underground utilities within
the boundaries of the tract proposed for development prior to
excavation. A list of the applicable utilities and their phone numbers
shall appear on the plans submitted for review and proof shall be
presented to the Township prior to final plan approval.
A. All retaining walls shall be designed and approved in accordance with
the following:
(1) Such walls shall be designed by a structural engineer, whose seal
shall appear on the plans.
(2) Such walls shall be constructed to have a batter, depth of footing,
anchoring, drainage and materials to provide for maximum safety.
Special safety precautions shall be taken whenever such walls are
constructed in or near areas of steep slope and very steep slope.
(3) All grading above and below such walls shall comply with this
article.
(4) Pressure-treated timber retaining walls shall not exceed a height of
four feet above grade.
(5) All construction details for such walls shall be shown in accordance
with Articles V and VI.
(6) Safety rails shall be provided where appropriate for retaining walls.
B. All retaining walls shall also be designed in accordance with Chapter
148, Stormwater Management (refer to the Appendixes).
A. Whenever the total gross floor area of a building, on a lot in the C-1
District, exceeds 30,000 square feet, the following shall apply:
(1) If more than 30,000 square feet of building footprint/floor area is
proposed, then separate buildings shall be constructed. Each
separate building shall be 60 feet from any other building.
§ 160-54 CONCORD CODE § 160-56.1
155:400
(2) If separate buildings are constructed, the sixty-foot space between
them shall have twelve-foot sidewalks adjoining each building;
eight-foot parking/drop-off/ loading-unloading space adjoining each
sidewalk; and ten-foot accessways straddling the center of the
sixty-foot space.
(3) The "Main Street" environment to be created under § 160-56.1A(2)
shall be landscaped with shade trees of at least three-inch caliper
at thirty-foot intervals, within the required twelve-foot wide
sidewalk area.
(4) At least one centrally located pedestrian plaza area, comprising an
area of at least 6,500 square feet shall be provided. The pedestrian
plaza shall include shade trees, planters, benches and plaza
surfacing of brick, flagstone or other similar unit pavers.
(5) The building shall have vertical treatments to reduce the mass of
an otherwise horizontal, windowless big box. The vertical
treatments shall include such items as windows, columns,
archways, porticos and a vertical bay form of gabled roof with bays
of 24 feet in width.
(6) All of the requirements of this Article VIII shall be presented in
drawings at the time of application for conditional use approval or
other plan approval.
B. Whenever the total gross floor area of a building on a lot in the C-2
District exceeds 65,000 square feet, the following shall apply:
(1) If more than 65,000 square feet of building footprint/floor area is
proposed, then separate buildings shall be constructed. Each
separate building shall be 60 feet from any other building.
(2) If separate buildings are constructed, the sixty-foot space between
them shall have twelve-foot sidewalks adjoining each building;
eight-foot parking/drop-off/ loading-unloading space adjoining each
sidewalk; and ten-foot accessways straddling the center of the
sixty-foot space.
(3) The "Main Street" environment to be created under § 160-56.1B(2)
shall be landscaped with shade trees of at least three-inch caliper
at thirty-foot intervals, within the required twelve-foot wide
sidewalk area.
(4) At least one centrally located pedestrian plaza area comprising an
area of at least 6,500 square feet shall be provided. The pedestrian
plaza shall include shade trees, planters, benches and plaza
surfacing of brick, flagstone or other similar unit pavers.
(5) The building shall have vertical treatments to reduce the mass of
an otherwise horizontal, windowless big box. The vertical
treatments shall include such items as windows, columns,
§ 160-56.1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-56.1
155:401
archways, porticos and a vertical bay form of gabled roof with bays
of 24 feet in width.
(6) All of the requirements of this Article VIII shall be presented in
drawings at the time of application for conditional use approval or
other plan approval.
§ 160-56.1 CONCORD CODE § 160-56.1
155:402
ARTICLE IX
Mobile Home Parks
§ 160-57. General applicability.
§ 160-58. Use regulations.
The uses allowed within a mobile home development shall be as specified in
§ 210-58 of Chapter 210, Zoning.
§ 160-59. Application procedures.
All applications for mobile home developments shall follow the procedures
established in § 210-67A of Chapter 210, Zoning. No application for
subdivision or land development approval for the construction of a mobile
home development will be accepted until the Board of Supervisors has given
approval pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 210, Zoning.
§ 160-60. Site design.
All regulations of §§ 210-59 through 210-63 of Chapter 210, Zoning, shall be
adhered to in mobile home developments. In addition thereto, the following
regulations shall apply.
A. Individual mobile homes. Individual mobile homes may be erected on
any lot where the use is permitted, provided that compliance is made
with zoning requirements, § 160-60A and B, § 160-62B(3), § 160-62C(3),
§ 160-63, § 160-64, § 160-65 and § 160-67A through F of this article and
all other applicable regulations. Tracts of land may be developed and
improved for the purpose of erecting two or more mobile homes
provided that zoning requirements, all requirements of this chapter,
including those sections referenced above, and other applicable
regulations are met. The following regulations of this article apply to
mobile home development, as defined in this chapter.
B. Mobile home developments. The provisions of this article shall be
followed in the construction or alteration of all mobile home
developments (as defined in this chapter) planned for tracts of land 15
acres or greater in size in accordance with Article IX (Mobile Home
Development District) of Chapter 210, Zoning. These regulations are in
addition to those set forth in Article IX of Chapter 210, Zoning, and
other applicable regulations of this chapter as referenced herein;
compliance with all regulations of both ordinances is required.
A. Arrangement of structures and facilities. The tract, including mobile
home stands, patios, other dwellings and structures and all tract
improvements, shall be organized in relation to topography, the shape
of the plot and the shape, size and position of structures and common
facilities. Special attention shall be given to new mobile home designs
and to common appurtenances that are available.
§ 160-57 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-60
155:403
B. Adaptation to tract assets. Each mobile home unit or other dwelling or
structure shall be fitted to the terrain with a minimum disturbance of
the land and a minimum elevation difference between the floor level of
the unit and the ground elevation under it. Existing trees and shrubs,
rock formations, streams, floodplains, steep slopes and other natural
features of the tract shall be preserved in accordance with the
standards of Article VIII. Favorable views shall be emphasized by the
plan.
C. Courts and spaces. Groups or clusters of units so placed as to create
interior spaces and courtyards shall be incorporated whenever feasible.
D. Orientation. Mobile homes are encouraged to be arranged in a variety
of orientations and are strongly encouraged to have many units with
their long sides facing the street, rather than their ends, in order to
provide variety and interest. Site layout shall be designed to ensure that
mobile home units are offset to block long uninterrupted vistas between
the units.
E. Street layout. Gridiron layouts and street patterns unrelated to the
topography of the site are to be avoided.
F. Streets.
(1) The street system of the mobile home development (MHD) shall be
designed so as to:
(a) Create a separation of automobile and pedestrian circulation
by means of a system of roads and pedestrian walkways.
(b) Relate harmoniously with land uses within and adjacent to the
mobile home development.
(c) Create efficient and safe connections with the existing road
systems of the Township in order to ensure proper ingress and
egress to and from the mobile home development.
(d) Minimize through traffic in residential areas.
(2) Location and arrangement of streets.
(a) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location
of all streets shall conform to the Official Map of Concord
Township, as adopted or amended, and shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical
conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be
served by such streets.
(b) Where such is not shown in the Official Map, the arrangement
of streets in the development shall either provide for the
continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal
streets in surrounding areas or conform to a plan for the
§ 160-60 CONCORD CODE § 160-60
155:404
neighborhood approved or adopted by the Board of
Supervisors to meet a particular situation where topographical
or other conditions make continuance or conformance to
existing streets impracticable.
(c) Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
(d) To facilitate snow removal and to permit easy access for firefighting
equipment and delivery trucks, dead-end streets (culsde-
sac), designed to be so permanently, shall be provided at the
closed end with a turnaround having an outside cartway radius
of at least 40 feet and a right-of-way line radius of at least 50
feet. Such streets shall be no longer than 700 feet, measured
from its intersecting center line to the center of the
turnaround, except where topographical or other conditions
make this limitation impracticable as determined by the Board
of Supervisors. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
(3) Access to streets.
(a) Where the mobile home development abuts or contains a
present or proposed arterial or collector street, reverse
frontage with screened planting contained in a twenty-foot
nonaccess easement along the right-of-way shall be required
unless Board of Supervisors' approval is obtained to alternative
treatment, as may be necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties or other abutting properties and to
afford separation of through and local traffic.
(b) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where control thereof is vested in the Township under
conditions approved by the Board of Supervisors. When the
development adjoins unsubdivided acreage, new streets shall
be provided through to the boundary lines of the development
with temporary easements for turnaround.
(4) Street intersections.
(a) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 150 feet should
be avoided.
(b) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at
less than 60°.
(c) Right-of-way lines at street intersections shall be rounded with
a radius of 25 feet or with a greater radius where the Board of
Supervisors may permit comparable cutoffs or chords in place
of rounded corners.
§ 160-60 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-60
155:405
(d) To the fullest extent possible, intersections with major traffic
streets shall not be located less than 800 feet apart, measured
from center line to center line.
(e) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets shall be avoided, and where such avoidance is
impossible, such intersections shall be designed with extreme
care for both vehicular and pedestrian safety.
(f) Grades at intersections shall be in conformance with
Subsection F(7) below.
(g) Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections of
streets. There shall be a clear sight triangle, measuring 75 feet
along the intersecting street lines from the point of
intersection indicated on the plan, that is maintained free and
clear of shrubs, structures, signs and other visual obstructions.
(h) The intersection should be designed and graded to allow for
proper drainage.
(5) Street widths and setback lines. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No.
221; 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 234]
(a) Street right-of-way and cartway widths shall be as required in
§ 160-39C; provided, however, that private streets located in
an adult residential community mobile home development shall
be subject to the provisions of § 160-60F(12).
(b) Additional rights-of-way and cartway widths than those
specified in this or other ordinances may be required by the
Board of Supervisors in order to lessen traffic congestion, to
secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to facilitate
the adequate provision for transportation and other public
requirements or to promote the general welfare.
(c) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street of
inadequate right-of-way width, additional right-of-way width
shall be provided to conform to the standards established in
Subsection F(5)(a).
(6) Street alignment.
(a) Except for secondary-residential streets, there shall be a
tangent of at least 100 feet, measured at the center line
between curves,
(b) The minimum radius at the center line for curves on collector
streets shall be 300 feet, and for secondary residential streets
it shall be 150 feet. Proper superelevation shall be provided for
curves less than 600 feet in radius on collector streets.
(7) Street grades.
§ 160-60 CONCORD CODE § 160-60
155:406
(a) Street grades shall not exceed the following:
Street Type Percent Grade
Collector 6%
Secondaryresidential
10%
(b) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding 1%
and shall be designed in relation to the extent of grade change
and to provide the following minimum lengths of curves:
[1] For over crests (summits), for each four-percent difference
in gradients, 125 feet in length of curve shall be provided.
[2] For under crests (sags), for each four-percent difference in
gradients, 100 feet in length of curve shall be provided.
(c) Where the grade of any street at the approach to an
intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided
having a minimum length of 50 feet measured back from the
street line, within which no grade shall exceed a maximum of
5%. Furthermore, the maximum grade within an intersection
shall not exceed 1%.
(d) No street grade shall be less than 0.5%.
(e) All streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way.
Maximum side slopes within the right-of-way shall not exceed
1 1/2 feet horizontal to one foot vertical and shall be
adequately stabilized with appropriate plant materials.
(8) Street names. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or
be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall
be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(9) Street signs and lighting.
(a) Street name signs conforming to Township specifications shall
be erected and painted in accordance with said specifications
at all street intersections or junctions in all developments at
the expense of the developer.
(b) The developer shall install or cause to be installed, at the
developer's expense, such streetlighting facilities as may be
deemed adequate and as may be prescribed at the time the
development plan is approved, and the developer shall pay the
cost of operating said streetlights until such time as the street
or street upon which said lights are installed shall be accepted
by resolution of the Board of Supervisors as part of the public
road system of the Township or until the Board of Supervisors
condemns such street or streets for use as a public street.
§ 160-60 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-60
155:407
(10) Access limitations. Mobile home lots may have direct access only
onto minor internal streets. Direct access from a mobile home lot
shall not be permitted onto the street(s) from which the mobile
home development gains primary access.
(11) Conversions. Any road built as a private road and later proposed
for conversion to a public road shall be brought up to the applicable
standards for public roads prior to being ordained as a public way,
unless this requirement is waived by the Board of Supervisors
subsequent to determining that compliance with the requirement
would have a negative effect on the mobile home development.
(12) Private streets. [Added 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 234]
(a) The provisions of §§ 160-39C(2) and 160-39E regarding private
streets shall not apply to private streets in an adult residential
community mobile home development. Private streets in an
adult residential community mobile home development shall be
governed by the provisions set forth below in Subsection
F(12)(b) through (e), inclusive.
(b) Private residential streets are permitted only if they serve as
access to no more than five lots. A maximum of three interior
lots may access the private street; provided, however, that at
the discretion of the developer of an adult residential
community mobile home development, all of the streets within
a mobile home development may be designated as private
streets. All lots which abut a private street shall use the private
street for access exclusively.
(c) Private residential streets shall be designed to meet the
following standards:
[1] A minimum of a forty-foot right-of-way shall be provided.
[2] A minimum of an eighteen-foot cartway shall be provided
for private residential streets that provide access for no
more than five lots. A minimum of a twenty-four-foot
cartway shall be provided for private residential streets
that provide access to six or more lots. On-street parking
shall be restricted to only one side of the private
residential street.
[3] Lot area and setback requirements for lots which abut
private streets shall be the same as are required along
public streets in addition to the interior lot standards as
set forth in § 160-43H.
[4] A private street in an adult residential community mobile
home development shall otherwise be in conformance with
all design standards, except that conformance with
§ 160-60 CONCORD CODE § 160-60
155:408
§ 160-42 is not required. Rolled curbing instead of vertical
curbing is required for use on private streets.
(d) Private streets in an adult residential community mobile home
development shall be indicated as such on the record plan and
shall be subject to contract and guarantee requirements
outlined in Article X of Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land
Development. The private street shall be owned and
maintained by a homeowners' association comprised of the lot
owners or pursuant to alternate arrangements approved by the
Township such as a recorded maintenance/easement
agreement.
(e) Refer to § 160-41 for design standards and requirements for
driveways serving one or two dwellings or buildings.
G. Fire lanes and hydrants.
(1) No dwelling unit or part of a unit shall be located more than 150
feet from a duly improved and accessible fire lane, as defined
below, nor more than 600 feet from a private or public street or a
fire hydrant. All fire hydrants and fire lanes shall be subject to the
approval of the Township.
(2) Fire lanes shall have a minimum unobstructed right-of-way width of
40 feet; and there shall be constructed within this right-of-way an
all-weather and well drained surfaced cartway with a minimum
width of 28 feet. The extension of fire lanes shall begin from one or
more private or public streets.
(3) Dead-end fire lanes shall be terminated with an unobstructed
vehicular turnaround or cul-de-sac with a minimum right-of-way
radius of 50 feet. Dead-end fire lanes shall have a maximum length
of 400 feet.
(4) The location of fire lanes shall conform to plans for the extension of
streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewer and other
drainage facilities and public utilities as contained in this and other
ordinances of the Township of Concord and shall provide adequate
access to buildings by firemen and other emergency services.
(5) Fire hydrants must be provided by the developer. The number, type
and location of fire hydrants and the size and rate of flow of feeder
lines shall be subject to the approval of the Township Fire Marshal.
(6) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until fire lanes are
constructed and hydrants tested and approved by the Township
Fire Marshal.
H. Pedestrian circulation.
(1) General requirements. All mobile home developments shall provide
safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian walkways of adequate width
§ 160-60 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-60
155:409
for intended use, durable and convenient to maintain, between
individual mobile homes, mobile home development streets, as
community facilities provided for the residents and off-site
pedestrian traffic generators, such as schools, bus stops,
commercial centers, etc. These pedestrian walkways may parallel
vehicular roadways, where they shall only be required on one side,
or they may form a separate but coordinated system away from
streets. Walkways must be provided wherever pedestrian traffic is
concentrated and where school children congregate but may be
waived elsewhere if the applicant successfully demonstrates a lack
of need to the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Common walk system. Where a common walk system is provided
and maintained between locations, such common walks shall have
a minimum width of four feet. Where these walks parallel roadways
they shall be separated from the road pavement by a distance of at
least four feet.
(3) Individual walks. All dwellings shall be connected to common walks
or to streets or to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a
paved street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of
two feet.
I. Parking.
(1) Spaces required. Two paved off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for each dwelling, either on the same lot therewith or in
common parking facilities, provided that parking areas contained
therein are within 150 feet of the mobile home lots for which they
are intended.
(2) Common parking areas.
(a) Aisle width. Where common parking facilities are to be used,
no parking aisle will be less than 22 feet in width.
(b) Required green areas. Ten percent of all common parking
areas on each lot shall be devoted to green areas consisting
mostly of grass and plantings, including trees which must be
interspersed within the paved parking areas to channel traffic
or divide parking areas. The green areas required by this
section shall not constitute a portion of any green area or
common open spaces otherwise required by this chapter or any
other ordinance or regulation of the Township. The exact
design and location of the green areas required by this section
shall be indicated on a development or subdivision or other
similar plan and be permanently maintained as such.
J. In addition to the requirements of Chapter 210, Zoning, the following
regulations shall also apply.
§ 160-60 CONCORD CODE § 160-60
155:410
(1) Arrangement. The common space shall be designed as a contiguous
area unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Board of Supervisors that two or more separate areas would be
preferable. The open space shall also have easily identifiable
pedestrian and visual accessibility to all residents of the mobile
home development, although all units do not have to abut the
common open space.
(2) Recreation. Recreation areas and facilities acceptable to the Board
of Supervisors shall be provided to meet the anticipated needs of
the residents of the development. Not less than 25% of the required
open space area, exclusive of lands within the required buffers,
shall be devoted to recreation. Recreation areas should be of a size,
shape and relief that is conducive to active and passive recreation.
K. Buffers.
(1) General requirements. Along all exterior property boundary lines
except those which abut another mobile home development, there
shall be a permanent buffer at least 15 feet in depth, unless this is
waived pursuant to Subsection K(4). A screen buffer (as defined
herein) shall be provided wherever the mobile home development
abuts existing residential zones and/or residential uses or any
existing street [as modified by Subsection K(3)], drive or parking
area and where abutting other types of uses when deemed
necessary by the Board of Supervisors to provide sufficient
buffering and transition. No less than a softening buffer (as defined
herein) shall be provided wherever the mobile home development
abuts existing commercial, office and industrial uses. No less than
an open buffer shall be provided where more extensive buffers are
deemed unnecessary by the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Components.
(a) Screen buffer. The primary component of a screen buffer shall
be a row of suitable evergreen trees at a height of not less than
six feet when planted and spaced not more than 10 feet apart
on center, and these trees shall be of such species to attain a
height at maturity of not less than 20 feet. Also required as a
secondary component of the buffer is one of the following:
mounding (the use of which is encouraged), provided that the
slopes shall be a maximum of 3 to 1; visually opaque fencing
not greater than six feet in height; and coniferous shrubbery.
Any combination of evergreen trees, coniferous shrubs,
mounding, fencing or other natural vegetation or man-made
material is allowable, provided that an effective visual screen
at least 15 feet in height above the adjacent ground elevation
in the mobile home development is achieved within a
reasonable time. But whenever only vegetation is used, there
shall be at least a double row of evergreen trees, with the trees
§ 160-60 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-60
155:411
in one row offset five feet from the trees in the other row and
the rows at least five feet apart.
(b) Softening buffer. The primary component of a softening buffer
shall be a row of trees spaced not more than 25 feet apart on
center, at least 25% of which shall be evergreens. The
evergreen trees shall be at least six feet in height when planted
and shall attain at least 20 feet in height maturity. Any
deciduous trees shall be at least 1 1/2 inches in caliper and
eight feet in height when planted and shall attain a height of
not less than 20 feet at maturity. These trees shall be
interspersed with other allowable components, including any
other type of trees, shrubs, mounding, fencing and/or similar
natural or man-made elements having a visible vertical
dimension or any combination thereof.
(c) Open buffer. The open buffer shall, as a minimum, consist of
grass, ground cover and/or similar vegetative material and
may include trees, shrubs or other natural or man-made
landscaping materials, but it shall be mostly vegetative rather
than paved.
(3) Street boundaries. Wherever necessary for adequate sight distance
or where the Board of Supervisors so determines that a sufficient
buffer exists to protect the welfare and safety of the community, a
single row of deciduous trees at least eight feet in height at
maturity and with a spacing of not more than 40 feet on center may
be provided along all property boundaries which abut a street.
(4) Existing buffers. In cases where an edge(s) of a mobile home
development occurs along natural features which function as
buffers, including but not limited to mature vegetation, significant
grade changes or stream valleys which are likely to be permanently
preserved, buffering may be waived along that edge(s) upon
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(5) Maintenance. All vegetation shall be maintained permanently and,
in the event of death or other destruction, shall be replaced by the
persons responsible for maintenance when death or destruction
occurred.
(6) Buffer landscape plan. A buffer landscaping plan acceptable to the
Board of Supervisors shall be submitted in accordance with
§ 160-50 of this chapter.
L. Drainage considerations. The following site drainage requirements
shall apply to all mobile home developments.
(1) Surface water. The ground surface in all parts of a development
shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe,
efficient manner. The velocity of runoff during and after
development shall not exceed 1.5 feet per second, as required by
§ 160-60 CONCORD CODE § 160-60
155:412
Chapter 102, Section 102.22(c) of the Erosion Control Rules and
Regulations published by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection July 1, 1973, and as subsequently
amended.
(2) Ponds and retention structures. Surface water collectors and other
bodies of standing water capable of breeding mosquitoes and other
insects shall be eliminated or controlled in a manner approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Wastewater. Wastewater from any plumbing fixture or sanitary
sewer line shall not be deposited upon the ground surface in any
part of a mobile home development or the surrounding properties.
(4) Erosion and sediment control. All applicable regulations and permit
requirements to prevent accelerated soil erosion and resulting
sedimentation as stipulated in the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Manual, July 1, 1973, and as subsequently amended, shall be
followed by all parties engaged in establishment of a mobile home
development.
(5) The storm sewage for a mobile home development shall be
designed and constructed subject to the determinations of the site
analysis of the natural features and so as to minimize erosion,
flooding and runoff using, as necessary, drainage easements,
swales, catchment basins, silt traps and design of cartways so as to
minimize runoff. Design is to be based upon an anticipated rainfall
of 2 1/2 inches per hour, with 100% runoff.
(6) Drainage facilities shall be provided:
(a) To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
(b) To ensure adequate drainage of all points along the line of
streets; and
(c) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
(7) In the design of drainage facilities, special consideration shall be
given to problems that may arise from concentration of stormwater
runoff over adjacent properties and roads.
(8) Storm sewers, as required, shall be placed in back of the curb when
located in a street or right-of-way. When located in undedicated
land, they shall be placed within an easement not less than 20 feet
wide, as approved by the Township. Open ditches shall be limited in
length as required.
(9) In some cases, stormwater must travel in original stream beds or in
open channels. Concreted or riprapped channels shall be required.
Open channels, whether concreted or not, shall generally be
§ 160-60 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-60
155:413
straightened, widened or otherwise adjusted to conform to
hydraulic requirements.
(10) Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of 18 inches and a
minimum grade of 1/2 of 1%. Changes in alignment shall be by
straight sections connected by inlets or manholes.
(11) Where a storm sewer passes between houses, sufficient width shall
be allowed between houses to accommodate said sewer, to be set
aside as a storm sewer easement to be maintained in perpetuity by
the applicant. The ground shall drain in the same direction as the
sewer. No pockets or craters shall be left in the road or on the
ground.
(12) Manholes shall be not more than 300 feet apart on sizes up to 24
inches and not more than 450 feet apart on greater sizes. Inlets
may be substituted for manholes on approval by the Township.
(13) Inlets and manhole covers and frames shall conform to Township
standards. At street intersections, inlets shall be placed in the
tangent and not in the curved portion of the curbing. Inlets shall
generally be Pennsylvania Standard Combination Special Inlets.
They shall be located at intersections and, as needed, between
intersections. Inlets shall be required when the design flow in any
gutter exceeds seven cubic feet per second. They shall be designed
to deliver a rainfall intensity of 2 1/2 inches per hour with 100%
runoff. The upstream end of the inlet shall be recessed by 10 inches
and shall be depressed to show eight inches or more of curb face
instead of six inches as shown elsewhere. Inlets shall be so placed
in an intersection that rainwater shall not have to cross any road
before entering.
(14) Bridges and culverts shall have ample waterway to carry expected
flows. Culverts shall be provided with wing walls and constructed
for the full width of the right-of-way. Bridges shall be provided with
a paved flow line and with deep aprons and wing walls at each end.
Bridges shall be constructed no narrower than the cartway of the
road they serve, and, in addition, sidewalks on both sides shall be
required.
M. Ground cover requirement. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of
every mobile home development shall be paved or covered with stone
screenings or other solid material or protected with a vegetative
growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and the emanation of
dust during dry weather. Impervious pavement shall be kept to a
minimum. All ground surfaces shall be appropriately maintained.
N. The landscaping requirements of § 160-50 shall also apply to all mobile
home developments. In addition, the following shall apply:
(1) Landscaping shall be regarded as an essential feature of every
mobile home development. In addition to the preservation of
§ 160-60 CONCORD CODE § 160-60
155:414
natural features, trees and slopes of the site, careful attention shall
be given to the landscaping of parking areas and provisions of
street trees as required by this chapter.
(2) Landscaping shall be planned and effectuated in the mobile home
development so as to integrate buildings with their surrounding
lands and to present a total pattern throughout the site. The use of
berms is encouraged.
(3) The protection of trees of two inches caliper or over, measured 4 1/
2 feet off the ground, shall be a factor in determining the location of
open space, buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas,
playgrounds, parking areas and finished grade levels.
(4) The development shall be designed and programmed so as to
minimize earthmoving, erosion, tree clearance and the destruction
of natural amenities. Natural features, such as lakes, streams and
wooded slopes, shall be preserved and incorporated into the final
landscaping of the development wherever possible and desirable.
The applicant shall demonstrate the means whereby trees and
other natural features shall be protected during construction.
Wherever possible, scenic points, historic spots and other
community assets and other planting shall be preserved.
(5) Seeding, sodding and other planting shall be applied to stabilize
topsoil on steep slopes and to enhance the appearance of open
space. This program must be approved by the Soil Conservation
District of the Federal Soil Conservation Service. Excessive cuts
and fills shall be avoided. Topsoil shall not be stripped, covered or
removed from the development site.
(6) Erosion control measures, such as minimizing the areas of exposed
soil, mulching, building silt catchment basins and planting
temporary ground cover, shall be instituted as necessary. All
construction, including grading and regrading, shall be
accomplished under and in accordance with the analysis of natural
resources required by this chapter. Where adequate surface
drainage is not possible by grading alone, a supplementary
drainage system approved by the Township Engineer will be
required.
(7) All parking areas shall be landscaped. The interior of each lot shall
have one two-inch-caliper shade tree for every four parking spaces.
(8) Whenever the site is not naturally wooded, shade trees shall be
provided along all streets. No fewer than two two-inch-caliper trees
measured 4 1/2 feet off the ground shall be planted for each
twenty-five-foot section of collector streets. For the purpose of
these regulations, street trees are limited to those listed in the
Appendixes.
§ 160-60 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-60
155:415
§ 160-61. Common elements.
§ 160-62. Utilities.
(9) Subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors, the planting
strip or utility strip between the curb and sidewalk may be moved
and placed into an acceptable public park area on an equal basis,
resulting in an integral curb, gutter and sidewalk treatment where
this is accomplished. Where integral curb, gutter and sidewalk is
permitted, a planting and utility easement shall be required. The
combined dimension of such sidewalk and planting and utility
easement together shall not exceed the residual dimension of road
right-of-way, measured from the back of the curb to the right-of-way
line for each side, respectively. Such integral treatment shall,
however, not be permitted on arterial or collector thoroughfares.
Areas within planting strips cannot be used to enable larger lot
sizes or used for park purposes.
A. Ownership. Common open space and roadways shall be offered for
dedication to the Township or public use assured through easements or
other appropriate means in any mobile home development where all
lots will be sold or where the Board of Supervisors determines those
facilities to be key elements in the open space and/or circulation
systems of the Township, in accordance with the Township
Comprehensive Plan.127 In all other cases, these and other common
elements may be retained in private ownership or may be owned jointly
by the residents of the development.
B. Maintenance. Prior to development plan approval, provision acceptable
to the Board of Supervisors and Solicitor for the maintenance of all
common elements which will not be owned and maintained by a
governmental agency shall be established.
C. Service building. The structure or structures containing the
management office and other common facilities shall be conveniently
located for the use intended. Consolidation of laundry, recreation,
management and other common facilities in a single building and
location is encouraged if the single location will adequately serve all
mobile home lots.
A. General.
(1) All streets, off-street parking areas and areas of high pedestrian
use shall be adequately lighted. All such lighting shall be designed
and located so as to direct light away from adjacent residents.
Adequate lighting shall be provided after dark. Appropriate
lighting shall be provided for walkways and to identify steps, ramps
127. Editor's Note: The Comprehensive Plan is on file in the Township offices. See also the
Appendixes.
§ 160-60 CONCORD CODE § 160-62
155:416
and signs. Such lighting shall be designed and located so as to
direct light away from adjacent residences.
(2) The requirements for lighting may be waived by the Board of
Supervisors where density of development may not justify its use.
(3) Electric, telephone and all other utility facilities shall be installed
underground by the developer unless, in the opinion of the Board of
Supervisors, special conditions require otherwise. In such event,
such installations shall be as directed by the Board of Supervisors.
(4) Where telephone and electric service lines are placed
underground, conduits or cables shall be placed within an
easement or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not
conflict with other underground services. Further, all transformer
boxes shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the
public.
(5) Easements shall be provided to account for the distribution of unit
substations to service the area. The design of the utility structures
should be architecturally compatible with the surrounding
structures.
B. Water supply.
(1) General requirements. An adequate supply for domestic, auxiliary
and fire-fighting uses shall be provided for all uses included in the
mobile home development, including service buildings and
accessory facilities, in accordance with § 210-59H of Chapter 210,
Zoning.
(2) Water distribution system. All water piping, fixtures and other
equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
state and local regulations, as well as those of the servicing utility.
(3) Individual water riser pipes and connections for mobile homes.
(a) Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the
confined areas of the mobile home stand at a point where the
water connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby
ensuring the shortest water connection possible and
decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
(b) The water riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter
consistent with the standards of the servicing public utility or,
in lack thereof, of the Township Plumbing Inspector, and shall
terminate at least four inches above the ground surface. The
water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a mobile home
does not occupy the lot.
(c) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of
service lines, valves and riser pipe and to protect risers from
heaving and thawing actions of ground during freezing
§ 160-62 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-62
155:417
§ 160-63. Gas distribution systems.
weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location
of the riser pipe.
(4) Fire protection. All mobile home developments shall be provided
with fire hydrants to meet the specifications of the Middlestates
Department Association of Fire Underwriters. In addition, those
hydrants shall be in sufficient numbers to be within 600 feet of all
existing and proposed mobile homes and other dwellings,
measured by way of accessible streets or common areas.
C. Sewage disposal.
(1) General requirements. An adequate and safe sewerage system
shall be provided in all mobile home developments for conveying
and disposing of sewage from dwellings, service buildings and
accessory facilities in accordance with § 210-59H of Chapter 210,
Zoning.
(2) Sewer system. All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of
sufficient depth to be free of breakage from traffic or other
movements and shall be separated from the water supply system.
The system shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with
all state and Township regulations, as well as those of the servicing
utility.
(3) Individual sewer connections for mobile homes.
(a) Each mobile home stand shall be provided with a sewer riser
pipe consistent with the standards of the servicing utility or, in
lack thereof, of the Township Plumbing Inspector. The sewer
riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer
connection to the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a
vertical position.
(b) The sewer connection shall have an inside diameter and slope
as required by the servicing utility or, in lack thereof, by the
Township Plumbing Inspector. All joints shall be watertight.
(c) All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid,
corrosive-resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner
surface shall be smooth.
(d) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when
a mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall
be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall
extend at least 1/2 inch above ground elevation.
A. General. Gas equipment and installations within a mobile home
development shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
applicable codes adopted by the enforcing agency. Where the state or
§ 160-62 CONCORD CODE § 160-63
155:418
other political subdivision does not assume jurisdiction, such
installations shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
appropriate provisions of ANSI Z21.30 and Z106.1.
B. Required gas supply.
(1) The minimum hourly volume of gas required at each mobile home
lot outlet or any section of the mobile home development gas piping
system shall be calculated as follows:
Type
Natural Gas
(cubic feet per
hour)
Liquefied
Petroleum Gas
(cubic feet per
hour)
For the most remote mobile
home lot outlet on any branch
or main
125 50
For the second most remote
outlet on any branch or main
100 40
For the third most remote
outlet on any branch or main
75 30
(2) After the third most remote outlet subsequent branch or main line
loadings may be computed using a value of 50 cubic feet per hour
for natural gas and 20 cubic feet per hour for liquefied petroleum
gas.
C. Installation. All gas piping installed below the ground shall have a
minimum earth cover of 18 inches. Gas piping shall not be installed
under any mobile home.
D. System shutoff valve. A readily accessible and identified shutoff valve
controlling the flow of gas to the entire gas piping system shall be
installed near to point of connection to the service piping or supply
connection of the liquefied petroleum gas tank.
E. Each mobile home lot shall have an approved gas shutoff valve installed
upstream of the mobile home lot gas outlet and located on the outlet
riser at a height of not less than four inches above grade. Such valve
shall not be located under any mobile home. Whenever the mobile home
lot outlet is not in use, the outlet shall be equipped with an approved
cap or plug to prevent accidental discharge of gas.
F. Mobile home connector. Each mobile home shall be connected to the
mobile home lot outlet by an approved three-fourths-inch mobile home
connector not more than six feet in length. Approved pipe and fittings
may be used between the flexible connector and the mobile home lot
gas outlet when the distance between the mobile home lot gas outlet
and the mobile home gas service connection exceeds that required to
make a safe installation with only a mobile home connector.
§ 160-63 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-63
155:419
§ 160-64. Fuel oil distribution systems.
§ 160-65. Fuel supply and storage.
G. Mechanical protection. All gas outlet risers, regulators, meters, valves
or other exposed equipment shall be protected from mechanical
damage by vehicles or other causes.
H. The mobile home gas connection shall be installed at the edge of the
mobile home stand, approximately 30 feet from the front of such stand,
and located as not to terminate beneath the mobile home.
A. General. Distribution systems shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such
systems. Piping installed below ground shall have a minimum earth
cover of 18 inches.
B. All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders towards mobile
homes shall be permanently installed and securely fastened in place.
C. All fuel oil storage tanks of cylinders should be installed underground
and shall not be located inside or beneath any mobile home or
accessory structure or less than five feet from any mobile home exit.
D. Every tank shall be vented by a vent no less than 1 1/4 inches iron pipe
size, so designed and installed to prevent entrance of rain of debris.
E. A shutoff valve located immediately adjacent to the gravity fee
connection of a tank shall be installed in the supply line to the mobile
home.
F. Fuel oil connectors from the tank to the mobile home shall be brass or
copper tubing or approved flexible metal hose, not smaller than 3/8 inch
iron pipe size or tubing, and shall be protected from physical damage.
Aluminum tubing shall not be used.
G. Valves and connectors shall be listed standard fittings maintained
liquidtight to prevent spillage of fuel oil on the ground.
A. Liquefied petroleum gas containers installed on a mobile home lot shall
be securely by not permanently fastened to prevent accidental
overturning. Such containers shall not be less than 25 pounds' nor more
than 100 pounds' liquefied petroleum gas capacity.
B. No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside or
beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other
structure.
C. All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be securely fastened in place
and shall not be located inside or beneath any mobile home nor less
than five feet from any mobile home exit.
§ 160-63 CONCORD CODE § 160-65
155:420
§ 160-66. Permits, licenses, fees and inspections.
D. All fuel oil storage tanks or cylinders shall be screened from adjacent
structures, access roads and traffic arteries by hedges, dense plantings,
earth berms, changes in grades or walls.
A. Permits required.
(1) Lots for sale. In those mobile home developments wherein some or
all of the mobile home lots will be sold individually (whether totally
fee simple or fee simple with a homeowners' association,
condominium or cooperative), no lot to be conveyed shall be
developed or a mobile home or other structure placed or
constructed thereon until the subdivision and/or land development
plan has been properly approved and the proper building and
construction permits have been issued for that lot in accordance
with the standard procedures for any building activity in Concord
Township. No mobile home or other structure shall be occupied
until a valid occupancy permit has been issued by Concord
Township.
(2) Lots for lease. In those mobile home developments wherein some
or all of the mobile home lots will be leased, the following
regulations shall apply to the entire development exclusive of the
lots being sold individually:
(a) Initial permits. It shall be unlawful for any person or group to
construct, alter, extend or operate a mobile home development
unless and until that person or group obtains:
[1] A valid permit, issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection and in the name of the operator,
for a specified construction, alteration or extension
proposed; and
[2] Valid permit(s) authorizing construction and initial
occupancy, issued by the Concord Township Zoning Officer
in the name of the operator, which shall not be issued until
a copy of the DEP permit has been furnished, all permits
for water supply and sewage systems shall have been
obtained and all other requirements contained herein have
been complied with and final approval of the application
has been granted by the Board of Supervisors.
(b) Annual licenses. In addition to the initial permits, the operator
of a mobile home development with lots for lease shall apply to
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and
to the Concord Township Zoning Officer on or before the first
day of each year for an annual license to continue operation of
the mobile home development. The Zoning Officer shall issue
the annual license upon satisfactory proof that the
§ 160-65 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-66
155:421
§ 160-67. Additional requirements.
development continues to meet the standards prescribed by
state agencies having jurisdiction and the standards of this
article and other applicable Township ordinances. The license
so issued shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance
or until January 1 of the next year, whichever comes first.
(c) Transfer of ownership. Every person holding a permit shall file
notice with the Concord Township Manager within 10 days
after having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise
disposed of interest in or control of any mobile home
development.
(d) Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home development, it
is determined that conditions or practices exist which are in
violation of any provisions of this chapter or any regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, the Concord Township Zoning
Officer shall give notice, in writing, to the person holding the
certificate, advising him that unless such conditions of
practices are corrected within such time as shall be specified
in said notice, the license to operate the mobile home
development shall be suspended.
B. Fees.
(1) Fees for the initial application and preliminary and final approvals
of any mobile home development shall be prescribed by resolution
of the Board of Supervisors of Concord Township.
(2) The fee for the annual license required for mobile home
developments having lots for lease shall be prescribed by
resolution of the Board of Supervisors and shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer with the application for the annual license.
C. Inspection.
(1) Upon notification to the licensee, manager or person in charge of a
mobile home development with lots for lease, the Building
Inspector or Zoning Officer of Concord Township may inspect a
mobile home development after due notice to determine
compliance with this article.
(2) Upon receipt of the application for annual license and before
issuing such annual license, the Zoning Officer or other designated
representative of Concord Township shall make an inspection of the
mobile home development to determine compliance with this
article and other applicable Township ordinances. The Zoning
Officer or other representative shall thereafter notify the licensee
of any instances of noncompliance and shall not issue the annual
license until the licensee has corrected all such violations.
§ 160-66 CONCORD CODE § 160-67
155:422
§ 160-68. General prerequisites to approval of final plans.
A. Mobile home stands. A concrete pad, properly graded, placed and
compacted so as to be durable and adequate for the support of the
maximum anticipated loads during all seasons, shall be used for all
mobile homes.
B. Anchoring. Every mobile home placed within a mobile home
development shall be anchored to the mobile home stand where it is
located prior to the unit being occupied or used in any other way or the
expiration of seven days, whichever occurs first. The anchoring system
shall be designed to resist a minimum wind velocity of 90 miles per
hour.
C. Stability. All mobile homes placed within a mobile home development
shall, prior to occupancy or other use, be affixed to their mobile home
stands in such a way so as to prevent tilting of the unit.
D. Site standards. The following site standards are encouraged for all
mobile homes in a mobile home development:
(1) The exterior colors shall be in earth tones (brown, beiges or dark
greens). Trim and accent colors may be in other tones but must
blend harmoniously with the earth tone scheme.
(2) All roofs shall be covered with composition roofing material or
wood shingles so that no metal is visible.
(3) No exterior antennas of any kind shall be permitted.
(4) If aluminum patios and carports are used, all visible exterior
structural members shall be covered with wood (fascias and posts),
and the roofs shall be covered with composition material or wood
shingles.
E. Skirts. All mobile homes placed within a mobile home development
shall, prior to occupancy or other use, have skirts installed which are
designed to complement the appearance of the mobile home and are
coordinated throughout the park.
F. Hitch. The hitch or tow bar attached to a mobile home for transport
purposes shall be removed and remain removed from the mobile home
when it is placed on its mobile home stand.
G. Litter control. The mobile home development shall be kept free of litter,
rubbish and other flammable and unsightly material.
H. Fire extinguishers. Portable fire extinguishers rated for Classes B and C
shall be kept in service buildings and at other locations conveniently
and readily accessible for use by all occupants and shall be maintained
in good operation condition. Their capacity shall be not less than 2 1/2
pounds.
§ 160-67 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-68
155:423
A. Improvements or guaranty thereof. Before approving any development
plan for recording, the Board of Supervisors shall either require that
the necessary grading, paving and other street improvements, as
required in § 160-60F hereof, all have been installed in strict
accordance with the standards and specifications of the Township or
that the Township be assured by means of a proper contract and
completion guaranty, as set forth in Article X of this chapter, that the
improvements will subsequently be installed by the developer. Where
the development plan has been approved and recorded, either after the
specified improvements have been completed and approved by the
Board of Supervisors or, if prior to completion, upon proper completion
guaranty as aforesaid, purchasers and mortgagees of lots in the
development, with or without buildings thereon or on any of them, shall
be relieved of any and all liability for any deficiency in lack of or failure
to complete the improvements above-mentioned as set out in said plan
or required as a condition precedent to the approval of the plan of
development, and any failure to complete or properly complete said
improvements shall not encumber any or all of the lots in the
development.
B. Agreement to complete improvements. In all cases where the necessary
grading, paving and other street improvements required herein shall
not have been installed in strict accordance with the standards and
specification of the Township, the developer shall enter into a written
agreement with the Township in accordance with § 160-14 and Article X
and in the manner and form approved by the Township Solicitor,
wherein developer shall agree, to the extent applicable:
(1) To construct or cause to be constructed, at his own expense, all
streets, bridges, culverts, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks,
water systems, drainage facilities, streetlighting facilities, street
signs, monuments, sanitary sewerage, street shade trees and parks
and other improvements shown on said development plan, all in
strict accordance with standards and specifications of the
Township and within the time specified in said agreement.
(2) To make adequate provision with the Township Engineer for the
inspection of the construction of the aforesaid improvements to
assure compliance with Township standards and specifications.
(3) To maintain, at his own cost, said streets, bridges, culverts, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water systems, drainage facilities,
streetlighting facilities, street signs, monuments, sanitary
sewerage, street shade trees, parks and other improvements until
the same are accepted or condemned by the Township for public
use and for a period of two years thereafter to repair and
reconstruct the same or any part of one of them when such repair
or reconstruction shall be specified by the Board of Supervisors as
necessary by reasons of faulty construction, workmanship or
materials.
§ 160-68 CONCORD CODE § 160-68
155:424
§ 160-69. Revocation or suspension of permit.
If any fine assessed under § 160-88 shall remain unpaid for the term of
15 days or for such further period as the Township may permit for cause
shown, then and in that event all permits and licensees shall forthwith be
suspended until such time as all fines, costs and fees have been satisfied.
Further, upon continued or repeated violation or violations within any
mobile home development, the right to the issuance of a permit or other
continued operation thereunder may be suspended for a fixed term or
permanently revoked by the Concord Township Board of Supervisors.
(4) To pay all costs, charges or rates of the utility furnishing electric
service for the streetlighting facilities installed by the developer
until such time as the streets shown on the development plans shall
have been accepted or condemned by the Township for public use
and to indemnify and save harmless the Township from and against
all suits, actions, claims and demands for electric service as
aforesaid or any part thereof to the time that said streets shall be
accepted or condemned as public streets in the manner herein
above set forth.
(5) To post contemporaneous with the execution of such agreement a
bond in accordance with § 160-71 of this chapter.
(6) For security for completion of improvements at or before the
acceptance of said improvements by the Township for public use, to
post a bond with corporate surety approved by the Township
Supervisors in accordance with § 160-75 of this chapter.
(7) To file two copies of a final plan with the Board of Supervisors,
accurately showing, as built, the location of all buried utility lines,
underground drains, spring heads, storm drainage lines and
permanent development monuments as a condition precedent to
acceptance of the streets and other required improvements.
(8) The provisions of § 160-68B shall not relieve the developer from the
penalties provided for in Article XII and the Second Class Township
Code128 for violation of this chapter.
(9) In all cases where the necessary grading, paving and other street
improvements required herein shall not have been installed in
strict accordance with the standards and specifications of the
Township, the Board of Supervisors may enforce the bond or other
security in accordance with § 160-74 of this chapter.
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 160-68 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-69
155:425

ARTICLE X
Improvements
§ 160-70. Completion of improvements.
§ 160-71. Completion guaranty.
A. No subdivision and/or land development application shall be finally
approved unless the streets shown on such plan have been improved to
a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition or improved as
required by this chapter and any walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights,
fire hydrants, shade trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers
and other improvements as required by this chapter have been installed
in accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the completion of any
improvements required as a condition for final plan approval, including
improvements or fees, the landowner or developer shall deposit
financial security with the Township in an amount sufficient to cover the
costs of such improvements or common amenities, including but not
limited to roads, stormwater detention and/or retention basins and
other related drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open space
improvements or buffer or screen plantings which are or may be
required.
B. When requested by the landowner or developer, in order to facilitate
financing, the Board of Supervisors shall furnish the developer with a
signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plan
contingent upon the developer obtaining a satisfactory financial
security. The final plan (record plan) shall not be signed nor recorded
until the financial improvements agreement is executed. The resolution
or letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be
revoked if the financial security agreement is not executed within 90
days, unless a written extension is granted by the Board of Supervisors.
Such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed,
in writing, at the request of the landowner or developer.
A. In lieu of the completion of the streets and other improvements
required as a condition for the final approval of the subdivision and/or
land development plan, as set forth in § 160-13 and § 160-70, the
landowner or developer may deposit financial security acceptable to the
Board of Supervisors (except as set forth in this section) in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements, estimated,
calculated and determined as set forth below.
B. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Township may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such
lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security.
C. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution chosen by the
§ 160-70 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-71
155:427
party posting the financial security, provided that said bonding
company or lending institution is authorized to conduct such business
within the commonwealth.
D. Such bond or other security shall provide for and secure to the public
the completion of any improvements which may be required on or
before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.
E. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the landowner or developer. The Township may adjust the amount of the
financial security annually by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for
the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of
the 90th day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a
rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the
Township may require the landowner or developer to post additional
security in order to assure that the financial security equals said 110%.
Any additional security shall be posted by the landowner or developer
in accordance with this subsection.
F. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by a landowner or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The
Township, upon the recommendation of the Township Engineer, may
refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the landowner
or developer and the Township are unable to agree upon an estimate,
then the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Township and the landowner or developer. The
estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third
engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be
paid equally by the Township and the landowner or developer.
G. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
H. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Board of Supervisors may authorize submission of final plans by section
or stages of development, subject to such requirements or guaranties
§ 160-71 CONCORD CODE § 160-71
155:428
as to improvements in future sections or stages of development as it
finds essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the
development.
I. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Board of
Supervisors to release or authorize the release, from time to time, of
such portions of the financial security necessary for payment to the
contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall
be in writing, addressed to the Board of Supervisors, who shall have 45
days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Township
Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Board of Supervisors that such
portion of the work upon the improvements has been completed in
accordance with the approved plan. Upon such certification, the Board
of Supervisors shall authorize release by the bonding company or
lending institution of an amount, as estimated by the Township
Engineer, fairly representing the value of the improvements completed,
or if the Board of Supervisors fails to act within said 45 day period, the
Board of Supervisors shall be deemed to have approved the release of
funds as requested. The Board of Supervisors may, prior to final release
at the time of completion and certification by its Engineer, require
retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
J. Where the Board of Supervisors accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion, the Board may require
the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of said
improvements, as well as the functioning of said improvements, in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
plan for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as
otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
K. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Township, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
L. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final plan approval, the
Township shall not condition the issuance of building, grading or other
permits relating to the erection or placement of improvements,
including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted upon the final
plan upon actual completion of the improvements depicted upon the
approved final plan. Moreover, if said financial security has been
provided, occupancy permits for any building or buildings to be erected
§ 160-71 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-71
155:429
§ 160-72. Release from improvement bond.
§ 160-73. As-built plan.
shall not be withheld following the improvement of the streets
providing access to and from existing public roads to such building or
buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable condition,
as well as the completion of all other improvements as depicted upon
the approved final plan, either upon the lot or lots or beyond the lot or
lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the reasonable
use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
A. When the landowner or developer has completed all of the necessary
and appropriate improvements, the landowner or developer shall notify
the Board of Supervisors, in writing, by certified or registered mail, of
the completion of the aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Township Engineer. The Board of Supervisors shall,
within 10 days after receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the
Township Engineer to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The
Township Engineer shall thereupon file a report, in writing, with the
Board of Supervisors and shall promptly mail a copy of the same to the
landowner or developer by certified or registered mail. The report shall
be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the Township
Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Board of Supervisors.
Said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of
said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said improvements
or any portion thereof shall not be approved or shall be rejected by the
Township Engineer, said report shall contain a statement of reasons for
such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall notify the landowner or developer within
15 days of receipt of the Township Engineer's report, in writing, by
certified or registered mail, of the action of the Board of Supervisors
with relation thereto.
C. If the Board of Supervisors or the Township Engineer fails to comply
with the time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements
will be deemed to have been approved and the landowner or developer
shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty
bond or other security agreement.
D. If any portion of said improvements shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Board of Supervisors, the landowner or developer shall
proceed to complete the same and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
landowner's or developer's right to contest or question, by legal
proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the Board of
Supervisors or the Township Engineer.
§ 160-71 CONCORD CODE § 160-73
155:430
§ 160-74. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
In the event that any improvements which may be required under this
chapter have not been installed as provided in this chapter or in accordance
with the approved final plan, the Board of Supervisors may enforce the
bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If the
proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of
installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered
by such bond or security, the Board of Supervisors may, at its option, install
or repair part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or
land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action
to recover from the land developer the moneys necessary to complete said
improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
from legal or equitable action brought against the landowner or developer
or both, shall be used solely for the installation of improvements covered by
such security.
§ 160-75. Dedication and acceptance of improvements.
Upon completion of the construction of improvements in accordance with
the approved subdivision and/or land development plan, the following
conditions shall apply to the offer of dedication of the same and the
acceptance thereof:
A. Within 30 days after completion of improvements and approval of the
same by the Township and before acceptance of such improvements,
the landowner or developer shall submit to the Board of Supervisors a
corrected set of as-built plans and profiles in accordance with § 160-17
and § 160-31. In the event that the as-built plan is not submitted in
complete and accurate form, all funds being withheld by means of a
completion guaranty shall not be released until such plan has been
satisfactorily completed.
B. The as-built plan shall be reproducible and drawn to the same scale as
the final plan, conservation plan and improvements construction plan
and shall be certified to by an engineer or surveyor and approved by the
Township Engineer.
C. Said Plan shall indicate the actual location, dimensions and/or
elevations of all completed improvements, including but not limited to
those set forth in § 160-31.
A. The Board of Supervisors shall have no obligation to take over and
make public any street or other improvement in or abutting a
subdivision or land development. If the Board of Supervisors elects to
accept an offer of dedication, such acceptance shall not occur unless
and until:
(1) The required improvements and monuments, as shown on the
approved subdivision and/or land development plan, conservation
plan and improvements construction plan, shall have been certified
§ 160-73 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-75
155:431
by the Township Engineer as having been constructed and installed
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and all other
ordinances, codes, regulations, plans and maps of the Township
and accurately delineated on an as-built plan.
(2) A maintenance guaranty is provided through the posting of
financial security, such as that deemed to be acceptable to the
Township as set forth in § 160-71A. Such guaranty shall assure the
structural integrity of required improvements, as well as the
functioning of said improvements, in accordance with the design
and specifications as depicted on the approved final plans for a
term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. Said financial security shall be in an amount equivalent
to 15% of the actual cost of installation of the required
improvements.
(3) A deed or deeds of dedication for all such improvements, prepared
and executed by the landowner or developer in accordance with
forms prescribed by the Board of Supervisors, shall have been
presented to the Board of Supervisors, together with a certificate
from the contractor or contractors evidencing the payment of all
labor and material costs and a policy of title insurance insuring the
fee title to said improvements as free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances and other objections to the title.
(4) At least 50% of all lots having access to the street has been
encompassed by completed dwellings, and the Board of
Supervisors shall determine that the public interest requires that
such improvements be accepted.
(5) Any offer of a deed of dedication must be accompanied by a
maintenance bond and the as-built plan(s) at least 90 days prior to
the anticipated date for the acceptance of the deed of dedication.
B. The Board of Supervisors shall have no responsibility with respect to
any improvements, notwithstanding any public use thereof, unless and
until such improvements are accepted for dedication by duly enacting
or adopting an ordinance or resolution therefor.
§ 160-75 CONCORD CODE § 160-75
155:432
ARTICLE XI
General Regulations
§ 160-76. Coordination with adjoining or nearby areas.
All proposed subdivisions or land developments shall be coordinated and
planned so as to be compatible with adjoining or nearby neighborhoods or
approved subdivisions or land developments to the end that harmonious
development will result. Such coordination shall also pertain to subdivisions
or land developments located adjacent to neighboring municipalities.
§ 160-77. Inspection.
All work and materials shall be subject to inspection for conformity with
the terms of this chapter by the Township Engineer, Building Inspector,
Plumbing Inspector or designated representatives.
§ 160-78. Lot purchasers and mortgagees.
When a subdivision and/or land development plan has been approved and
recorded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
improvements thereon completed and approved by the Board of Supervisors
or, in lieu thereof, an improvement bond or other security has been
furnished the Township, the purchasers and mortgagees of lots in the
subdivision or land development shall be relieved of any and all liability for
any deficiency in, lack of or failure to complete said improvements by the
landowner or developer, and any failure to complete or properly complete
A. When any work or materials are determined by the Township's
representative not to be in compliance with the terms of this chapter or
any other Township ordinance, code, regulation, plan or map or to be at
variance with any permit issued therefor, the Township's
representatives may, by notice in writing or verbal order followed by
notice in writing, direct that all work upon improvements in the
subdivision or land development forthwith stop until such
noncompliance or variance is corrected; except as the Township's
representative may deem necessary to prevent injury or damage to
persons or property, no work shall thereafter be performed upon the
same except in accordance with the order of the Township's engineer,
Building Inspector or designated representative.
B. No underground pipes, works, lines, structures, subgrades or base
courses shall be covered until the same shall be inspected and approved
by the Township Engineer, and if the same have been covered contrary
to the provisions hereof, upon the order of the Township Engineer, the
landowner or developer shall cause the same to be forthwith
uncovered, at his expense, so as to permit the inspection thereof.
C. When an inspection of any improvements shall be required or desired
by the landowner or developer, the landowner or developer shall give
the Township Engineer 48 hours' notice in advance.
§ 160-76 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-78
155:433
said improvements shall not encumber any lot or lots in said subdivision or
land development.
§ 160-79. Public hearing.
Before acting upon any subdivision and/or land development plan, the
Board of Supervisors may conduct a public hearing thereon pursuant to
public notice.
§ 160-80. Notice to contractors.
The landowner and/or developer shall notify, in writing, all builders and/
or contractors that they shall perform all work in accordance with the
regulations and requirements of this chapter and such other Township
ordinances, codes, regulations, plans and maps as shall be applicable
thereto. Such notification shall be submitted to the Township prior to
construction and placed on file.
§ 160-81. Modification of site and plan requirements.
The Planning Commission may recommend to the Board of Supervisors
that the site requirements of this chapter for a subdivision and/or land
development be modified or altered in order to encourage or promote
economy and ingenuity in the layout and design of subdivisions and land
development, to more effectively protect unique and/or sensitive natural
areas or to more effectively conform to the purposes of this chapter as
follows:
A. With respect to encouraging or promoting economy and ingenuity in
the layout and design of subdivisions and land developments, the
Planning Commission may recommend modifications to site
requirements for, but not limited to, the following types of proposals:
(1) Those which may involve earth-sheltered housing design.
(2) Those which may involve special forms of solar energy
conservation.
(3) Those which may involve the conversion, reuse and/or adaptation
of an existing structure or building.
(4) Utilization and layout of open space.
B. With respect to more effectively protecting various sensitive natural
areas, the Planning Commission may recommend modifications to site
requirements for, but not limited to, the following types of proposals:
(1) Those which would more effectively protect existing tree growth,
especially notable trees and tree masses with indigenous
vegetation.
(2) Those which would minimize extensive grading and the
displacement of soil.
§ 160-78 CONCORD CODE § 160-81
155:434
(3) Those which would enhance groundwater recharge.
(4) Those which would minimize surface water runoff and improve the
management of stormwater.
(5) Those which would preserve historic or cultural sites or structures.
(6) Those which would minimize visibility of development and protect
the visual quality of ridges and other exposed areas.
C. In granting modifications to the landowner or developer, the Board of
Supervisors may impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied
or modified.
D. In addition to the foregoing, one or more provisions of this chapter may
be modified by the Board of Supervisors upon recommendation of the
Planning Commission if the literal enforcement of the provisions will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is
observed.
(1) All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall
accompany and be a part of the preliminary or final plan
application for subdivision and/or land development. The request
shall state in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or
hardship on which the request is based, the provision or provisions
of this chapter involved and the minimum modification necessary.
(2) The Planning Commission shall keep a written record of all action
on all requests for modifications.
(3) The Board of Supervisors may authorize a waiver of these
regulations. In granting any modification, the Board of Supervisors
shall prescribe any conditions that they deem necessary to or
desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, the Board
of Supervisors shall take into account the nature of the proposed
use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity and the
probable effect of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development upon traffic conditions, fire, police protection and
other utilities and services in the vicinity. No modification shall be
granted unless the Supervisors find:
(a) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting
said property such that the strict application of the provisions
of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable
use of this land.
(b) That the modification is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant.
§ 160-81 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-81
155:435
(c) That the granting of the modification will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in
which said property is situated.
§ 160-81 CONCORD CODE § 160-81
155:436
ARTICLE XII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 160-82. Records.
The Township Manager shall assign an application number to all
applications for preliminary plan and final plan approval. All matters
pertaining to such applications shall be filed in accordance with the
subdivision and/or land development application number. In addition, the
Township shall keep a record of its findings, decisions and
recommendations relative to all subdivision and/or land development plans
filed with the application for review. All such records shall be public
records.
§ 160-83. Application fees.
Upon the filing of an application for preliminary and final approval of a
subdivision and/or land development plan, the landowner or developer shall
pay to the Township Manager to the use of the Township, such fees as
the Board of Supervisors shall from time to time provide by ordinance or
resolution.
§ 160-84. Plan review fees.
The landowner or developer shall pay, to the use of the Township and
upon invoice rendered by the Township, the actual cost of all fees incurred
by the Township in the review of all subdivision and/or land development
plans by the Township Engineer, consultants, Township Solicitor and such
other professionals as are engaged by the Township to review and evaluate
subdivision and land development plans. The need for such professionals
and the selection thereof shall be determined solely by the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 160-85. Inspection fees.
A. In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such review
fees, the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify the
Township that such fees are disputed, in which case the Township shall
not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development application
due to the applicant's request over disputed fees.
B. In the event that the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the
amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the
applicant and Township shall follow the procedure for dispute
resolution set forth in § 160-85F.
A. The landowner or developer shall pay, to the use of the Township and
upon invoice rendered by the Township, such charges as shall be made
by the Township Engineer or other Township inspector for the field
inspection of improvements in the subdivision or land development; but
in the event that, owing to special or unusual conditions, specialized or
§ 160-82 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-85
155:437
expert inspections, analyses or tests of improvements shall be required,
such inspections, analyses or tests shall be performed by persons or
firms selected by the Board of Supervisors, and the fees and costs of
such inspections, analyses or tests shall be paid by the landowner or
developer to the use of the Township upon invoice rendered by the
Township in an amount equivalent to the actual cost thereof to the
Township.
B. All invoices shall be due upon presentation.
C. Any landowner or developer who is delinquent in the payment of
invoices shall be denied issuance of any further approvals or permits by
the Township, whether such approvals or permits pertain to the
development for which said invoice was rendered or any other land or
development within the Township.
D. The Township Building Inspector or Township Manager shall revoke all
permits issued to landowners or developers who are delinquent in the
payment of any invoice.
E. A landowner or developer who disputes an invoice as billed within 10
days shall state such objection to the Township Manager, in writing,
upon receipt, via certified mail, return receipt requested.
F. Reimbursement by the applicant to the Township shall be based upon a
schedule established by ordinance or resolution. Such expense shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary fees
charged by the Township Engineer or consultant for work performed
for similar service in the community, but in no event shall the fees
exceed the rate or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant to the
Township when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
applicants.
(1) In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any such
expense in connection with the inspection of improvements, the
applicant shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify
the Township that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary, in which case the Township shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision and/or land development application or
any approval or permit related to development due to the
applicant's request over disputed engineer expenses.
(2) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Township and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of the expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and Township shall
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer, licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
to review said expenses and make a determination as to the amount
thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
§ 160-85 CONCORD CODE § 160-85
155:438
§ 160-86. Material tests.
The landowner or developer shall pay to the use of the Township and upon
invoice rendered by the Township the cost of performing all material tests
determined by the Board of Supervisors to be necessary or desirable in
connection with the inspection or approval of all subdivision and/or land
development plans or improvements.
§ 160-87. Other fees.
The landowner or developer shall pay to the use of the Township and
upon invoice rendered by the Township all fees incurred by the Township
in the preparation of the subdivision and land development agreements,
improvement and maintenance bonds, escrow agreements and other
instruments deemed necessary or desirable by the Board of Supervisors in
connection with subdivisions or land developments.
§ 160-88. Remedies.
or her sole opinion deems necessary and shall render a decision
within 50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required
to pay the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Township and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas (or if at the time there be no President
Judge, then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such
engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Township Engineer
nor any professional engineer who has been retained by or
performed service for the Township or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less then the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Township shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but
otherwise the Township and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
A. Preventive remedies.
(1) In addition to other remedies, the Township may institute and
maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover
damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure
or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of
§ 160-85 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-88
155:439
selling or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor
from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
(2) The Township may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which
has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of any ordinance provisions. This authority to
deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of the following
applicants:
(a) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(b) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee
had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(c) The current owner of record who acquired the property
subsequent to the time of violation, without regard as to
whether such current owner had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
(d) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who
acquired the property subsequent to the time of violation,
without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had actual
or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting
of an approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee
for the development of any such real property, the Township may
require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an
interest in such real property.
B. Jurisdiction. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction in
proceedings brought under § 160-88C.
C. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township
as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed,
levied or be payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor
timely appeals the judgment, the Township may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the District Justice determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership or corporation violating the ordinance to
§ 160-88 CONCORD CODE § 160-88
155:440
§ 160-89. Collection of fines.
All fines collected for violations of this chapter, as provided in § 160-88C,
shall be paid over to the Township.
§ 160-90. Amendments.
have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth
day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
District Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation.
(2) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a
final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted
to grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
A. The regulations set forth in this chapter may, from time to time, be
amended by the Board of Supervisors.
B. The following requirements shall be observed prior to making any
amendment to this chapter:
(1) Proposed amendments shall be submitted to the Township Planning
Commission for its findings and recommendations at least 30 days
prior to the date fixed for the public hearing on such proposed
amendment if the amendment has been prepared by an agency
other than the Township Planning Commission. In addition, the
proposed amendment shall be submitted to the County Planning
Department for its recommendations at least 30 days prior to the
date fixed for the public hearing on the amendment.
(2) The findings of the Planning Commission shall be submitted to the
Board of Supervisors in a written report.
(3) Before voting on the enactment of a proposed amendment, the
Board of Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant
to public notice, as defined by this chapter, at which time the
parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be
heard. A brief summary setting forth the principal provisions of the
proposed amendment and a reference to the place within the
Township where copies of the proposed amendment may be
secured or examined, shall be incorporated into the public notice.
(4) Prior to the enactment of proposed amendments, the Township
shall publish the proposed amendment once, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Township, not more than 60 days and not
less than seven days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed
§ 160-88 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-90
155:441
amendment shall include the time and place of the meeting, the
place within the Township where copies of the proposed
amendment can be obtained and either the full text thereof or
the title and a brief summary prepared by the Township Solicitor,
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text
is not included:
(a) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township at the time the public notice is
published.
(b) An attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in
the County Law Library.
(c) In the event that substantial charges are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Board of
Supervisors shall, at least 10 days prior to the enactment,
readvertise, in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township, a brief summary setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail, together with a summary of the changes.
(5) Within 30 days after enactment, the Board of Supervisors shall
forward a certified copy of the amendment to the County Planning
Department.
§ 160-90 CONCORD CODE § 160-90
155:442
Chapter 166
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
Zoning use approval — See Ch. 214.
§ 166-1. Definitions and word usage.
Unless otherwise indicated, the following words shall be construed to have
the meaning hereafter indicated. The singular shall include the plural and
the plural shall include the singular.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector of Concord Township.
FENCE — An enclosure. Such enclosure shall be at least three feet in
height, shall be made of masonry, wood or metal with apertures not larger
than two inches and shall be equipped with a gate with an automatically
self-locking lock.
GATE — The door which closes the opening in a fence around in-ground
pools or the entrance to the steps or ramp to an above-ground pool. It shall
be three feet in height and the bottom shall not be more than three inches
above the sill. It shall be equipped with an automatically self-locking lock
and shall be self closing.
PERSON — Any person, copartnership, association, firm or corporation.
POOL —
§ 166-2. Permit required; application requirements; inspection.129
From and after the effective date of this chapter it shall be unlawful for
any person to erect, construct or maintain any pool within the Township
of Concord, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, without first having obtained
IN-GROUND — Any permanent swimming pool constructed partially
or entirely below ground level, outside of a building, completely
surrounded by a precipitous wall of dirt, concrete, wood, masonry,
metal or other such material, in which there is or can be an
accumulation of water to a depth of one and one-half feet or more at
any edge.
A.
ABOVE-GROUND — Any movable swimming pool constructed above
the ground, with steps or a ramp from the ground to the top of the pool,
with precipitous sides, in which there is or can be an accumulation of
water to a depth of 1 1/2 feet at any edge.
B.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 160-90 SWIMMING POOLS § 166-2
166:443
a permit therefor from the Building Inspector. Applications therefor shall
be made upon a form to be furnished by the Building Inspector and shall
be accompanied by a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors. The application shall be accompanied by a plot plan
of property, showing the location of the pool with specific dimensions as
to area and depth and, in addition, the location of all surrounding houses
or neighboring properties and a detailed specification of the fence and/or
gate if required under the provisions of this chapter. The Building Inspector
shall issue a permit when the plans submitted indicate that the provisions
of this chapter are complied with. The applicant shall keep the permit at
the site of construction available for inspection at all times. The Building
Inspector shall inspect following completion to determine that the location
of the pool and the construction of the fence and/or gate comply with the
plan as submitted.
§ 166-3. Fencing requirements.
§ 166-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
A. No in-ground pool shall be erected or maintained hereafter within the
limits of Concord Township within 200 feet of any dwelling house of any
neighboring owner or within 100 feet of the property line of any
adjoining property, unless and until a fence is erected surrounding said
in-round pool.
B. No above-ground pool shall be erected or maintained hereafter within
the limits of Concord Township within 200 feet of any dwelling house of
any neighboring owner or within 100 feet of the property line of any
adjoining property, unless and until a gate has been erected across the
steps or ramp leading from the ground to the top of the pool.
C. On or before September 10, 1972, any person maintaining an in-ground
pool within 200 feet of any dwelling house of any neighboring owner or
within 100 feet of the property line of any adjoining property, which
pool has been constructed before the effective date of this chapter, shall
erect a fence surrounding said in-ground pool.
D. On or before September 10, 1972, any person maintaining an aboveground
pool within 200 feet of any dwelling house of any neighboring
owner or within 100 feet of the property line of any adjoining property
which pool has been placed or maintained before the effective date of
this chapter shall erect a gate across the steps or ramp leading to the
top of said above-ground pool.
E. Every person maintaining an in-ground or above-ground pool which
must be fenced or gated, as above, hereunder shall keep the gate closed
and securely locked at all times when said pool is not in use by the
person maintaining the same, his family or his guests.
§ 166-2 CONCORD CODE § 166-4
166:444
Chapter 170
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Transient retail merchants — See Ch. 176.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine of
$600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this chapter, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or the
Fire Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement
procedure set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Violations and Penalties.
§ 166-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 166-4
166:445

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)130
§ 170-1. through § 170-5. (Reserved)
130. Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Per Capita Tax, adopted 1-7-1974 by Ord. No. 85, amended in
its entirety 4-3-1978 by Ord. No. 107 and amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221, was repealed
12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 326.
§ 170-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-1
166:447

ARTICLE II
Tax Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 2-6-1976 by Ord. No. 98]
§ 170-6. Discount established.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes to the Township of Concord
shall be entitled to a discount of 2% from the amount of such tax upon
making payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after the
date of the tax notice.
§ 170-7. Penalty established.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes to the Township of Concord
who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes charged against them for
four months after the date of the tax notice shall be charged a penalty of
10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the Tax Collector and be
collected by him.
§ 170-6 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-7
166:449

ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 288;131; amended in its entirety
10-6-2009 by Ord. No. 330132]
§ 170-8. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in § 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
corporation, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, firm or corporation engaged in any occupation,
trade, business or profession within the limits of Concord Township.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, as this term is defined in § 13 (relating to
earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, as amended, § 13, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on
or performed within the corporate limits of Concord Township for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of
Concord Township; a Second Class Township organized under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 170-9 of this article.
131. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Occupational Privilege Tax,
adopted 1-7-1980 by Ord. No. 116, as amended.
132. Editor's Note: This ordinance provide that nothing herein shall be construed to repeal the
imposition and collection of an occupational privilege tax, plus applicable penalties and
interest, for calendar year 2010 and all prior calendar years, or of an emergency and
municipal services tax, plus applicable penalties and interest, for calendar years 2006,
2007, 2008 and 2009, as the same existed prior to this amendment. This ordinance shall
be effective on 1-1-2010 and all calendar years thereafter unless repealed or modified by
ordinance of Concord Township.
§ 170-8 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-8
166:451
TAX COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency
designated by Concord Township to collect and administer the tax herein
imposed.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31, in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 170-9. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2010, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within Concord Township
during the tax year. Each individual who exercises such privilege for any
length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in the
amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance with the
provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the following
purposes as the same may be allocated by the Board of Supervisors from
time to time: emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services; road construction and/or
maintenance; reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief through
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with
53 Pa. C.S.A. Ch. 85, Subch. F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
Concord Township shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the
tax for emergency services. This tax is an addition to all other taxes of any
kind or nature heretofore levied by Concord Township. The tax shall be no
more than $52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the
number of political subdivisions within which a person may be employed.
§ 170-10. Exemption and refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for the calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
§ 170-8 CONCORD CODE § 170-10
166:452
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with Concord Township's
Tax Collector and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within Concord Township of less than $12,000 in
the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is filed. The
exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all the
employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within
Concord Township for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the
employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt
of the exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed by
Concord Township or except as required by Subsection B(2), the
employer shall not withhold the tax from the person during the
calendar year or the remainder of the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate applies. Employers shall ensure that the
exemption certificate forms are readily available to employees at
all times and shall furnish each new employee with a form at the
time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be the uniform
form provided by Concord Township.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by Concord Township that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within Concord
Township equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within Concord Township in an amount equal to or
in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall
withhold the local services tax from the person under Subsection
B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
§ 170-10 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-10
166:453
§ 170-11. Duty of employers to collect.
outstanding balance of tax due, and Concord Township may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. Concord Township, in consultation with the Tax Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the General Municipal
Law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. Concord Township or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the Township of Concord, as well as those
employers located outside the Township of Concord but who engage in
business within the Township of Concord, is hereby required to collect
from each of the employees engaged by him or performing for him
within the Township of Concord and make a return and payment thereof
to the Tax Collector. Further, each employer is hereby authorized to
deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ, whether said
employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or not all
such services are performed within Concord Township.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest one
hundredth of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payrollperiod
basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, “combined rate” shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and Concord
Township.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
§ 170-10 CONCORD CODE § 170-11
166:454
§ 170-12. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of
the tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Tax Collector. If an
employer fails to file the return and pay the tax whether or not the employer
makes collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 170-13. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Tax Collector on or before the 30th day following the
end of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 170-14. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within Concord Township shall be required to comply with this
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. Concord Township shall provide a taxpayer a
receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to Concord Township if the failure to
withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by the
employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 170-11B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 170-11 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-14
166:455
article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Tax Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 170-15. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
§ 170-16. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of Concord Township but who perform services of any
type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within Concord
Township, do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
Concord Township. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation within
Concord Township and an employee of a nonresidential employer may, for
the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person, and in the
event his or her tax is not paid, Concord Township shall have the option
of proceeding against either the employer or employee for the collection of
this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 170-17. (Reserved)
§ 170-18. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Tax Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to accept and
receive payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the
amount received by him from each employer or self-employed person,
together with the date the tax was received.
§ 170-14 CONCORD CODE § 170-18
166:456
§ 170-19. Suits for collection.
§ 170-20. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 170-21. Interpretation.
B. The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the administration of this
article and is hereby charged and empowered, subject to Township
approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate regulations relating to
the administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions
for the examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this
article, the examination and correction of any return made in
compliance with this article and any payment alleged or found to be
incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to have
occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector
shall have the right to appeal consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights under Act 50 of 1998.133
C. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the Tax
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Tax Collector may sue for
the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together
with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection, including reasonable attorney's fees.
133. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
§ 170-18 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-21
166:457
§ 170-22. through § 170-23. (Reserved)
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower
Concord Township to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the Township under the
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 170-21 CONCORD CODE § 170-22
166:458
ARTICLE IV
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 12-4-1984 by Ord. No. 136]
§ 170-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMISSION OR ESTABLISHED PRICE — The established price or regular
monetary charge of any character whatever, including donations,
contributions and dues or membership fees, periodic or otherwise, fixed
and exacted or in any manner received by producers, as herein defined,
from the general public or a limited or selected number thereof, directly or
indirectly, for the privilege of attending or engaging in any entertainment
or amusement, provided that when such entertainment or amusement is
conducted at any place where the charge for admission is wholly or in
part included in the price paid for refreshments, service or merchandise,
amounts paid for admission to such an amusement shall be deemed to
be 50% of the amount paid for refreshments, service and merchandise;
provided, further, that if the admission or established price being charged
for the privilege of attending or engaging in any entertainment or
amusement is not reasonably related to the true value of the entertainment
or amusement, then the Township of Concord or its agent shall also allocate
a reasonable portion of the amount paid for the refreshment, service or
merchandise received as part of the admission or established price.
AMUSEMENT — All manner and form of entertainment, diversion, sport,
pastime or recreation, including but not limited to theatrical performances,
operatic performances, motion-picture exhibitions, carnivals, fairs,
circuses, sideshows, shows, concerts, nightclub entertainment, lectures,
sporting events, vaudeville shows, amusement parks, dances, golf,
miniature golf, bowling, tennis, racquetball, fitness centers, billiards,
athletic contests, pinball machines, electronic games, coin-operated
machines and devices for recreation and any other form of entertainment,
diversion, sport, pastime or recreation for which admission, as herein
defined, is charged or paid by any person for the privilege of attending or
engaging therein.
PERSON — Every natural person, copartnership, firm, association, fiduciary
or corporation, and when applied to any person other than a natural person
shall also include all officers or partners.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place indoors or outdoors within the
Township of Concord where the general public or a limited or selected
number thereof may, upon payment of an admission, attend or engage in
any amusement as herein defined.
PRODUCER — Any person, as herein defined, conducting any place of
amusement, as herein defined, where the general public or a limited or
selected number thereof may, upon the payment of an admission, attend or
engage in any amusement.
§ 170-24 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-25
166:459
§ 170-25. Rates of tax and exemptions.
A. A tax is hereby imposed upon the sales of admission or on the privilege
of attending or engaging in amusements at the rate of 4% of the sales of
admission or established price charged the general public, or a limited
or selected group thereof, by any producer for such privilege, provided
that, where no fixed admission or established price is charged, the tax
shall be based upon the gross sales of admissions collected. [Amended
12-6-1988 by Ord. No. 154; 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 220; 12-16-2014
by Ord. No. 360]
B. In the case of nonprofit organizations, including but not limited to
country clubs, guest fees charged (whether paid for by the member or
the guest) for golfing, tennis, swimming or other amusements are
subject to the tax imposed by Subsection A.
C. In the case of persons admitted free or at reduced rates to any place of
amusement at a time when and under circumstances where an
admission fee is charged to other persons, the tax imposed by this
section shall be computed on the established price charged to such
other persons of the same class for the same or similar
accommodations, to be paid by the person so admitted.
D. The tax imposed hereunder shall not be imposed upon the privilege of
attending any amusement conducted by any agency of the Garnet Valley
School District, by any agency of any other private or parochial school
that is located in Concord Township or by any agency of Concord
Township. For purposes of this section, all of the fire companies of
Concord Township and the Concord Ambulance Association shall be
deemed agencies of Concord Township.
E. The tax imposed hereunder shall not be imposed upon the privilege of
listening to live background instrumental music while dining in a
restaurant when the music is performed by a single musician playing
either a piano, organ, violin, guitar or accordion.
F. The tax imposed hereunder shall not be imposed upon the privilege of
attending any amusement conducted by an organization or any unit
thereof based in Concord Township qualified as a charitable
organization by the Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and/or the Internal Revenue Service of the United States
Government, so long as the proceeds are intended solely for charitable
purposes and represent at least 50% of the gross proceeds of the
amusement.
G. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply or be imposed upon the
privilege to attend any amusement by a child under the age of 12 years
where the established price is $2 or less.
H. The tax imposed by this section shall not apply or be imposed upon the
privilege to enter into any place, indoors or outdoors, to engage in any
activities, the predominate purpose of which is exercise, fitness, health
§ 170-25 CONCORD CODE § 170-25
166:460
§ 170-26. Permits.
maintenance, improvement or rehabilitation, health or nutrition
education or weight control. [Added 12-6-1988 by Ord. No. 165]
A. On and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
producer to continue to conduct or thereafter to begin to conduct any
form of amusement at any permanent or temporary place of amusement
within the Township of Concord unless an amusement permit or permits
shall have been issued to him as hereinafter prescribed and the tax
herein imposed shall have been paid in accordance with the provisions
herein made.
B. Every producer desiring to continue to conduct or hereafter to begin to
conduct any amusement within the Township of Concord shall file an
application for a permanent or temporary permit or permits, as the case
may be, with the Secretary of the Township of Concord. Every
application for such permit or permits shall be made upon a form
prescribed, prepared and furnished by the Secretary of the Township of
Concord and shall set forth the name under which the applicant
conducts or intends to conduct an amusement, whether the applicant
conducts or intends to conduct a permanent or temporary place of
amusement and such other information as the Secretary may require. If
the applicant has or intends to have more than one place of amusement,
the application shall state the name and address of the owner, lessee or
custodian of the premises upon which such amusement is to be
conducted. If the applicant is other than a natural person, the applicant
shall state the names and addresses of the officers or partners thereof
and any information prescribed by the Secretary of the Township of
Concord for purposes of identification. The application shall be signed
and verified by oath or affirmation by an officer or partner thereof, and,
in the case of a corporation, the application shall be accompanied by a
certified copy of a corporate resolution authorizing the officer to make
the application.
C. At the time of making such application, the applicant shall pay to the
Secretary a permit fee, in a sum as set from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors, for each temporary permit which shall be
good for no longer than 10 days, or a permit fee, in a sum as set from
time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, for an annual
permit which shall be good for the remainder of the fiscal year.
[Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
D. Upon approval of the application and the payment of any permit fee or
fees as provided herein, the Secretary shall grant and issue to each
applicant an annual or temporary amusement permit for each place of
amusement within the Township of Concord as set forth in his
application. Amusement permits shall not be assignable and shall be
valid only for the persons in whose names they are issued and for the
conduct of amusements at the places designed therein and shall at all
times be conspicuously displayed in the places for which they are
§ 170-25 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-26
166:461
§ 170-27. Collection by producers.
§ 170-28. Reports; payment by producers.
issued. All permits for permanent places of amusement shall expire on
December 31, 1985, and annually thereafter, unless sooner suspended,
surrendered or revoked for cause by the proper authorities of the
Township of Concord. Permits for temporary places of amusement shall
expire at the time specified therein.
E. Whenever any permit issued under the provisions of this article is
defaced, destroyed or lost, the Secretary may issue a duplicate permit
to the holder of the defaced, destroyed or lost permit upon the payment
of a fee in sum as set from time to time by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
F. The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Concord may suspend or,
after hearing, revoke any amusement permit whenever it finds that the
holder thereof has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this
article. Upon suspending or revoking any amusement permit, the Board
of Supervisors of the Township of Concord shall require the holder
thereof to surrender immediately all permits or duplicates thereof
issued to him, and the holder shall promptly surrender all such permits
to the Board of Supervisors as required. Whenever the Board of
Supervisors suspends an amusement permit, it shall notify the holder
immediately and afford him a hearing, if desired and if the hearing has
not already been afforded. After such hearing, the Board of Supervisors
shall either rescind its order of suspension or, good cause appearing
therefor, shall continue the suspension or revoke the permit.
A. Producers shall collect the tax imposed by this article and shall be liable
to the Township of Concord as agents thereof for the payment of the
same into the treasury of the Township of Concord through the
Secretary, as hereinafter provided in this article.
B. Where permits are obtained for conducting temporary amusements by
persons who are not the owners, lessees or custodians of any place
where the temporary amusement is to be conducted, the tax imposed by
this article shall be paid by the owner, lessee or custodian of such place
where such temporary amusement is held or conducted unless paid by
the producer conducting the amusement.
C. Where the producer or any other person required to pay the tax is other
than a natural person, the officers or partners of said producer or other
person shall be required to collect, account for and pay over the tax
imposed by this article and be personally liable, jointly and severally, for
payment of the tax if the producer or other person is unable or fails, for
any reason, to pay the tax.
A. Every holder of a permanent permit shall, on or before the 15th day of
the following month after the close of each quarter, transmit to the
§ 170-26 CONCORD CODE § 170-28
166:462
§ 170-29. Duties of landlord.
Any person or persons, corporations, partnerships or other entity
whatsoever leasing space to a tenant knowing or having reason to know
that the tenant is or may become a producer of any amusement shall
immediately advise the Secretary as to the identity and location of the
tenant and the amusement. Failure to do so shall subject the landlord to the
penalties under § 170-37 herein and shall make the landlord responsible for
payment of tax due from the conduct of the amusement.
§ 170-30. Penalty on unpaid taxes.
If any tax levied in pursuance of this article shall not be paid when due,
penalty and interest on the amount due shall be added thereto. The penalty
shall be 10% per annum and interest per annum shall be calculated at the
rate equal to that rate imposed and adjusted from time to time by the United
States Government upon delinquent taxpayers.
§ 170-31. Examination of records.
If the Secretary is not satisfied with the report and payment of tax made by
any producer under the provisions of this article, he is hereby authorized
and empowered to make a determination of the tax due by such producer
based upon the facts contained in the report or upon any information within
his possession or that shall come into his possession, and for this purpose
Secretary a report, under oath or affirmation, of the total admissions,
as herein defined, charged or collected, and the total amount of tax
due from persons upon such admissions under this article and at the
same time shall pay over to the Secretary the entire amount of tax due.
[Amended 1-3-2005 by Ord. No. 289]
B. Every holder of a temporary permit shall, promptly after each day's
performance, pay over to the Secretary the amount of tax due from such
person under this article upon admissions, as herein defined, for such
day and at the same time shall submit to the Secretary a report of the
total admissions, as herein defined, charged or collected on such day
and the total amount of tax due on such admissions. On the day of
expiration of such temporary permit, the person to whom such permit is
issued shall, in addition, submit a report, under oath or affirmation, of
all admissions, as herein defined, charged or collected during the
period in which such temporary permit was in effect and of all taxes due
and paid, provided that:
(1) The Secretary of the Township of Concord may, in any case, direct
any Constable to receive any tax due under this article and to pay
over such moneys to the Secretary at the earliest opportunity.
(2) In every case, the Secretary of the Township of Concord shall
furnish to the person paying any tax levied under this article a
receipt for the payment of such tax.
§ 170-28 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-31
166:463
the Secretary of the Township of Concord or any authorized agent or officer
of the Township of Concord is authorized to examine the books, papers,
tickets, ticket stubs and records of any producer taxable under this article,
to verify the accuracy of any report or payment made under this article,
to verify the accuracy of any report or payment made under the provisions
thereof or to ascertain whether the taxes imposed by this article have been
paid.
§ 170-32. Confidential information.
Any information gained by the Secretary or any other official or agent
of the Township of Concord as a result of any returns, investigations or
verifications required or authorized by this article shall be confidential,
except for official purposes and except in accordance with proper judicial
order or as otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any information
contrary to the provisions of this article shall constitute a violation of this
article.
§ 170-33. Taxes recoverable as debts.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all penalties and interest,
shall be recoverable by the Township of Concord as other debts of like
amount are recovered.
§ 170-34. Estimates.
If any producer or any other person required to pay the tax shall neglect or
refuse to make any report and payment of tax required by this article or if,
as a result of an investigation by the Secretary of the Township of Concord
or any authorized agent of the Township of Concord, a report is found to be
incorrect, the Secretary shall estimate the tax due by such producer or any
other person required to pay the tax and determine the amount due by him
for taxes, penalties and interest thereon.
§ 170-35. Taxes payable into treasury.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article, shall be paid to the Secretary of the Township of
Concord for the use and benefit of the Township of Concord.
§ 170-36. Rules and regulations.
The Secretary is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter or
thing pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this article.
§ 170-37. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
§ 170-31 CONCORD CODE § 170-37
166:464
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provision of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
§ 170-37 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-37
166:465

ARTICLE V
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 2-3-1987 by Ord. No. 154]
§ 170-38. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Township of Concord."
§ 170-39. Statutory authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Township of Concord, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered or where the actual settlements on
such transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 170-40. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
devises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or devise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof, unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. The term "document" shall also
include a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording
under § 170-45 of this article.[Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
§ 170-38 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-40
166:467
FAMILY FARM PARTNERSHIP — A partnership of which at least 75% of
its assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75%
of the interests in the partnership are continuously owned by members
of the same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to
include:[Added 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment or both
the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the responsible
members or general partners thereof and, as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE: —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing.
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities.
B.
C. Fur farming.
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations.
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Township of Concord,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, including without limitation buildings,
structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with
or without upper or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements,
immovables or interests which, by custom, usage or law, pass with a
conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and
equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
§ 170-40 CONCORD CODE § 170-40
166:468
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interests in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift or sale by execution upon a judgment or upon
the foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
B.
§ 170-40 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-40
166:469
§ 170-41. Imposition of tax; interest.
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value
of which is not determinable under Subsections A or B, the actual
monetary worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the times the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, the amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act 511 of December 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer then the tax levied by the Township of Concord under
the authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the
tax exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate,
and such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part
of the Township of Concord; provided, however, that the Township of
Concord and any other political subdivision which imposes such tax on
the same person or transfer may agree that instead of limiting their
respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the
maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 170-40 CONCORD CODE § 170-41
166:470
§ 170-42. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth and any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 170-43. Excluded transactions.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 170-41 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one
year from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Township of Concord is prohibited from
taxing under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at sheriff's sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties takes shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
§ 170-41 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-43
166:471
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to a
successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this clause.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
§ 170-43 CONCORD CODE § 170-43
166:472
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture and if the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, [68A Stat. 3. 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its
primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities or a transfer from
such a conservancy to the United States Commonwealth or to any
of their instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions.
[Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership. [Added 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
(21) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate. [Amended 1-5-1998 by
Ord. No. 221]
(22) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(23) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation
of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 170-43 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-44
166:473
§ 170-44. Taxable documents. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
Except as otherwise provided in § 170-43, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or devise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 170-45. Acquired company.
§ 170-46. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company, and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this article. [Added 1-5-1998 by Ord.
No. 221]
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
§ 170-44 CONCORD CODE § 170-46
166:474
§ 170-47. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 170-48. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and shall have priority out of
the proceeds or any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 170-49. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is devised by the grantor,
a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the devise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer. [Amended
1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by the Act of July 7, 1983
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for
the local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the
Township of Concord based on a redetermination of the amount of tax
due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania Realty
Transfer Tax, without compensation from the Township of Concord.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not
§ 170-46 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-49
166:475
§ 170-50. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 170-51. Civil penalties.
§ 170-52. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein lying, being situated,
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the tenth of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Township of Concord all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for
use of the county, together with a report containing the information as
is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 170-49 CONCORD CODE § 170-52
166:476
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Township of Concord, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments or interest therein is described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable and to continue until
discharge by payment or in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of
Delaware County in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims
and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. Section 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
§ 170-53. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 170-54. Regulations.
The Secretary of the Township of Concord is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
§ 170-52 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-54
166:477

ARTICLE VI
Tax Exemptions for Improvements
[Adopted 5-1-2001 By Ord. No. 258]
§ 170-55. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words or phrases shall have the
following meanings:
LERTA DISTRICT — Any industrial, commercial or other business property
owned by an individual, association or corporation and located in the area
which has been designated as an area eligible for tax exemption relief under
the Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act, Act No. 76 of 1977,
72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
IMPROVEMENTS(S) — Any repair, construction or reconstruction,
including alterations or additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a
property within the LERTA District so that it attains higher standards of
safety, health, economic use or amenity or is brought into compliance with
laws, ordinances or regulations governing such standards. Ordinary upkeep
or maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Concord, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 170-56. LERTA District designation.
§ 170-57. Length of exemption; applicability; delinquency.
A. The following parcels are hereby designated to meet the criteria of
inclusion within a LERTA District, in accordance with the provisions of
the Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act, Act No. 76 of
1977, 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
(1) Folio No. 13-00-00078-01, Map No. 13-18-010.
(2) Folio No. 13-00-01062-00, Map No. 13-25-003.
(3) Folio No. 13-00-01062-01, Map No. 13-25-004.
B. A map showing the designated parcels is attached hereto and shall be
incorporated herein as Exhibit A.134
A. There is hereby exempted from all real property taxation that portion of
the additional assessment attributable to the actual costs of
improvements to eligible properties in the LERTA District, with the
length of the schedule of taxes exempted to be for a five-year period,
which shall commence with the effective date of said exemption.
B. The exemption of taxes authorized by this article shall be upon the
property exempted and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of
the property.
134. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 170-55 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-57
166:479
§ 170-58. Exemption schedule.
The schedule of real estate taxes to be exempted shall be in accordance with
the following percentage of improvements to be exempted each year:
Year Amount Exempted
1 50%
2 40%
3 30%
4 20%
5 10%
§ 170-59. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
C. The exemption from taxes authorized by this article shall only be
applicable to those properties upon which all taxes and other municipal
charges/fees/levies are current. In the event of delinquency, all
exemption from the point of delinquency and into succeeding years
shall be forfeited, and taxes shall be at 100% of assessed valuation. For
purposes of this article, "delinquency" shall be defined as a failure to
pay any assessment by the date on such assessment as required by law
to be paid.
A. Any person, association or corporation desiring an exemption pursuant
to this article shall apply to the Building Inspector of the Township of
Concord within 90 days of the date the Building Permit is issued for
construction of the improvements. The application must be in writing
on a form provided by the Township of Concord and shall contain the
following information;
(1) The date the building permit was issued for such improvements;
(2) The location of the property to be improved;
(3) The nature of the property to be improved;
(4) The type of improvements;
(5) A summary of the plan of improvements;
(6) The cost of the improvements;
(7) Whether the property has been condemned by any governmental
body for noncompliance with laws or the Township Code; and
(8) Such additional information as the Township may require.
B. A copy of the exemption application shall be forwarded to the Board of
Supervisors of Concord Township or its designee within 60 days of the
date of receipt by the Township. The Board of Supervisors of Concord
Township shall decide whether the application for exemption is in
§ 170-57 CONCORD CODE § 170-59
166:480
§ 170-60. Severability.
If any part of this article is for any reason found to be illegal or invalid, such
illegality or invalidation shall not affect any of the remaining parts of this
article, which shall continue to be fully operative as if the illegal or invalid
part had not been enacted.
§ 170-61. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of any inconsistency.
§ 170-62. When effective.
This article shall become effective five days after adoption.
conformity with the provisions of this Article and, if so, shall approve
same. Written notice of the Board of Supervisors' decision, and the
basis therefor if denied, shall be provided to the applicant.
C. In all cases where the exemption is granted, the Township of Concord
shall forward a copy of the exemption request to the Delaware County
Board of Assessment. The Board of Assessment shall, upon completion
of the improvements and notification from the Building Inspector of the
Township of Concord that the improvements comply with all applicable
building codes and provisions of the Concord Township Code, assess
separately the improvements and calculate the amount of the
assessment eligible for tax exemption. The exemption provided herein
shall be effective with the next assessment immediately following the
date on which the exemption is granted. Appeals from the reassessment
and the amount eligible for the exemption may be taken by the taxpayer
or any taxing authority as provided by law.
D. The cost of improvements to be exempted and the schedule of taxes
exempted existing at the time of the initial request for tax exemption
shall be applicable to that exemption request, and subsequent
amendments to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests initiated
prior to their adoption.
§ 170-59 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-62
166:481
Chapter 172
TAXPAYERS' BILL OF RIGHTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxation — See Ch. 170.
§ 172-1. Rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations attached hereto as Schedule 1135 and
incorporated herein by reference are hereby approved and adopted for use
in Concord Township.
§ 172-2. Disclosure statement.
The disclosure statement, substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 2136
attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference, is hereby approved
and adopted for use in Concord Township.
§ 172-3. Forms for petition for appeal.
The form for petition for appeal and refund, substantially in the form
set forth in Schedule 3137 attached hereto and incorporated herein by
reference, is hereby approved and adopted for use in Concord Township.
§ 172-4. Board for administrative appeals.
The Board of Supervisors of Concord Township hereby determines that
administrative appeals relating to petitions for appeal and refund submitted
by taxpayers in connection with the assessment, determination or refund
of an eligible tax under the LTBR (Local Taxpayers' Bill of Rights) shall be
undertaken by the Concord Township Board of Supervisors.
§ 172-5. Appeal procedures.
The administrative appeal procedures set forth in the rules and regulations
and substantially in the form set forth in Schedule 4,138 attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference, are hereby approved and adopted for use
in Concord Township.
135. Editor's Note: Schedule 1, Rules and Regulations for Compliance with the Local Taxpayers'
Bill of Rights, is on file in the Township offices.
136. Editor's Note: Schedule 2, Disclosure Statement under the Local Taxpayers' Bill of Rights,
is on file in the Township offices.
137. Editor's Note: Schedule 3, Petition for Appeal and Refund, is on file in the Township
offices.
138. Editor's Note: Schedule 4, Administrative Appeal Procedures Applicable to Petitions for
Appeal and Refund, is on file in the Township offices.
§ 170-62 CONCORD CODE § 172-6
172:482
§ 172-6. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of law
and shall be applicable to all eligible taxes levied by Concord Township after
January 1, 1999.
Chapter 176
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 70.
Amusement tax — See Ch. 170, Art. IV.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 190.
§ 176-1. Permit required.
From and after the passage of this chapter, no circuses or carnivals shall
be held and no transient retail business or house-to-house merchandising
of any kind, by peddler, hawkers, transient merchants or others, shall be
carried on within the township except upon the payment of a license fee and
the granting of a permit therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 176-2. Nuisances.
No permit shall be issued for any activity mentioned in § 170-1 hereof or
for any of like character where it shall reasonably appear that such activity
would be a nuisance or detrimental to the health, morals or safety of the
citizens of the township or where the purpose for which the permit is sought
may adversely affect the general welfare of the township's residents.
§ 176-3. Hours.
No permit shall be issued for any activity hereinbefore mentioned which is
to be carried on in whole or in part after 6:00 p.m. prevailing time on any
day, except by prior invitation of the property owner or tenants. Approved
circuses and carnivals may not be carried on on a Sunday or after 12:00
midnight on any other day.
§ 176-4. Exceptions.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the payment of a
license fee by or for any of the following:
A. Activity conducted by a nonprofit, charitable or benevolent
organization.
B. Activity conducted by or under the supervision of the township schools.
C. Activity exempt by law from payment of a license fee.
§ 172-6 TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS § 176-4
176:483
§ 176-5. Fee.139
A minimum permit fee, as set from time to time by resolution of the Board
of Supervisors, shall be charged for approved circuses and carnivals. In
addition thereto, the applicant shall deposit with the township a sum, as set
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors, to be returned
at the conclusion of the circus or carnival upon satisfying the township that
the premises have been restored to the condition existing prior to the circus
or carnival. All other fees for permits hereunder shall be as set from time to
time by resolution of the Board of Supervisors.
§ 176-6. Application requirements.
All applications for permits hereunder shall be in writing and shall be filed
with the Township Secretary, who is hereby authorized to issue the permit
in each instance if, after due investigation, he be satisfied as to the proper
and lawful purpose for which the permit is sought and upon receiving the
prescribed license fee and upon receiving the approval of a Supervisor of
the township. The applicant shall supply his or her name, sex, age, address,
the business to be engaged in and the food, goods, wares, amusement
services, merchandise or other articles to be sold, the name and address
of the firm or company represented, the number of days the applicant
proposes to carry on said activity, the registration number of the applicant's
motor vehicle, whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime and
the details of such crime. A recent photograph of the applicant shall be filed
with said application.
§ 176-7. Exhibition of permit.
Every permittee shall carry his permit with him at all times while engaged
in the activity permitted by the license issued under this chapter and shall
exhibit the same upon request. Every permittee shall display outwardly on
his or her person the permit number issued by the township.
§ 176-8. Revocation of permit.
The Township Secretary is authorized to revoke any permit granted
hereunder when the activity covered thereby shall prove to be a nuisance
or detrimental to the public health, safety or morals of the citizens of the
township, and when a permit is thus revoked it shall be promptly returned
to the Secretary.
D. Any farmer selling exclusively produce grown by him.
E. Insurance companies or their agents.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 176-4 CONCORD CODE § 176-9
176:484
§ 176-9. Appeals.
Should any applicant for a permit hereunder deem himself aggrieved by
reason of the Secretary's refusal to issue such permit or by the terms and
conditions under which the same is allowed or by a revocation of such
permit, such applicant may appeal to the Board of Supervisors by filing with
the Secretary a written notice of an intent to appeal, said notice to be filed
within one week following the action of the Secretary complained of.
§ 176-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
Chapter 185
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles, motor-driven — See Ch. 190.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine of
$600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this chapter, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Chapter II, Violations and
Penalties.
§ 176-9 TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS § 176-10
176:485

ARTICLE I
Township Roads with Maximum Speed Limit of 25 Miles Per Hour
[Adopted 4-2-2002 by Ord. No. 267]
§ 185-1. Township roads with maximum speed limit of 25 miles per
hour.
A. A maximum speed limit of 25 miles per hour is established and/or
confirmed on the portions of Township roads specified below, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on said roads at a
speed in excess of 25 miles per hour.
B. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a summary offense and
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person
exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five
miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
Name of Street Limits
(*indicates approval by previous ordinance)
Aldan Avenue* From Conchester Road to Thornton Road
Allen Drive From Smithbridge Road to Hunt Meeting Lane
Andrien Road From Mendenhall Drive to the boundary of
Thornbury Township
Annesley Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Anvil Court [Added
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Beech Tree Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Big Woods Drive From the cul-de-sac of Big Woods Drive to the
cul-de-sac of Big Woods Drive
Bolling Circle* From Ruby Road to the cul-de-sac
Brinton Lake Road
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
From Baltimore Pike (Route 1) south to Spring
Valley Road
Cambridge Drive* From Conchester Highway to the cul-de-sac of
Cambridge Drive
Carter Way From Route 202 to the cul-de-sac of Carter Way
Christopher Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
§ 185-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS § 185-1
176:487
Name of Street Limits
(*indicates approval by previous ordinance)
Cider Mill Court
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Clayton Park Drive* From Green Creek Lane to Conchester Highway
Colonial Circle* From Thornton Road to Thornton Road
Conchester Road3* From Baltimore Pike to Aldan Avenue
Concord Creek
Road
From the cul-de-sac of Concord Creek Road to
the cul-de-sac of Concord Creek Road
Concord Crossing
Lane [Amended
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Concord Meeting
Road*
From Saint John's Drive to Jeremiah Collett
Road
Country Lane From Smithbridge Road to Willits Way
Cross Creek Lane From Pyle Road to Pyle Road
Cross Keys Drive From Concord Road to Vernon Lane
Darlington Road From John Hannum Circle to the cul-de-sac of
Darlington Road
Dogwood Lane* From Ivy Lane to Ivy Lane
Dougherty
Boulevard*
From Baltimore Pike to Ivy Lane
Edward Jennings
Road*
From Concord Road to Saint John's Drive
Featherbed Lane* From Conchester Highway to Kirk Road
Fellowship Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Fox Valley Lane* From Polecat Road to South Ivy Lane
George's Way From James Hayward Road to the cul-de-sac of
George's Way
Glenview Drive* From Cheyney Road to Schoolhouse Lane
Governor Markham
Drive*
From Cheyney Road to the cul-de-sac of
Governor Markham Drive
Gray Hawk Lane
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
§ 185-1 CONCORD CODE § 185-1
176:488
Name of Street Limits
(*indicates approval by previous ordinance)
Great Oak Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Hannah Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Hemlock Drive* From Schoolhouse Lane to the cul-de-sac of
Hemlock Drive
Heritage Hill Drive From Smithbridge Road to the cul-de-sac of
Heritage Hill Drive
High Hill Lane
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Huntington Farm
Drive
From Cheyney Road to Big Woods Drive
Hunt Meet Lane From Allen Drive to the cul-de-sac of Hunt Meet
Lane
Huntsman Drive From Kirk Road to Woodsview Drive
Ivy Lane* From the Chester Heights boundary to South Ivy
Lane
James Hayward
Road
From Spring Valley Road to Spring Valley Road
Jeremiah Collett
Road*
From Concord Meeting Road to Concord
Meeting Road
Jesse Court [Added
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
John Beale Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
John Hannum Circle From Concord Road to Concord Road
John Meyers Circle
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Kirk Road [Added
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
From Smithbridge Road to Garnet Mine Road
Lacrue Street* From Conchester Road to Aldan Avenue
§ 185-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS § 185-1
176:489
Name of Street Limits
(*indicates approval by previous ordinance)
La France Way
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Leopard Run Road* From Smithbridge Road to Woodchuck Way
Lone Beech Lane
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Marlborough Lane* From Cambridge Drive to the cul-de-sac of
Marlborough Lane
Marshall Court From Temple Road to the cul-de-sac of Marshall
Court
Mary Court [Added
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Mattson Road
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
From Route 322 to Chester Heights Township
Meers Lane From Concord Meeting Road to Big Woods Drive
Mendenhall Drive* From Andrien Road to Andrien Road
Merion Drive* From Conchester Highway to Marlborough Lane
Mill Haven Road From Sunset View Drive to Sunset View Drive
Mill Race Place* From Cheyney Road to the cul-de-sac of Mill
Race Place
Millwright Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Minshall Circle From James Hayward Road to the cul-de-sac of
Minshall Circle
Molly Lane* From Ruby Road to Robins Way
Morris Drive From Temple Road to Sawmill Road
Nathaniel Court
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Nellie Lane [Added
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Newlin Way From Carter Way to Carter Way
Oxfordshire Court
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
§ 185-1 CONCORD CODE § 185-1
176:490
Name of Street Limits
(*indicates approval by previous ordinance)
Park Lane* From Schoolhouse Lane to the cul-de-sac of Park
Lane
Patricia Lane* From Cheyney Road to the cul-de-sac
Patriot Lane* From Thornton Road to the cul-de-sac of Patriot
Lane
Pennrose Talley
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Peter Gamble Lane From James Hayward Road to the cul-de-sac of
Peter Gamble Lane
Peters Lane From Valleybrook Road to the cul-de-sac of
Peters Lane
Pleasant Hill Drive From Sunset View Drive to Spring Hill Farm
Road
Pole Cat Road* From Baltimore Pike to Ivy Mill Road
Quigley Lane
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Ralph Marsh Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Remarkable Court
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Rigby Court [Added
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Robert Adams Court
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Robins Way* From Ruby Road to the cul-de-sac
Rockland Manor
Road [Added
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Ruby Road* From Beaver Valley Road to the cul-de-sac
Running Brook
Road*
From the cul-de-sac of Running Brook Road to
the cul-de-sac of Running Brook Road
Running Spring
Lane
From Bethel Road to the cul-de-sac of Running
Spring Lane
§ 185-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS § 185-1
176:491
Name of Street Limits
(*indicates approval by previous ordinance)
Saint John's Drive From Cheyney Road to Concord Meeting Road
Samuel Hill Lane
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Sawmill Road From Temple Road to the cul-de-sac of Sawmill
Road
Schoolhouse Lane* From Baltimore Pike to Cheyney Road
Scott Road* From Concord Road to Baltimore Pike
Shavertown Road
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
From Featherbed and Kirk Roads to Naamans
Creek Road
Shaw Circle [Added
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Sleighride Road From Smithbridge Road to Willits Way
Smithfield Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
South Ivy Lane* From Ivy Lane to Ivy Lane
Spring Valley Road
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
From the Chadds Ford/Concord Township line to
Conchester Highway (Route 322)
Stephen's Green From Sleighride Road to the cul-de-sac of
Stephen's Green
Stirrup Lane
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Summit Avenue* From Beaver Valley Road to Dain Avenue
Sunset View Drive From Smithbridge Road to Pleasant Hill Drive
Sussex Court
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Swan Lake Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Swayne Court
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Temple Road* From Smithbridge Road to Spring Valley Road
§ 185-1 CONCORD CODE § 185-1
176:492
Name of Street Limits
(*indicates approval by previous ordinance)
Thomas Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Thomas Speakman
Drive [Added
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Trimble Road
[Amended
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Union School Way
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
Vernon Lane From Concord Road to Cross Keys Drive
Walters Road From John Hannum Circle to the cul-de-sac of
Walters Road
Ward Creek Road From Pleasant Hill Drive to the cul-de-sac of
Ward Creek Road
Waterwheel Way* From Mill Race Place to the cul-de-sac of
Waterwheel Way
Watkin Avenue* From Route 202 to Route 202
Wendy Lane* From Glenview Road to Park Lane
Willam Beaser Drive
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
William Howard
Drive [Added
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Willits Way
[Amended
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Winding Way From Glenview Road to Wendy Lane
Wolverton Way From Running Brook Road to Carter Way
Woodchuck Way* From Running Brook Road to Running Brook
Road
§ 185-1 TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS § 185-1
176:493
Name of Street Limits
(*indicates approval by previous ordinance)
Woodside Farm
Drive [Added
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Woodsview Drive
[Amended
11-8-2006 by Ord.
No. 304]
Entire length
Wright's Court
[Added 11-8-2006
by Ord. No. 304]
Entire length
§ 185-1 CONCORD CODE § 185-1
176:494
ARTICLE II
Traffic-Calming Measures
[Adopted 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 329]
§ 185-2. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to establish criteria and guidelines for the
installation of traffic-calming measures on Township-owned roadways. Such
measures are specifically designed to reduce the speed, but not necessarily
the volume, of motor vehicle traffic in residential areas, nor is their purpose
to move traffic to adjoining roadways. Traffic-calming measures shall also
consist of enforcement and education activities by the Pennsylvania State
Police Department.
§ 185-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SPEED HUMP — Synonymous with "traffic-calming measure." A speed
hump is a raised hump in the pavement extending across the width of the
roadway at a right angle to the direction of the flow of traffic. A speed
table is considered an equal alternative to speed hump where deemed
appropriate per the Township Traffic Engineer.
§ 185-4. Policy for installation.
It is the policy of the Township to install speed humps on streets in
accordance with the procedures and criteria listed in §§ 185-5 and 185-6
herein.
§ 185-5. Application procedure.
A. Applicants may request that a study be conducted to construct speed
humps in a particular neighborhood. Requests shall be submitted in
writing, along with a petition described below, to the Board of
Supervisors for consideration at its next scheduled meeting.
B. Petition.
(1) All households on the affected street must be contacted by the
applicants and advised that speed humps are being considered for
their street.
(2) A signed petition must be submitted reflecting the support of at
least 90% of the households (determined by street address) on the
affected street i.e., the signature of one adult member of the
household is necessary.
(3) Support is also required from 90% of households located on streets
or cul-de-sacs whose only access is via the affected street i.e., the
signature of one adult member of the household is necessary.
§ 185-2 TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS § 185-6
176:495
§ 185-6. Criteria.
The following general criteria have been established as a means to limit the
use of speed humps to areas where they will be most effective and practical;
these criteria are subject to modification as recommended by the Township
Traffic Engineer:
§ 185-7. Recommendation and approval.
A. Speed humps will not be installed on state roadways or any roadway
classified higher than "local" within the Concord Township
Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
B. The legally posted speed limit on the street should not exceed 25 miles
per hour.
C. The minimum length of the street, or portion thereof, measured from
the nearest intersecting street, should be at least 1,000 feet.
D. The average vehicle speed (based upon the 85th percentile of the
speeds recorded during the traffic count) should not be less than five
miles per hour over the legally posted speed limit, which should be
determined by a speed study.
E. The distance between speed humps should not be less than 250 feet.
F. Speed humps should not be installed on hills or curves that could affect
the safe control of vehicles.
G. Speed humps should be no less than 12 feet in width.
H. Signs indicating "HUMP" should be installed in each direction at the
location of the hump and a sufficient distance before the hump to warn
approaching motorists. For increased visibility, reflective stripes should
be painted on the humps.
I. Pennsylvania's Traffic Calming Handbook, Penn Dot Pub. 383, as
revised, may be utilized by the Township Traffic Engineer in forming a
recommendation to the Board of Supervisors regarding any trafficcalming
measure.
A. All decisions regarding whether or not to recommend the installation of
speed humps shall be made by the Board of Supervisors in accordance
with the criteria contained herein.
B. All Township Traffic Engineer recommendations to install speed humps
in the petitioned area shall be subject to final approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
§ 185-6 CONCORD CODE § 185-7
176:496
Chapter 187
VEHICLES, ENGINE BRAKES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise disturbance — See Ch. 124.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 185.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 190.
§ 187-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Concord Township
Engine Brake Ordinance."
§ 187-2. Legislative intent.
The Board of Supervisors of the Township of Concord, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, finds, as a fact, that the operation of an engine brake on
a gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicle not equipped with
mufflers, or equipped with defective or modified exhaust mufflers, so as
to create excessive noise through the use of said engine brake, adversely
affects the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of Concord
Township and, therefore, is a nuisance in fact.
§ 187-3. Use prohibited.
No gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicle shall be operated
on the streets, roads, alleys or highways within the Township of Concord
listed below utilizing, in said operation, an engine brake, without exhaust
mufflers, permitting excessive noise to be created by said motor vehicles
using the engine brake. The streets subject to this prohibition shall be as
follows:
Street Between
Route 1 (Baltimore Pike) [Added
6-5-2007 by Ord. No. 313]
From Route 202 (Wilmington-West
Chester Pike) to Thornton Road and
from Schoolhouse Lane to Stoney
Bank Road
Route 202 (Wilmington Pike) Bethel Township (Pyle Road) to
Chadds Ford Township (Route 1/
Baltimore Pike)
Route 322 (Conchester Highway)
[Added 6-5-2007 by Ord. No.
313]
From Route 1 to Fellowship Drive
and from Smithbridge Road to
Bethel Township line (approximately
intersection of Route 322 and
Garnet Mine Road)
§ 185-7 VEHICLES, ENGINE BRAKES § 187-4
187:497
§ 187-4. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to emergency driving situations requiring the
utilization of an engine brake to protect the safety and property of the
residents of Concord Township, other motor vehicle operators, pedestrians
or the operator and passengers of the motor vehicle involved in said
emergency situation.
§ 187-5. Violations and penalties.
For each violation of the provisions of this chapter, unless another penalty
is specifically provided in the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code140, any person who
commits, permits, takes part in or assists in any such violation shall be
liable, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, to pay a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense, together with the
costs of prosecution. Each use of such engine brake in Concord Township
shall be considered a separate violation.
Chapter 190
VEHICLES, MOTOR-DRIVEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumping — See Ch. 93.
Noise — See Ch. 124.
Solid waste — See Ch. 142.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
Transient retail merchants — See Ch. 176.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 185.
§ 190-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the term "motor-driven vehicle" shall be construed
to include all wheeled and chain- and/or belt-driven vehicles powered by
internal combustion engines, including but not limited to motorcycles,
motorbikes, trail bikes, motor scooters, snowmobiles and all-terrain
vehicles.
§ 190-2. Prohibited acts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated or to
participate in the operation of any motor-driven vehicle in or upon the
public roads, streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, grounds or
property situated within the Township of Concord.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated or to
participate in the operation of any motor-driven vehicle in or upon the
private property of another without the express prior written consent of
140. Editor's Note: See 75 P.S. § 101 et seq.
§ 187-4 CONCORD CODE § 190-2
190:498
§ 190-3. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the operation of properly
licensed motor vehicles upon the public highways in accordance with law
or agriculture equipment used in the course of fanning or commercial
equipment being properly used in the trade or business of the owner or
by such owner's employees or agents or power mowers, garden tractors or
snow blowers when such operation is incidental to home, lawn or garden
work or maintenance.
§ 190-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
Chapter 196
the owner and/or occupant of said private property, which express
prior written consent shall be retained and carried upon the person
operating any motor-driven vehicle during the period of operation and
displayed immediately upon request to any law enforcement official
and/or the owner and/or occupant of the private property upon which
the vehicle operation occurs. Any person operating a motor-driven
vehicle upon the private property of another shall stop and identify
himself upon the request of the landowner or his duly authorized
representative and, if requested to do so by the landowner or his
duly authorized representative, shall promptly remove the motor-driven
vehicle from the premises.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated or to
participate in the operation of any motor-driven vehicle at a rate of
speed that is unreasonable or improper under existing conditions or in
any careless way so as to endanger the person or property of the
operator or another.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine of
$600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this chapter, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
penalties.
§ 190-2 WATER CONSERVATION § 190-4
196:499
WATER CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 136.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 148.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
§ 196-1. Applicability.
No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, governmental or public
building or structure of any kind which is constructed or remodeled and in
which plumbing, water piping or water fixtures are to be installed, extended
or altered in any way and for which construction a permit is required to be
obtained from the Township of Concord (or would be required but for an
exemption from a permit requirement for public or governmental agencies),
unless the new, extended or altered plumbing, water piping and other
water-using fixtures therein conform to the requirements and standards of
§ 196-2 of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any such
building or structure for which such a building permit is issued or would
otherwise be required to be issued but for such an exemption on or after
June 3, 1992.
§ 196-2. Performance standards.
A. Water closets. The water consumption of water closets shall not exceed
an average of 1.6 gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressures
from 20 pounds per square inch (psi) to 80 pounds per inch. The fixture
shall perform in accordance with the test requirements of the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) A112.19.2M and ANSI
A112.19.6M.
B. Urinals. Urinal water consumption shall not exceed an average of 1.5
gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 pounds
per square inch to 80 pounds per square inch. The fixtures shall
perform in accordance with the test requirements of ANSI A112.19.2M
and ANSI A112.19.6M.
C. Shower heads. Shower-head discharge rates shall not exceed 3.0
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20
pounds per square inch to 80 pounds per square inch. The fixture shall
perform in accordance with the test requirements of ANSI A112.18.1M.
D. Faucets. Sink and lavatory faucet discharge rates shall not exceed 3.0
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20
pounds per square inch to 80 pounds per square inch. The fixture shall
perform in accordance with the test requirements of ANSI A112.18.1M.
§ 190-4 CONCORD CODE § 196-3
196:500
§ 196-3. Special purpose equipment.
The performance standards of § 196-2 shall not apply to fixtures and fittings
such as emergency showers, aspirator faucets and blowout fixtures that,
in order to perform a specialized function, cannot meet the specified
standards.
§ 196-4. Exemptions.
Any person(s) may apply to the Township of Concord for an exemption to
the terms of this chapter, which may be granted by the Board of Supervisors
upon proof that some other device, system or procedure will save as much
or more water as those set forth herein or that those set forth herein cannot
be complied with without undue hardship. The Building Inspector of the
Township of Concord may grant a waiver from the performance standards
of § 196-2 when availability constitutes an undue hardship.
§ 196-5. Official review and modification.
The Board of Supervisors may, from time to time, modify, add to, or remove
from the standards and restrictions herein.
§ 196-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
Chapter 204
WEAPONS
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine of
$600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this chapter, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
§ 196-3 WATER CONSERVATION § 196-6
196:501

ARTICLE I
Firearms
[Adopted 11-11-1963 by Ord. No. 33]
§ 204-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the term "firearm" shall include shotguns, air guns,
air pistols, spring guns or pistols, rifles and pistols of any caliber or any
implement which impels with force a pellet of any kind.
§ 204-2. Discharge of firearms prohibited. [Amended 1-5-1998 by
Ord. No. 221]
Except as herein provided otherwise, it shall be unlawful and it is hereby
prohibited for any person or persons to fire or discharge any firearm within
the Township of Concord, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 204-3. Exceptions
§ 204-4. Target ranges. [Amended 6-2-1975 by Ord. No. 91]
A. No person shall, except in defense of person or property or on an
approved target range under adult supervision, fire or discharge any
firearm within the Township of Concord.
B. Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the use of a shotgun using
scatter shot at any time by anyone otherwise lawfully permitted to use
the same; the use of a shotgun using a rifle slug during the official
Pennsylvania deer season and for deer hunting, provided that said gun
is not discharged within 150 yards of any building; the use of any type
of firearm on an approved target range under adult supervision; or the
use of firearms by any person licensed to carry such firearms for law
enforcement purposes. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
C. No gun or firearm of any type may be discharged outside the confines of
any building for any purpose within one mile of the edge of any school
zone. [Added 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 335]
A. Outdoor target ranges may be permitted subject to the following
regulations:
(1) A permit for the installation and use of outdoor target ranges shall
be secured from the Township Secretary. Said permit shall be for a
period of one year from the date of issue, and the fee for such
permit shall be $10;
(2) Said permit may only be issued to the owner of the premises to be
used as an outdoor target range, and said range shall be for the
owner's personal use;
§ 204-1 WATER CONSERVATION § 204-4
196:503
§ 204-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-2-1975 by Ord. No.
91; 12-3-1996 by Ord. No. 206]
(3) Said outdoor target range shall have a natural earth backstop or a
backstop of the type and kind approved by the National Rifle
Association;
(4) No part of said outdoor target range shall be located within 100
yards of any property line;
(5) Said outdoor target range may only be used as a target range
during the hours of 10:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m., prevailing time,
Mondays through Saturdays, inclusive, and shall not be used on
Sundays;
(6) No person shall discharge on said outdoor target range at any time
any firearm having a caliber in excess of a .22 caliber; and
(7) A target range located wholly within a residence or a building used
on a lot in connection with a residence may be used in accordance
with the terms of this article without securing a permit.
B. Any police officer lawfully engaged in his law enforcement duties within
the Township of Concord is hereby authorized to seize and confiscate
any firearm, as defined herein, which shall be fired or discharged within
the limits of the Township of Concord in violation of this article.
[Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provision of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, Violations and
Penalties.
§ 204-4 CONCORD CODE § 204-5
196:504
ARTICLE II
Bows and Arrows
[Adopted 12-3-1991 by Ord. No. 183]
§ 204-6. Applicability. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the use of bows and arrows in
schools and clubs under competent adult supervision. Nor shall this article
prohibit the use of bows and arrows in accordance with the Game and
Wildlife Code, Act 93 of July 8, 1986, P.L.442 (34 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.).
§ 204-7. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
given to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ARROW — A missile shot from a bow, having a slender shaft with fletching
or vanes at the butt and a pointed head.
BOW — A weapon which propels an arrow, is hand-held, hand-drawn, held
in the drawn position by hand or by a hand-held mechanical device and
released by hand.
§ 204-8. Target ranges; permits
The Board of Supervisors or its designee is authorized to issue permits for
outdoor target ranges after the inspection and approval of such ranges.
Outdoor target ranges may be permitted subject to the following
regulations:
A. A permit for the installation and use of outdoor target ranges shall be
secured from the Township Secretary. Said permit shall be for a period
of one year from the date of issue, and the fee for such permit shall be
$10;
B. Said permit may only be issued to the owner of the premises to be used
as an outdoor target range, including owners of two or more adjoining
premises applying for a range for their joint use, and said range shall be
for the permittee's personal use;
C. Said outdoor target range shall have a natural earth or artificial
backstop so that the arrow cannot travel more than 15 yards beyond the
target aimed at, after making due allowance for deflection in any
direction not to exceed an angle of 45°, or a backstop of the type and
kind approved by the National Rifle Association;
D. No part of said outdoor target range shall be located within 150 feet of
the property line of the permittee, and the range shall be so constructed
and located that no arrow can travel within 150 feet of the property line
of the permittee (such property line being defined as the outside
property perimeter of two or more adjoining premises where a joint
permit has been issued);
§ 204-6 WATER CONSERVATION § 204-8
196:505
§ 204-9. Bow hunting.
Bow hunting shall be permitted within the Township only as conducted
according to the Pennsylvania Game and Wildlife Code,141 except that no
such hunting shall be permitted within 150 feet of a property line or in a
manner which could cause an arrow to pass within 150 feet of a property
line.
§ 204-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
E. Said outdoor target range may only be used as a target range daily
during the daylight hours between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing
time; and
F. A target range located wholly within a residence or a building used on a
lot in connection with a residence may be used in accordance with the
terms of this article without securing a permit.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or who permits
the violation of any provision of this article shall pay a fine of $600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
article shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this article, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
141. Editor's Note: See 34 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 204-8 CONCORD CODE § 204-10
196:506
Chapter 210
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open Space Committee — See Ch. 35.
Planning Commission — See Ch. 53.
Zoning Officer — See Ch. 60.
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 70.
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Excavation and soil removal — See Ch. 98.
Fire hydrant districts — See Ch. 104.
Sewers — See Ch. 136.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 148.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
160.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 166.
Water conservation — See Ch. 196.
Zoning use approval — See Ch. 214.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A225.
§ 204-10 WATER CONSERVATION § 204-10
196:507

ARTICLE I
Purpose, Objectives and Definitions
§ 210-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10601 through 10619,
and is intended, by its various provisions, to permit, prohibit, regulate,
restrict and determine:
§ 210-2. Objectives. [Amended 2-6-2001 by Ord. No. 256]
This chapter shall serve as an instrument for guiding and regulating the
orderly growth, development and redevelopment of the Township in
accordance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan of Concord Township, as
from time to time amended, which contains the long-term goals, objectives,
principles, standards, and implementation strategies deemed beneficial to
the interest and welfare of the Township, the objectives being as follows:
A. Uses of land, watercourses and other bodies of water.
B. Size, height, bulk, location, erection, construction, repair, maintenance,
alteration, razing, removal and use of structures.
C. Areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied by
uses and structures, as well as areas, courts, yards and other open
spaces and distances to be left unoccupied by uses and structures.
D. Density of population and intensity of use.
A. To promote growth management through:
(1) A balance of residential and nonresidential development;
(2) An interconnected network of open spaces, recreational areas, and
pathways;
(3) Mixed-use development within tracts that have direct access to
Routes 1, 202, and 322;
(4) A more fluid flow of vehicular traffic within the Township and
across its borders;
(5) A municipal services center in the central portion of the Township;
(6) A redefinition of the Concordville area to create a Village center
near the intersection of Routes 322 and 1; and
(7) Neighborhoods that are compact and walkable.
B. To conserve environmental resources by:
§ 210-1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-2
196:509
(1) Striking a balance between the conservation and development of
the natural landscape through the protection of environmental
resources and the preservation of open spaces;
(2) Coordinating and maintaining a functional open space network
consisting of parkland, trails, agricultural lands, floodplains,
wetlands, and woodlands; and
(3) Preserving prime agricultural land, woodlands, areas of steep
slope, and the stream valleys.
C. To protect historic and cultural resources by:
(1) Protecting historic and cultural resources in order to maintain the
Township's heritage;
(2) Encouraging the preservation of historic buildings and their
surroundings;
(3) Promoting agricultural land preservation in order to maintain the
scenic character of the Township; and
(4) Creating a Concordville Village District that would include historic
structures along Concord Road and Route 1 as significant elements
of its identity.
D. To promote a compact land development pattern by:
(1) Conserving a community character by limiting the sprawling
pattern of development; and
(2) Developing a Concordville Village District.
E. To obtain land for use by future generations by:
(1) Acquiring properties for Township parks, recreational areas, and
passive open space; and
(2) Preserving farmland.
F. To encourage a regional planning perspective by:
(1) Promoting a more regional vision for cooperation in the land
development process; and
(2) Promoting coordinated community development through effective
regional and local communication.
G. To improve the infrastructure by:
(1) Creating an interconnected network of roads to enhance traffic
flow and safety;
(2) Extending public sewer and public water service into existing
developments; and
§ 210-2 CONCORD CODE § 210-2
196:510
§ 210-3. Word usage. [Amended 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231]
For the purposes of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
(3) Promoting mass transportation systems, including regional bus and
rail service.
H. To enhance community facilities by:
(1) Expanding the system of parks, trails and sidewalks.
(2) Promoting both active and passive outdoor recreation and indoor
recreation activities for persons of all ages and abilities;
(3) Continuing to provide services related to public health, safety, and
education; and
(4) Developing a municipal services center focused at the Municipal
Building and school district properties, and the Kids' Dream
Playground.
I. To promote commercial development and a stable tax base by:
(1) Enhancing the existing tax base and expand tax revenue
opportunities;
(2) Continuing to promote small-scale commercial development; and
(3) Supporting small owner-operated businesses.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future.
B. The singular includes the plural.
C. The plural includes the singular.
D. The word "person" includes a corporation, unincorporated association
or a partnership as well as the individual.
E. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel," "tract" or "site."
F. The term "shall" is always mandatory.
G. The word "building" includes the word "structure" and shall be
construed as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof."
H. The word "Commission" and the words "Planning Commission" always
mean the Concord Township Planning Commission.
I. The word "street" means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated
as a court, boulevard, avenue, expressway, cul-de-sac, highway, lane
and road, or however otherwise designated.
§ 210-2 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-3
196:511
§ 210-4. Definitions. [Amended 1-4-1988 by Ord. No. 157; 6-4-1991
by Ord. No. 180; 3-4-1997 by Ord. No. 210; 1-5-1998 by Ord. No.
221; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 225; 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231]
J. The word "Board" and the words "Board of Supervisors" shall always
mean the Board of Township Supervisors of Concord Township.
K. The word "watercourse" includes channel, creek, ditch, drain, dry run,
swale, spring and stream.
L. The words "County Planning Commission" shall always mean the
Planning Commission of the County of Delaware.
M. The word "Township" shall always mean Concord Township.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
ABANDONMENT — The cessation of the use of a property by the
owner, with the intention neither of transferring rights of the property
to another owner, nor of resuming the use of the property. A use
discontinued for a period of one year or more shall be deemed to have
been abandoned.
ABUTTING OWNER — The owner of record of a lot which shares a
common boundary to the lot to be subdivided and/or developed or
which is contiguous to that section of street on which the subject lot
has frontage, i.e., a lot across from the lot to be subdivided and/or
developed.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to the principal
permitted building on a lot and used for purposes customarily
incidental to those of the principal permitted building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure located on the same lot with
the principal permitted building or structure but incidental or
subordinate to such building or structure.
ACCESSORY USE — A use conducted on the same lot with the principal
use, but incidental and subordinate to such use.
ACCESSWAY — A paved surface, other than a street, which provides
vehicular or pedestrian access from a street to a lot or parking area,
including the area providing for the movement of vehicles around and
through designated parking lots. An accessway may be a strip of land
which provides access, an easement or a driveway.
ACTIVE ADULT COMMUNITY — A residential development planned,
designed and developed with the particular purpose of accommodating
and providing for dwelling units and related facilities which provide
an environment specifically suited to the needs, wants and desires of
active adults, i.e., households whose principal(s) shall be individuals
who have attained the age of 45 years. Nothing herein shall be
construed to be a violation of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C.§ 3601 et
§ 210-3 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:512
seq; 24 CFR parts 100, 103 and 104; the Fair Housing Amendments Act
of 1988, 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq; and the Housing for Older Persons Act
of 1995, P.L. No. 104-87, 109 Stat. 787.
ACTIVE RECREATION USE/ACTIVE RECREATION — Use involving
leisure time activities and/or areas, typically involving:[Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
ADVERTISING VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle or trailer parked on
a public right-of-way or on public or private property so as to be
visible from a public right-of-way which has attached thereto or located
thereon any sign or advertising device for the basic purpose of
providing advertisement of products or direction to a business or
activity. This limitation does not apply to any form of vehicular signage,
such as a sign attached to a bus or lettered on a motor vehicle, which
vehicle is not utilized for the basic purpose of providing advertisement
or direction as described above.
AGRICULTURE (or AGRICULTURAL USE) — The cultivating of the soil,
the raising of livestock and poultry or the harvesting of the products of
the soil, including horticulture and forestry.
ALTERATION — Any change in the exterior, facade or structural
components of a building; or any change to a building or structure
or in a use which would alter its use classification; or any change
which would alter the type or method of sewage disposal system. The
alteration of a building, structure or use may include the following
changes:
Sports, requiring equipment or occurring at prescribed sites, such
as but not limited to fields or courts (e.g., soccer, football, baseball,
tennis, basketball, swimming, and the like).
(1)
Other cardiovascular pursuits in a less formal setting, such as but
not limited to trails (e.g. jogging, cross-country skiing, and the
like).
(2)
(1) A change in the use from one zoning classification to another.
(2) The addition of any use to a building or structure.
Changes to the interior layout or partitions of a building to modify
or improve the utility of the premises.
(3)
Changes or modifications of the structural members of any building
or structure.
(4)
Incidental changes to nonstructural parts of a building or structure
which relate to a change in use of the building or structure.
(5)
Changes in occupancy or alteration of conditions imposed upon the
occupancy of a building or premises.
(6)
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:513
ANIMAL KENNELS — Kennels for the raising and/or boarding of dogs,
cats or like animals for commercial purposes.
ANTENNA — A device used to collect or transmit telecommunications
or radio signals. Examples are panels, microwave dishes and single
poles known as "whips."
ANTENNA HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the base
of an antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the
antenna support structure, including any antenna affixed thereto. If
the antenna support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average
between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the
antenna height.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any pole, telescoping mast,
monopole, tower, tripod or any other structure which supports or has
attached to it an antenna or antennae.
ANTIQUE MALL — A building which is partitioned to provide spaces for
the sale of antiques by antique dealers, for items such as clocks, lamps,
clothing, rugs, toys, furniture and the like.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE — Vehicles for which a current antique or classic
license plate has been issued by the state and/or is 25 years old or older.
APARTMENT — See "dwelling, apartment."
APARTMENT HOUSE — See "dwelling, apartment house."
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who
has filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors
and assigns.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A residential facility for the housing
and care of elderly and/or frail persons.
AUCTION HOUSE — A commercial establishment where goods are sold
at auction, including space devoted to sales and storage, loading and
unloading and parking for employees and for peak auction events.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM) — An accessory use structure
which is used for banking activities.
AVERAGE GROSS RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling
units per acre in a planned residential community, computed by
dividing the number of dwelling units which the applicant proposes to
construct by the number of acres in the development, excluding that
acreage to be devoted to commercial use or public utility easements
(excepting private residential use easements). If the developer is
required to dedicate land for sites for schools or other public facilities,
such land shall be included in the total land area used in computing
maximum permissible average gross density. If such land is not
acquired by the appropriate body by the date of the sale or rental of
51% of the dwelling units in the development, then, at the option of the
developer, the land may be used for residential purposes, subject to the
provisions of Articles XII, XIII or XIV.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:514
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOMESTAY — An accessory use, to a singlefamily
detached dwelling, where permitted by conditional use in
conformity with Article XXVII.
BERM — An earthen embankment which serves purposes such as
directing the flow of surface water runoff, preventing soil erosion or
supporting plant materials to aid in screening.
BILLBOARD — See "sign, billboard."
BROADCASTING STUDIO — A commercial establishment at which
radio broadcasting takes place, including office space and sound studio
rooms.
BUFFER — An area designed and functioning to separate the elements
and uses of land which abut it and to ease the transition between
them. Unless otherwise specified, buffers may be included as part of the
required setbacks and yard areas. Buffers are divided into three types:
BUFFER PLANTING STRIP — A strip of required yard space not less
in width than designated in this Chapter 210 which is landscaped for
its full width with plantings such as evergreen and deciduous trees
and shrubs and which is permanently maintained. Buffer planting strips
shall consist of such plantings as will create an effective screen of
sufficient density to provide a continuous visual buffer and shall be
of sufficient height to minimize visibility from abutting properties or
districts or from a discrete area of a premises.
BUILDABLE AREA(S) (BUILDING ENVELOPE) — The area of a lot
remaining after the minimum yard and setback requirements of
Chapter 210, Zoning, have been met within which a principal permitted
building shall be located. Such setback requirements include yard
SCREEN BUFFER — A buffer comprised of natural and/or manmade
material arranged in a certain specified depth, height and
density to effectively block the view from one side to another
during all seasons of the year and to reduce the transmittal of noise
and odors between the sides.
(1)
SOFTENING BUFFER — A buffer comprised of natural and/or manmade
material arranged in a certain specified depth, height and
density to ease and soften, but not essentially block, the view from
one side to another; and to reduce the transmittal of noise and
odors between the sides.
(2)
OPEN BUFFER — A buffer normally comprised of grass, ground
cover and/or possibly other landscaping material having a specified
depth, but not necessarily having significant vertical components
to achieve a certain height or density, the purpose of which is to
achieve adequate spacing and attractive landscaping between two
or more actively used areas.
(3)
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:515
setback and setbacks from floodway and floodway fringe areas, and
such features as areas of steep slope and very steep slope and
easements. Where a buildable area is shown on a plan as extending into
a Floodplain Conservation District, or any other area which may involve
a conditional use or special exception, those portions of the buildable
area extending into any such areas shall be delineated, depicted and
otherwise noted on all plans in an accurate and conspicuous manner to
disclose the specific uses which may occur in such areas.
BUILDING — A structure having enclosing walls and a roof which is
built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels,
or property of any kind.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal crosssection
areas of the buildings on a lot, excluding cornices, eaves,
gutters or chimneys projecting not more than 18 inches, bay windows
not extending through more than one-story and not projecting more
than five feet, one story open porches projecting not more than 10 feet,
steps and balconies.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of the net lot area covered
by the building area.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — See "buildable area."
BUILDING LINE — For the purpose of determining the minimum width
of a lot, in the case of a normal lot, the straight line parallel to the edge
of the right-of-way at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the
front yard required for the district in which the lot is located and, in the
case of an interior lot not fronting on a public street for its full width,
a line parallel to the property line nearest to the accessway or right-ofway
and at a distance from that property line equal to the depth of the
front yard required for the district in which the lot is located.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
required minimum distance between any building to be erected and
the adjacent ultimate right-of-way. Such line shall be measured at right
angles from the front street ultimate right-of-way line which abuts the
property upon which said building is located and shall be parallel to
said ultimate right-of-way line.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: FRONT YARD BUILDING SETBACK LINE
— The line normally parallel to the public or private street right-of-way
line at a distance equal to the minimum required depth of the front yard
designated for each district. All yards adjacent to a public or private
street right-of-way shall normally be considered front yards. However,
in the case of an interior lot, such setback line shall coincide with the
front lot line as hereinafter defined (see "lot line, front").
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: REAR YARD BUILDING SETBACK LINE
— The line normally parallel to the front yard street right-of-way line
and equal to the minimum depth of the rear yard designated for each
district.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:516
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: SIDE YARD BUILDING SETBACK LINE —
The line normally perpendicular to the front yard street right-of-way
line and equal to the minimum depth of the side yard designated for
each district.
BUILD-TO LINE — The line at which a principal building is constructed
and maintained that provides for a generally uniform placement along
the primary frontage street for buildings in the Concordville Village
Overlay District.[Added 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 310]
BULK — The term used to describe the size of buildings or other
structures and their relationship to each other, to open areas such as
yards and to lot lines. The term may include the size, height and floor
area of buildings or other structures and all open areas in yard space
relating to buildings and other structures.
CALIPER — The diameter of new deciduous tree plantings measured
six inches above the top of the rootball at the base of the trunk of the
tree.[Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
CARTWAY — That area of a road or other street within which vehicles
are permitted, including travel lanes, but not including shoulders,
curbs, gutters, sidewalks or drainage swales.
CAR WASH — A building or portion thereof where automobiles are
cleaned, using a conveyor, blower, steam cleaning equipment or other
devices.
CELLAR — See "basement."
CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Consists of the
equipment and structures involved in receiving telecommunication or
radio signals from a mobile radio communications source and
transmitting those signals to a central switching computer which
connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephone lines.
CEMETERY — An area for the disposal or burial of deceased human
beings in a grave beneath the ground and the identification thereof by
a grave marker placed flush with the ground.
CENTER LINE OF STREET OR ROAD — A line equidistant from and
parallel to the street, right-of-way or property lines on each side of the
street or road.
CERTIFIED HISTORIC DISTRICT — An historic district which has been
certified for historical significance by the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission in accordance with Act 167, June 13, 1961, P.L.
282, 53 P.S. § 8001. State certification is required prior to national
registry.
CERTIFIED HISTORIC STRUCTURE — A building or structure listed in
the National Register of Historic Places or located within a registered
historic district and certified by the Secretary of the United States
Department of the Interior as being of historic significance to the
district.
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:517
CHARITABLE USE — A use by a nonprofit organization that provides
essential goods or services such as food, clothing, counseling, aid or
assistance beneficial to the general public or to a significant portion of
the public for no fee or at a fee which is recognized as being less than
that charged by a profit-making organization.
CINEMA, RADIO AND TELEVISION STATIONS OR STUDIOS — AN
establishment engaged in transmitting audio and/or visual programs to
the public that consists of a studio, transmitter and antennas.
CLINIC — A building which involves a health care use, where patients
are admitted for examination and treatment on an outpatient basis
by one or more physicians, dentists or other medical personnel,
psychologists or social workers and where patients are not lodged
overnight.
CLUB or LODGE — A group of people organized for a common purpose
to pursue common goals, interests or activities and usually
characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees
and dues, regular meetings and a constitution and bylaws, which is not
an adjunct to or operated by or in connection with a public tavern, cafe
or other public place.
CLUB, RECREATIONAL — A nonprofit facility devoted primarily to
recreational activities such as golf, tennis or swimming, the use of
which is restricted to members and their authorized guests.
CLUB, SOCIAL — A nonprofit facility, the use of which is restricted to
members and their authorized guests, such as a veterans', fraternal,
social or senior citizens' organization.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A subdivision/land development having
the following two characteristics:
COMMERCIAL DROP-OFF AND PICK-UP BOXES — Portable depository
boxes such as Federal Express boxes, newspaper vending machines or
other like structures.
COMMERCIAL EDUCATION OR INSTRUCTION — An establishment,
not a public educational institution, which offers training or instruction
related to a commercial use.
The site planning provides for the houses being grouped together
on a tract of land in clusters of several houses in such a way
that each cluster of houses serves as a module which is set off
from others like it by an intervening space that helps give visual
definition to each individual group.
(1)
The presence of undeveloped land that is held for the common
enjoyment of the neighboring residents or, when dedicated to the
Township, is available to the community at large.142
(2)
142. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "completely dry space," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 331 and subsequently repealed
6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 332. See now Art. XX, § 210-191.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:518
COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE OR NURSERY — A structure in which
plants, vegetables, flowers and similar materials are grown for sale.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land, or an area
of water or a combination of land and water within a development
site, designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas
set aside for public facilities.
COMMON PARKING — Any parking area used by three or more
dwelling units and having space for six or more motor vehicles.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A nonprofit facility designed to serve local
community needs operated by an educational, philanthropic, civic or
religious institution.
COMMUNITY FACILITIES — The services which provide for various
community health, education, safety, leisure and like needs and the
locations at which these services are provided. Typical community
facilities include schools, parks and recreation areas, libraries,
hospitals and other health-care facilities, fire protection, police,
ambulance and rescue service and postal services.
COMMUNITY SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system of piping,
septic tanks or other facilities serving more than one lot, or more than
one building, collecting and disposing of sewage in whole or in part
into the soil through septic tank filter fields which is administered
and maintained by such organizations as a homeowners' association,
community association or other like organization or agency and is in
compliance with the prevailing federal, state, county and municipal
regulations.
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — An individual well or series
thereof serving more than one lot or more than one building which
along with its appurtenant facilities is administered and maintained
by such organizations as a homeowners' association, community
association or other like organization or agency and is in compliance
with the prevailing federal, state and county regulations, as well as
those of the Chester Water Authority, United Water of Bethel or any
other entity which may have a permitted franchise within the
Township.143
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of Concord
Township dated February 2, 1988, and as may be amended from time to
time.
CONCORD TOWNSHIP HISTORICAL COMMISSION — A body, the
members of which are appointed by the Board of Supervisors, which
advises on matters concerning the preservation of historic resources.
143. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "completely dry space," which immediately
followed the definition of "cluster development," was repealed 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 331
and subsequently repealed 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 332. See now Art. XX, § 210-191.
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:519
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which, because of its potential for impact
on the surrounding neighborhood and the community at large, is
permitted only after the Board of Supervisors determines, following
a recommendation by the Planning Commission, that the applicable
standards and criteria stated in this Chapter 210 have been complied
with.
CONDOMINIUM — Any dwelling unit, regardless of dwelling type,
which has all of the following characteristics:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Any combustible or explosive composition
or any substance or combination of substances (or, except as
hereinafter provided, any article prepared for the purpose of producing
a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration
or detonation), and shall include blank cartridges and toy cannons
in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire
underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets,
Roman candles, aerial fireworks, or other fireworks of like construction,
and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound or
any tablets or other device containing an explosive substance. The term
"consumer fireworks" shall be defined as provided in 27 CFR § 55.11
(relating to meaning of terms).[Added 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 302]
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC) — A large
campus-scale facility (or integrated group of facilities) which has a
primary purpose of providing housing and continuing care for people
over the age of 62, and which consists of CCRC independent living
units, CCRC assisted living facilities, CCRC skilled care nursing
facilities and CCRC accessory uses, all as defined below and as
regulated by, where applicable, the Pennsylvania Department of
Welfare and/or the Pennsylvania Department of Health. For purposes of
this chapter, "continuing care" means the provision of lodging, nursing,
medical or other health-related services at the same or another location
to an individual pursuant to an agreement effective for the life of the
individual or for a period greater than one year, including mutually
terminable contracts, and in consideration of the payment of an
entrance fee with or without other periodic charges to an individual
who is at least 62 years of age.[Added 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
The unit (the interior and associated exterior areas designated for
private use in the development plan) is owned by the occupant.
(1)
All or a portion of the exterior open space and any community
interior spaces are owned and maintained in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act of 1980,144 as amended,
and in accordance with the provisions of open space, streets or
other development features in this chapter.
(2)
CCRC INDEPENDENT LIVING UNIT — A dwelling unit within a
continuing care retirement community (CCRC) containing living
(1)
144. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa. C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:520
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT FACILITY — An age-restricted
development that provides a continuum of accommodations and care,
area(s), bedroom area(s), kitchen area and bathroom(s), including
studio-style apartments or attached townhomes, which houses one
or more people over the age of 62 in a manner in which they may
live independently while receiving one or more meals per day in a
congregate setting.
CCRC ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A facility located within a
continuing care retirement community that provides a residential
living environment, assisted by congregate meals, housekeeping
and personal services for persons age 62 or older, who have
temporary or periodic difficulties with one or more essential
activities of daily living, such as feeding, bathing, dressing or
mobility, but do not require services in or of a Pennsylvania
Department of Health-licensed long-term care facility or nursing
facility. A CCRC assisted living facility shall include dwelling units,
dining room(s), bathing area(s), common area(s), offices and other
spaces necessary to provide the above services.
(2)
CCRC SKILLED CARE NURSING FACILITY — A facility located
within a continuing care retirement community which provides
board, shelter and twenty-four-hour skilled nursing and medical
care to chronic or convalescent patients. A CCRC Skilled Care
Nursing Facility shall include nursing beds and/or individual rooms,
dining rooms, bathing areas, common areas, offices, clinics,
therapy areas, medical facilities and other space necessary to
provide the above services to residents of the CCRC.
(3)
CCRC ACCESSORY USES — Within a continuing care retirement,
community shall mean those accessory uses necessary for the
operation of the facility or for the benefit or convenience of the
residents and their guests, including but not limited to kitchen and
dining facilities, restaurants, places of worship, indoor and outdoor
recreational buildings and uses, retail and banking facilities,
beauty salons and barbershops, gift shops, class rooms, security
facilities, conference rooms, social rooms, common areas, guest
rooms, medical offices, medical clinic, dialysis center, laboratory
services, dental offices, physical therapy and rehabilitation center,
wellness center, ambulatory surgery, diagnostic imaging services,
postal center, pharmacy, maintenance facilities, craft and music
rooms, various craft, health, exercise and vocational activities,
classrooms, swimming pools, library and television room, as well
as facilities related to the operation of the facility, such as but not
limited to administrative offices, food and record storage areas,
property maintenance facilities, non-age restricted day-care center
for relatives of employees, security operations, off-street parking
and heating and cooling equipment structures, provided that the
CCRC accessory use is for the sole primary benefit of the
continuing care retirement community (CCRC).
(4)
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:521
from independent living to skilled nursing, and enters into contracts to
provide lifelong care in exchange for the payment of monthly fees and
an entrance fee in excess of one year of monthly fees.
CONTINUOUS VISUAL BUFFER — A visually impenetrable screen
created through the effective use of plant materials, fencing, walls and/
or earthen berms.
CONTRACTOR'S SHOP — A commercial establishment used by
contractors involved in building, construction and/or trades like
carpenters or electricians, including fenced areas for the storage of any
outdoor supplies or equipment.
CONTRIBUTING RESOURCE(S) — A resource in a registered historic
district or historic complex which is filed with the National Register
of Historic Places or the Bureau for the Historic Preservation of the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission, as supporting the
district's or complex's historical significance through location, design,
setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association.
CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL CENTER — A minor commercial
facility located in a R-MHP District which generally contains no more
than five units and occupying no more than two acres, designed to
serve everyday needs of residents in its immediate vicinity, and whose
commercial goods and hours of operation encourage short stops for
specific items rather than extensive shopping trips. Its primary
component is a drug store or a small food and household goods store,
but not a supermarket, and the center may contain other
establishments, such as a beauty shop, laundry and dry-cleaning
establishment, or similar facilities.
CONVENIENCE STORE or MINI-MARKET — A commercial
establishment up to 4,000 square feet in gross floor area as a permitted
principal use in the C-1, C-2 and RMO Districts and as a conditional use
in the C-1, C-2 and RMO Districts whenever same is greater than 4,000
square feet.[Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 344]
CUL-DE-SAC — A single access street intersecting a through street at
one end and terminating in a permanent vehicular turnaround at the
other end.
CULTURAL USE — A use by a nonprofit historic, educational or like
organization which is available to the general public in the form of a
museum, botanical garden or like facility.
DAY-CARE — The provision of care for less than six children or adults
as an accessory use to a dwelling when permitted as a special exception
by the Zoning Hearing Board.
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any premises operated for profit in which adult
or child day care is provided simultaneously for six or more adults
or children who are not relatives of the operator. "Relative" for the
purposes of this definition means parent, guardian, child, stepparent,
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:522
stepchild, grandparent, grandchild, brother, sister, half-brother, halfsister,
aunt, uncle, niece or nephew.
DECK — A flat-floored, elevated, unroofed, open structure attached to
and readily accessible from within the principal building, consisting
of an open-planked floor area and side guardrails. Located in rear or
side yard areas and governed by the same yard and area regulations
as the principal use, occupancy and use of which shall be limited to
recreational aspects of the principal use.[Added 11-5-2003 by Ord.
No. 274]
DEMOLITION — The dismantling or tearing down of an historic
resource, or other intentional destruction or removal of an historic
resource; the act of removing, dismantling and/or razing a building or
structure, including the disposal of the demolished materials off-site to
an approved refuse disposal location.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT — Passively allowing a structure to
deteriorate by neglecting to effect minimal repairs or stabilize the
structure in order to maintain its historic and structural integrity.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per net acre.
DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY (DOE) — An historic resource
determined by the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission or
its designee as meeting the National Register criteria, but not listed in
the National Register.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
related to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase
"provision of the development plan" when used in this Chapter 210 shall
mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of a tree trunk
measured 4.5 feet above the natural grade at the base of the trunk of a
tree.[Added 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
DISTRICT — A geographically definable area, urban or rural, small
or large, possessing a significant concentration, linkage or continuity
of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or
aesthetically by plan or physical development. For purposes of this
chapter, the term shall mean districts as shown on the Historic
Resources Map.145
145. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:523
DRIVEWAY — A gravel or paved surface on a lot which provides access
for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling or other structure
from a street.
DRIVEWAY SHARED — A driveway used for shared access by two or
more uses or lots when permitted by the Township.
DWELLING — A building designed for and occupied exclusively for
residential purposes, including a mobile home.
DWELLING, APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in an apartment house.
DWELLING, APARTMENT HOUSE — A building designed for and
occupied exclusively as a residence for three or more families living
independently of one another.
DWELLING, CONDOMINIUM — See "condominium."
DWELLING, GARDEN-TYPE APARTMENT HOUSE — Multifamily
dwellings where individual dwelling units share a common outside
access and share a common yard area. Garden apartments contain
three or more dwelling units in a single structure.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY OR DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY
APARTMENT — A building designed for and occupied exclusively as a
residence for three or more families living independently of one another
and doing their own cooking therein.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A dwelling with party
walls separating two or more dwelling units including duplex, triplex,
quadruplex, townhouse and other like units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building designed for
and occupied exclusively as a residence for only one family and having
no party wall in common with an adjacent building.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED MOBILE HOME — See
"mobile home."
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE WITH AN ACCESSORY
APARTMENT — A detached single-family residential unit with an
attached apartment, the total area of such apartment not to exceed
1,000 square feet, on a single lot held in title by a single entity and
deed restricted against any further division by use of the Pennsylvania
Uniform Condominium Act146 or otherwise; constituting two dwelling
units on a single lot.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A building designed
for and occupied exclusively as a residence for only one family and
having only one party wall in common with an adjacent building.
DWELLING UNIT — A residential building or portion thereof forming
a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one family.
146. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa. C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:524
EASEMENT — A right, privilege or other interest granted or reserved
for the use of land for a particular purpose; the land to which such right
or privilege pertains.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — A public, private or sectarian school,
including instructional activities which are conducted primarily as
gainful private businesses such as driving, dancing and karate schools.
EMERGENCY SERVICE FACILITY — A station for fire, ambulance,
rescue and other emergency services, including customary incidental
uses.
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building,
an increase in size of another existing structure or an increase in that
portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.147
FACADE — The entire building front, including the parapet.
FAMILY — A single person occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a
household; two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption
occupying a dwelling unit, living together and maintaining a common
household and single and common cooking facilities, including no more
than one boarder, roomer or lodger; or two or more unrelated persons
occupying a single nonprofit dwelling unit, living together and
maintaining a common household and single and common cooking
facilities, excluding occupants of a club, fraternity house, lodge, foster
home, rooming house or boarding house and excluding group quarters
not owned or leased by the individuals.
FAMILY ENTERTAINMENT CENTER — A facility operated as a gainful
business within a building providing recreational opportunities for
children primarily from ages three to 12 accompanied by an adult of at
least 18 years, such as gymnastics, miniature golf, climbing apparatus,
and automatic devices or games, and involving the sale of food and/or
beverages as an accessory use.[Added 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 280]
FENCE — A freestanding and uninhabited structure consisting of wood,
glass, metal, plastic, wire, wire mesh, masonry or vegetation singly or
in a combination with other materials, 2 1/2 feet high or higher, erected
to secure or divide one property from another or part of a property from
a remaining part, to assure privacy, to protect the property so defined
or to enclose all or part of the property. A freestanding masonry wall
shall be considered to be a fence.
FESTOONS — A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags or pinwheels.
FILL — Material such as sand, gravel, earth and other suitable and
approved composition; or any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or
moved to a new location above the natural surface of the ground or on
top of a stripped or otherwise cut surface.
147. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "essentially dry space," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 331 and subsequently repealed 6-1-2010
by Ord. No. 332. See now Art. XX, § 210-191.
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:525
FINISHED GRADE — The final vertical elevation of the ground surface
above sea level, after development.
FIRE LANE — Includes any driveway, roadway, area, parcel and strip of
land, whether or not the same be depicted or shown on any plan, map
or drawing, and which is not a duly dedicated and established public
street of and in the Township of Concord, which provides vehicular
access from any public street in the Township of Concord to any
building or buildings designed or appropriate to occupancy by three or
more families.
FLAGS — Flags of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, the Township of Concord, foreign nations having
diplomatic relations with the United States, or any other flag adopted
or sanctioned by the Board of Supervisors, provided that such flag does
not exceed 60 square feet in area and shall be flown from a pole not
more than 25 feet in height.[Amended 9-4-2007 by Ord. No. 316]
FLEA MARKET — An occasional or periodic market held in an open
area or structure where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale
to the public.
FLEX SPACE — An area of a building or a building designed for use
either as office, assembly, warehouse/storage or light manufacturing.
Each flexspace area shall have not less than 10% of the area used for
office space. Assembly of parts or other like use shall occupy no more
than 90% of the individual flex-space area.
FLOOD — The general and temporary inundation or partial and
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of
streams, rivers, watercourses or other inland water from any source.148
FLOODPLAIN —
FLOODPLAIN AREA, IDENTIFIED — The floodplain area specifically
identified in Article XX of Chapter 210 as being inundated by the onehundred-
year flood. Included would be areas identified as Floodway
(FW), Flood-Fringe (FF) and General Floodplain (FA).150
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation;
and/or
(1)
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.149
(2)
148. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "flood, one-hundred-year," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 331 and subsequently repealed
6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 332. See now the definition of "one-hundred-year flood" in Art. XX,
§ 210-191.
149. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "floodplain area," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 331 and subsequently repealed 6-1-2010 by
Ord. No. 332. See now Art. XX, § 210-191.
150. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "floodproofing," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 331 and subsequently repealed 6-1-2010 by
Ord. No. 332. See now Art. XX, § 210-191.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:526
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry
and discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purpose of
Article XX of Chapter 210, the floodway shall be capable of
accommodating a flood of the one-hundred-year magnitude.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross area of the several floors of a
building or buildings measured from the face of exterior walls or from
center lines of walls separating two buildings. In particular, floor area
includes, but is not limited to the following:
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls or
from the center line of a common wall separating two buildings, but not
including interior parking spaces, loading spaces for motor vehicles or
any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular
parking or loading; and all floors below the first or ground floor, except
when used or intended to be used for human habitation or service to
the public.
FOREST — See "woodland and forest."
FORESTED AREAS — Those areas of extensive vegetation in which the
dominant plants are trees that are indigenous to the area, such areas
being illustrated on the Conservation Areas Map in the Comprehensive
Plan.
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when
practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through
developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for
commercial purposes, which does not involve any land development.
FRONTAGE — The length of a property line bordering a public right-ofway.
Basement space, if it meets the requirements of a building story
(see "half story").
(1)
Elevator shaft, stairwell and attic space (whether or not a floor has
been laid) providing structural headroom of eight feet or more.
(2)
The floor areas of roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways
or porches, where over 50% of the perimeter is enclosed.
(3)
Any floor space used for dwelling purposes no matter where
located within a building.
(4)
The floor areas of accessory building, excluding space used for
accessory off-street parking or used for loading berths.
(5)
Any other floor space not specifically excluded, excluding space
used for air conditioning machinery or cooling towers and similar
mechanical equipment serving the building.
(6)
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:527
FRONTAGE BUILDING — The length of an outside building wall facing
a public right-of-way.
FRONT YARD — See "yard."
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of the
deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies
connected therewith before burial or cremation.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or part of a principal
permitted building used for the storage of passenger motor vehicles
and one commercial motor vehicle owned and used by the owner or
tenant of such principal permitted building, without provision for
selling such vehicles for profit.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building, not a private garage, whose principal
use is the parking or storage of motor vehicles for specified time
periods or on a rental basis, but not for commercial or public utility
vehicles or the dead storage of motor vehicles, and not involving
repairing, auto wrecking or the sale of gasoline.
GARAGE, STORAGE — A building, not a private or public garage, used
for the storage of motor vehicles for compensation.
GARDEN-TYPE APARTMENT HOUSE — See "dwelling, garden-type
apartment house."
GOVERNMENTAL BUILDING — A building which houses governmental
operations or offices of a federal, state, county or municipal agency.
GREEN — A type of open space that is surrounded by dwelling units
and other buildings on at least two sides and that features amenities
such as gazebos, sitting walls, pergolas, fountains, benches,
landscaping, lighting, sculpture and the like, and in which public
gathering, informal recreation and the like, takes place.[Added
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
GROSS DENSITY — See "density."
GROUP HOME — A licensed community-based living arrangement
functioning as a single household and providing habilitative services,
in accordance with 55 Pennsylvania Code § 5310 or the Federal Fair
Housing Amendment Act.
GUEST — A nonpaying individual or individuals who reside temporarily
with the owner/occupant of the principal permitted building. Such
residency may range from an overnight accommodation to an extended
stay but shall in no case occur for a period greater than six consecutive
months.
HALF STORY — The lowest floor of a building having an area used for
human habitation that is half the area of the floor above.
HEALTH CENTER — An office or clinic for medical or dental
examination or treatment of persons primarily on an out-patient basis,
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:528
including laboratories incidental thereto, provided that no overnight
patients shall be kept on the premises.
HEIGHT — The height of a building shall be measured from the mean
level of the ground surrounding the building to a point midway between
the highest and the lowest points of the roof, including the parapet,
provided that chimneys, spires, towers, elevator, penthouses, tanks and
similar projections shall not be included in calculating the height.
HELIPORT — An area to accommodate all phases of operation of rotorwing
aircraft (helicopters) with suitable space to allow the provision of
service facilities.
HELISTOP — An area on a roof or on the ground to accommodate
touchdown and lift-off of rotor-wing aircraft (helicopters) for the
purpose of picking up and discharging passengers or cargo. Such area
shall have sufficient space to accommodate all required safety controls
and comply in all respects with Federal Aviation Administration
requirements, but in no case shall such area provide service facilities.
HISTORIC RESOURCE(S) — All historic and prehistoric (Native
American) buildings, sites, structures, objects, trees, stone walls and
other landscape features and districts shown on the Concord Township
Historic Resources Map.
HISTORIC RESOURCES MAP151 — A map adopted as part of Article
XIXA showing all of the historic resources identified by the Concord
Township Historical Commission and their location and respective
classification. The map shall include:
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
HISTORIC RESOURCES INVENTORY152 — Detailed information
about each historic resource listed on the Historic Resources Map.
(1)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
151. Editor's Note: This Historic Resources Map is located at the end of this chapter.
152. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Inventory is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:529
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation for gain, profit or support
conducted only by members of a family residing on the premises and
conducted entirely within the dwelling and/or building accessory
thereto, provided that no article is sold or offered for sale except such
as is produced on the premises by members of the immediate family
residing thereon.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified by an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior.
(4)
Home occupations shall include the following:
(a) Artists and sculptors;
(b) Authors and composers;
(c) Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors;
Family day-care homes limited to not more than five children
residing off the premises;
(d)
(e) Home crafts;
Office facility, provided that no retail or wholesale transactions
are made upon the premises; and
(f)
Nonresidential school of special education whose enrollment
does not exceed five pupils at any given time.
(g)
(1)
Permitted home occupations shall not in any event be deemed to
include the following:
Antique shops, gift shops, restaurants and other commercial
retail uses involving the sale of articles and products produced
off the premises;
(a)
(b) Barbershops and beauty parlors;
(c) Funeral chapel or funeral home;
(d) Medical or dental clinic or hospital;
(e) Tearoom;
(f) Renting of trailers;
(g) Riding or boarding stable or kennel;
(h) Tourist home, rooming, boarding or lodging house;
(i) Veterinary clinic or hospital; and
(j) Industrial uses.
(2)
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:530
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — See "nonprofit homeowners'
corporation."
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE OR STUDIO — The office of a
physician, lawyer, dentist, architect, professional engineer, theologian
or similar member of a recognized profession who customarily has
offices in the dwelling in which such person resides, but not including
an office such as a real estate office, insurance office or other office
permitted only in commercial districts.
HORTICULTURE — The art and practice of propagating and cultivating
plants for their produce or for ornament.
HOSPITAL — A facility providing inpatient medical care of the sick and
injured (including obstetrical care) where not more than 50 percent
of the total patient days during any year are customarily assignable
to the categories of chronic convalescent and rest, drug and alcoholic,
epileptic, mentally deficient, mental, nervous and tuberculosis; and
which is a proprietary facility or a facility of a private nonprofit
corporation or association licensed and regulated by the state.
In addition to the use limitations applicable in the zoning district
in which located, all home occupations shall be subject to the
following use limitations:
The home occupation shall be carried on wholly indoors and
within a dwelling or other structure accessory thereto;
(a)
There shall be no use of show windows or display or
advertising visible outside the premises to attract customers or
clients other than an accessory sign, as permitted;
(b)
(c) There shall be no exterior storage of materials.
No articles shall be sold or offered for sale, except for those
produced upon the premises;
(d)
Servicing by commercial vehicles for supplies and materials
shall not be permitted, except for mail delivery;
(e)
The home occupation shall be carried on only by members of
the immediate family residing in the dwelling. Not more than
two employees in addition to the resident practitioner shall be
employed on the premises of any accessory office of a dentist,
physician or lawyer;
(f)
The floor area devoted to a home occupation and the storage
of materials and supplies connected with the home occupation
shall not be more than 25% of the ground floor area of the
principal residential' structure, or 400 square feet, whichever
is less; and
(g)
Parking shall be provided in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Township Code.
(h)
(3)
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:531
HOTEL, MOTEL or INN — A building or group of buildings having units
containing sleeping accommodations which are available for temporary
rental occupancy by transients.
IMPERVIOUS SERVICE — A surface which has materials that do not
normally absorb rainfall or surface water such as buildings, paved
parking areas, paved walks and similar surfaces.
IMPROVEMENTS — Physical additions and changes to land such as
grading, paving, curbing, fire hydrants, water mains, sanitary sewers,
capped sewers, storm sewers, storm drains, catch basins, culverts,
sidewalks, monuments, crosswalks, bridges, earthworks, streetlights,
wells, on-site sewage disposal systems, street trees and other plantings
and other structures that may be necessary to produce usable and
desirable land development.
INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITY — Residential communities designed
for those who are independent with respect to their activities of daily
living (e.g., bathing, dressing, grooming) and choose to live in a
community with other seniors. These communities offer amenities such
as security systems, organized recreational activities and social
programs, meal service and transportation. Most independent living
facilities do not offer health care services (e.g. personal care or nursing
services); however, many are affiliated with health care facilities that
can provide such care when it is needed. Residents can also obtain
home health services from outside providers as required.
INDOOR ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY — A dinner theatre, music
theatre, and/or performing arts center or theatre at which plays,
concerts, ballet, children's performances or other cultural
performances take place, typically in conjunction with a restaurant.
INDOOR PLACE OF AMUSEMENT OR RECREATION — See "place of
amusement, indoor."
LAKES and PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain
water year round. Artificial ponds may be created by dams or result
from excavation. The shoreline of such water bodies shall be measured
from the spillway crest elevation rather than the permanent pool if
there is a difference. Lakes are bodies of water two or more acres.
Ponds are any water body less than two acres.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
(b)
(1)
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:532
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A sketch, preliminary or final plan,
submitted in compliance with the requirements of the Concord
Township Subdivision and Land Development Chapter, showing the
provision for development of a tract of land.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he
is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or
other person having a proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A design professional duly registered by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to practice landscape architecture.
LANDSCAPED AREA OR LANDSCAPED BUFFER — That portion of
a tract or lot in which plantings have been installed in accordance
with the landscaping requirements of Article VIII of Chapter 160. The
landscaped area includes the buffer planting strip, as well as plantings
which serve a functional and/or aesthetic purpose when located around
and between buildings, roads, parking areas, sidewalks, walkways,
sitting areas, service or maintenance structures, courtyards and the
like.
LANDSCAPING — Landscaping consists of any of the following, or a
combination thereof:
LANDSITE — A tract or parcel of land that contains the cellular
communications facility, tower, antenna and/or telecommunications
equipment building.
LIVESTOCK — Animals of any kind, except swine, raised for sale, resale
or agricultural field production. (For the purposes of this chapter, the
keeping of one or more horses or ponies for recreational purposes or for
pleasure, or the keeping of up to a total of 10 common household pets
such as dogs, cats, pot belly pigs and the like, shall not be considered
as the keeping of livestock.)
LIVE-WORK UNIT — A retail shop, artist studio, office, or other place
of business on the ground floor of a building in combination with a
dwelling unit or dwelling units located above such place of business
on the second floor or second and third floors. A person or persons
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features,
(2) A subdivision of land.
Material such as, but not limited to, grass, groundcovers, shrubs,
vines, hedges, trees; or
(1)
Nonliving durable material commonly used in landscaping, such
as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences, but
excluding paving.
(2)
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:533
other than the proprietor of the business may occupy a live-work
unit.[Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 310]
LIVING ACCOMMODATIONS FOR CARETAKERS — A dwelling for no
more than two persons who are employed on the premises by a business
for security or maintenance purposes.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET — A space, accessible from a street or
way, in a building or on a lot, for the temporary use of vehicles while
loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat
or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit. A parcel of land, the description of which parcel is
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County
by deed description or as described by an approved subdivision plan
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County by
deed description.
LOT (MOBILE HOME) — See "mobile home lot."
LOT AREA — [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 245; 7-5-2000 by
Ord. No. 249]
LOT AREA, NET — The area of a lot exclusive of existing or future
street/road rights-of-way and existing or future utility rights-of-way.
The area enclosed by the property lines of a lot, as herein defined,
exclusive of:
(a) Rights-of-way of dedicated streets;
(b) Fire lanes;
(c) Rights-of-way or easements proposed for dedication;
Utility easements and other underground lines beyond those
directly servicing the lot, except for Concord Township Sewer
Authority easements which may be included in the
computation of lot area; and
(d)
(e) Stormwater management basins;
(f) Any land within a floodway;
(g) Any wetlands; and
(h) Any land with a slope in excess of 25%.
(1)
The area of land comprised by any additional road rights-of-way
(i.e., in addition to the 50 feet, 60 feet or 80 feet set forth in
Appendix G of Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development),
which the Board of Supervisors may require, shall not be
subtracted when computing a minimum lot area.
(2)
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:534
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more
streets, including shared driveways, or upon two parts of the same
street, including shared driveways, forming an interior angle of less
than 135°. On every corner lot, there shall be two front yards, one rear
yard and one side yard.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area that is occupied by
the building area.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot which has no frontage on a public street but
has frontage on a private street.
LOT LINE — In the case of any lot abutting a street, the lot line for the
portion of the lot abutting the street shall be deemed to be the ultimate
right-of-way line and shall not be the center line of the street or any
other line within the right-of-way.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The front lot line is the line separating the lot
from the street right-of-way. For interior lots, the lot line, front, is the
line generally parallel to the street right-of-way at the nearest point
to the right-of-way where the lot attains substantially the minimum
required lot width.
LOT LINE, REAR — A lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line. If the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot
forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line
10 feet in length within the lot between the side lot lines parallel to and
at the maximum distance from the front lot line, and the setback from
which shall be co-extensively shown on any plan.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a street line or a rear lot
line.
LOT WIDTH — The distance measured between the side lot lines at the
required building setback line. When there is only one side lot line, as in
the case of two-family or single-family attached dwellings, the lot width
shall be measured between the side lot line and the center line of the
party wall of the end dwelling unit. In the case of a corner lot, the lot
width shall be measured between the side lot line and the front lot line
opposite.153
MAIL ORDER STORE, MAIL ORDER HOUSE or MAIL ORDER
BUSINESS — An establishment which specializes in the sale of mail
order items, but does not involve a factory outlet store or other store
for walk-in retail sales.
MANSARD — A sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally
comparable to a building wall.154
153. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "lowest floor," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 331 and subsequently repealed 6-1-2010 by
Ord. No. 332. See now Art. XX, § 210-191.
154. Editor’s Note: The former definitions of "manufactured home" and "manufactured home
park," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 331
and subsequently repealed 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 332. See now Art. XX, § 210-191.
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:535
MARQUEE — A permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid
materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building.
MEMORIAL/HISTORICAL PLAQUES — Commemorative plaques
placed by a recognized agency of the Township.
MINI-MARKET — See "convenience store."155
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units,
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and
ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT — A parcel of land which has been
planned and improved in compliance with the requirements of the
Mobile Home Development District, Article IX of Chapter 210, for the
placement of mobile homes, conventionally built or modular singlefamily
detached homes, or combinations thereof, for nontransient use;
consisting of two or more mobile home lots and 15 acres or greater in
size.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park,
improved with the necessary utility connections and other
appurtenances necessary for the erections thereon of a single mobile
home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which
have been so designated and improved that they contain two or more
mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MODULAR HOME — A single-family detached dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, made by assembling one or more factoryproduced
three dimensional sections into an integral living unit, whose
construction materials and specifications conform to those of
conventionally built units.
MOTOR HOME — A travel trailer which combines the living section and
the power source into a single unit.
MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS AND ACCESSORIES STORE — A retail
business involving the sale of motor vehicle accessories, parts, tires,
batteries and other supplies, with any installation of parts to occur
within a completely enclosed building.
MOTOR VEHICLE BODY SHOP — A business conducted for the
purpose of repairing motor vehicles, including body, fender and paint
spraying work.
155. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "minor repair," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 331 and subsequently repealed 6-1-2010 by
Ord. No. 332. See now Art. XX, § 210-191.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:536
MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL AGENCY — A business involving the lease
of automobiles.
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP — A business conducted for the
purpose of repairing automobiles and other motor vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AGENCY — A retail establishment occupying
a building which offers motor vehicles for sale to the general public.
This business may also perform any repair service to motor vehicles
permitted in a motor vehicle repair shop.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — A business conducted for the
purpose of providing gasoline, oil and accessories for automobiles and
other motor vehicles which may perform routine service and repairs to
such vehicles, but excluding repairing, body shop or car washing as a
principal permitted use.
MULTIPLE DWELLING OR APARTMENT HOUSE — See "dwelling
multifamily or dwelling, multifamily apartment."
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for
a municipality, planning agency or joint planning commission.
MUNICIPAL USE — A use owned by the Township such as parks,
playgrounds and other recreational, cultural and conservation areas;
the sites for sewage treatment, solid waste and refuse disposal and
other public facilities owned and operated for the good and well-being
of the Township and activities regularly conducted by the Township at
such sites and/or facilities.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended.156
NATIONAL REGISTER CRITERIA — Standards promulgated by the
Secretary of the United States Department of the Interior against which
historic resources nominated to the National Register are evaluated.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES — A list maintained by
the Secretary of the United States Department of the Interior composed
of buildings, sites, structures, objects and districts of national, state,
or local significance in American history, architecture, archeology,
engineering and/or culture.
NET AREA (ACREAGE) — The total net area of tract, excluding existing
roadways and rights-of-way and the following:
Ninety-five percent of the area of the floodplain as determined
by the floodplain boundaries shown on an accurate contour map
as required by the Concord Township Subdivision and Land
Development Chapter from floodplain elevations that are either
derived from the Township Floodplain Conservation District Map or
derived from another authorization source;
(1)
156. Editor's Note: 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:537
NET USABLE FLOOR AREA — See "floor area, net usable."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the Concord Township
Floodplain Management Ordinance157 and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent
of use provisions in this Chapter 210 or amendment heretofore or
hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of this chapter or amendment. Such nonconforming
structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in Chapter
210 or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use
was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or
amendment.
NONPROFIT HOMEOWNERS' CORPORATION — An incorporated
organization of homeowners within a development to which all
homeowners automatically belong. The purpose of the organization is
to own, maintain and preserve common open space land and the costs
are shared equitably among the members of the organization.
OBJECT — A thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or
scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to
a specific setting or environment.
ON-LOT SEWAGE DISPOSAL (ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL) — A
single system of piping, septic tanks or other facilities serving a single
lot, collecting and disposing of sewage into the soil on the lot where
such system is used through septic tank filter fields and in compliance
with the prevailing federal, state, county and municipal regulations.
ON-LOT WATER SUPPLY (ON-SITE WATER SUPPLY) — An individual
well on the lot where the well services one lot and/or water supply on
a lot occupied or to be occupied serving a permitted building and in
compliance with the prevailing federal, state and county regulations.
(2) Proposed rights-of-way and/or easement areas;
(3) Drainage easements not in the floodplain; and
(4) All land with slopes in excess of 25%.
157. Editor's Note: See Art. XX, Floodplain Conservation District, of this chapter.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:538
OPEN SPACE — Those areas, including building setbacks, private yards
and buffer areas, which are free from buildings, and those areas
containing such facilities as tennis courts and swimming pools.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — See "common open space."
OPEN SPACE TRUST — An organization in which all common open
space land is deeded to a trustee through a deed of trust. The trustee
owns, maintains and preserves the common open space. All residents
of a cluster development have an easement over the surface of common
open space land and share equitably in the cost of maintenance and
development costs.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE — The space on a lot, excluding such features
as buildings, parking areas, driveways, streets, slopes greater than
25%, or other restrictions as set forth in Article XXVII of Chapter 210.
OUTDOOR PLACE OF AMUSEMENT, RECREATION OR ASSEMBLY —
See "place of amusement, outdoor."
OUTSIDE STORAGE — The assembly of materials and supplies outside
of a building.
OWNER — A person recorded on official records as owning property.
The owner of property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the
owner of the sign unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or
otherwise brought to the attention of the Township, e.g., a sign leased
from a sign company.
PARAPET — The extension of a false front or wall above the roofline.
PARKING SPACE — A reasonably level space, available for the
temporary parking of one motor vehicle, exclusive of passageways,
driveways or other means of circulation or access. A parking space shall
include either covered garage spaces or uncovered parking lot space
located off the street right-of-way and in back of the front yard building
setback line. The size of parking spaces shall be as required in Article
VIII of Chapter 160.
PARKLET — An open space type that is a maximum of 6,500 square
feet, and a minimum of 1,000 square feet, and is used as a pedestrian
gathering area, typically with a combination of landscape and
hardscape materials.[Added 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
PASSIVE RECREATIONAL USE/PASSIVE RECREATION — Any leisure
time activity not considered active (e.g., walking, picnicking, bird
watching, fishing).
PATIO — A level, landscaped and/or surfaced area, also referred to as
a "terrace," directly adjacent to a principal building at or within three
feet of the finished grade and not covered by a permanent roof.[Added
4-3-2001 by Ord. No. 257]
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, partnership, trust, estate, municipality, governmental
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:539
unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PERSONAL CARE FACILITY — A facility operated by a legal entity
holding a certificate of compliance document issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Welfare ("license"), permitting the
operation of a personal care home (PCH) at the location of the facility,
according to appropriate Pennsylvania Department of Welfare program
licensure or approval regulations. The facility shall be used to provide
dwelling units, food and personal assistance or supervision to adults
of advanced age or otherwise who do not require services in or the
services of a Pennsylvania Department of Health licensed long-termcare
facility, but who, because of their advanced age or other condition,
require assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing,
diet, financial management, evacuation of a residence in the event of an
emergency or taking medication prescribed for self-administration.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT, INDOOR — A facility operated as a gainful
business within a building providing three or more automatic devices
or games, including pool or billiard rooms, but not involving the sale of
food and/or beverages except for vending machines, except in the case
of a bowling alley, theatre or indoor entertainment facility including a
dinner theatre, music theatre and/or performing arts center or theatre.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT, OUTDOOR — A facility which provides
private outdoor recreational opportunities such as a miniature golf
course, a golf driving range, an archery range or like-type
establishment, but excluding a gun club.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land,
controlled by a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a
number of dwelling units, or combination of residential and
nonresidential uses, the development plan for which does not
correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling or use, density or intensity,
lot coverage and required open space to the regulations established in
any other conventional zoning district.
PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER — An area to be planned, developed,
operated and maintained as a single entity and containing one or more
structures to accommodate retail, service, commercial or office uses,
or a combination of such uses, and appurtenant common areas and
accessory uses incidental to the principal permitted uses.
PLANT NURSERY — An establishment that grows and propagates
plants, including trees, shrubs, groundcovers and flowers, as a
principal permitted use.
PLANT SALE ESTABLISHMENT — A commercial use at which plants
are sold at wholesale or retail.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:540
POINT OF PURCHASE DISPLAY — Advertising of a retail item
accompanying its display, e.g., an advertisement on a product
dispenser.
PONY — A small horse of any of a number of breeds usually not over 58
inches high at the withers.
POULTRY — Domestic fowl raised for meat or eggs, including chickens,
turkeys, ducks, geese and the like.
POWER GENERATION FACILITY — A facility that uses combustible
materials to produce electrical power which is connected into the
power grid provided by other suppliers, such as PECO. Such facility,
being a conditional use in the M/I Municipal/Institutional District, shall
be in compliance with § 210-238G.[Added 7-5-2000 by Ord. No. 249]
PREMISES — A parcel of land with its appurtenances and buildings
which, because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest
conveyable unit of real estate.
PRIMARY FRONTAGE STREET — The main street along which an
existing or proposed building has frontage, and from which access
to a building is achieved through a front door and entryway.[Added
5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 310]
PRINCIPAL PERMITTED BUILDING — A building in which is
conducted, or is intended to be conducted, the principal permitted use
of the lot on which it is located.
PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USE — The primary building, use or structure
permitted and intended for a given lot or parcel.
PRIVATE GARAGE — See "garage, private."
PRIVATE STREET — See "street, private."
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office which is used and occupied by
a professional, such as a physician, lawyer, architect, engineer or
accountant.
PUBLIC GARAGE — "garage, public."
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing.
The first publication shall be not more than 30 days and the second
publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
PUBLIC STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — A street which is owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
PUBLIC UTILITY — An enterprise regulated by the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission with a franchise for providing to the public a utility
service deemed necessary for the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:541
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM (PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM) — Any
system for water distribution and water supply, other than an on-lot
water supply system, which is owned, administered and operated by an
organization which is regulated by a governmental agency, authority or
commission.
PUBLIC WAY — A paved accessway which is manifest in one or more
of the following: all state roads and highways; all dedicated roads
maintained by the Township; all roads for which the offer of a deed of
dedication has been made; and all private roads over which the general
public has the right to access.
REAR YARD — See "yard."
RECREATIONAL CLUB — See "club, recreational."
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Places designed for the conduct of
sports and leisure-time activities, excluding facilities which customarily
charge a fee for use, such as an outdoor place of amusement or an
indoor place of amusement.
RECREATIONAL USES — A use designed and equipped for the conduct
of sports, leisure-time activities and other customary and usual
recreational activities, excluding facilities which customarily charge a
fee for use, such as an outdoor place of amusement, or an indoor place
of amusement.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection; designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light-duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a
permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use.
REFUSE COLLECTION CENTERS — An accessory use in the R-A
Residence (Article VII of Chapter 210) District whereby solid waste is
collected or stored within an apartment building.
REGISTERED HISTORIC DISTRICT — An historic district listed in the
National Register, or a state or local historic district which has been
certified by the Secretary of the United States Department of the
Interior as meeting substantially all the requirements for National
Register listing. State certification is required prior to national
registration.158
REHABILITATION — The process of returning a property to a state or
utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient
contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the
property which are significant to its historical, architectural and
cultural values.
158. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "regulatory flood elevation," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 331 and subsequently repealed
6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 332. See now Art. XX, § 210-191.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:542
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION — A building used for public worship by
a congregation, excluding buildings used exclusively for residential,
educational, recreational or other uses not normally associated with
worship. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "religious institution"
shall include churches, chapels, cathedrals, temples and similar
designations.
RELIGIOUS USE — A use involving a structure in which worship and
ceremonies pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held.
RESIDENTIAL RETIREMENT FACILITY — A campus-type facility
designed to provide a continuum of services and housing for persons of
a minimum age of 55 years. Said facility may include a range of housing
types for seniors who are relatively independent and mobile, to seniors
unable to care fully for themselves and are in need of assistance and
services in carrying out the basic functions of daily living. Housing and
care facilities may include, but shall not be limited to independent living
facility; personal care facility; and skilled nursing facility.
RESTAURANT — A business devoted to the sale and consumption
of food and beverages and consumed only inside the building while
patrons are seated at counters or tables.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN SERVICE — A building and adjoining parking
area used for the purpose of furnishing food, soft drinks, ice cream and
similar confections to the public normally for consumption outside the
confines of the principal permitted building, or in vehicles parked upon
the premises, regardless of whether or not, in addition thereto, seats
or other accommodations are provided inside for the patrons. Services
are effected principally while patrons remain in their vehicles at such a
facility.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE — A fast-food restaurant or
section thereof which is designed to allow for the serving and pick-up
of food, without leaving the vehicle, for off-premise consumption.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A building used for the purpose of
furnishing food to the public for consumption on the premises within
the principal permitted building and for off-premise consumption.
RETAIL SERVICE AND REPAIR or PERSONAL SERVICE —
Establishments providing services, as opposed to products, to the
general public for personal or household use, including such uses as
hotels and motels; finance, real estate and insurance offices; health
services; laundry, linen supply and/or diaper service; beauty shops or
barbershops; shoe repair; TV/VCR repair; and sharpening of tools.
RETAIL SHOP OR STORE — A business establishment involving the
sale of products and/or services to the ultimate consumer.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land granted or reserved for public or
private use.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — See "street or road line."
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:543
RIPARIAN BUFFER — An area of vegetation and trees adjacent to
a watercourse that provides a transition between the aquatic and
terrestrial environments, and intercepts stormwater runoff, and
reduces pollutants entering into surface waters.[Added 12-22-2015
by Ord. No. 370]
ROAD — See "street."
ROADSIDE STAND — A temporary use conducted on a lot in or on a
space or structure at which the sale of farm products grown on site
takes place.
SALE OF FARM PRODUCTS — The sale of products produced on a farm
within the Township.[Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 245]
SANITARY SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution, or the water-carried waste resulting
from the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing machines,
sinks, dishwashers or any other source of water-carried waste of human
origin.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe that conveys sanitary sewage.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A sewer system serving a
portion of a municipality or municipalities, developed and administered
by a governmental agency or a municipal authority. In the event that
such sewer system is not readily available, a temporary on-site system
serving a group of dwellings designed to be disconnected and its use
discontinued upon availability of sewer service administered by a
governmental agency or municipal authority shall be permitted upon
the approval of the Department of Environmental Resources.
SCHOOL — A religious, sectarian and nonsectarian, denominational
private institution, or a public institution, both of which are licensed by
the state.
SCREEN PLANTING — The plantings which are used in a buffer
planting strip or other landscaping arrangement to create a continuous
visual buffer.
SCREENING — The use of plant materials, fencing, walls and/or
earthen berms, or combinations thereof, to aid in the concealment of
such features as parking areas and vehicles within them and to provide
privacy between two or more different land uses or activities; a visual
and/or sound buffer or other barrier.
SECTION — A geographical area or tract which is part of a
development which will be developed according to a timetable for
development over a period of years included by the applicant in the
development plan.
SECTIONAL HOME — See "modular home."
SEPTIC TANK — A water-tight receptacle that receives the discharge
of sewage from a building sewer or part thereof and is designed and
constructed so as to permit settling of solids from this liquid, digestion
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:544
of the organic matter and discharge of the liquid portion into a disposal
area.
SEPTIC TANK FILTER FIELD — A system of open jointed pipes
intended to distribute septic tank effluent into the ground for
absorption and evaporation.
SETBACK LINE — See "building setback line."
SEWAGE — The total of organic waste and wastewater generated
by residential, industrial, commercial, institutional or other
establishments.
SEWERAGE — All effluent carried by sewers, whether it is sanitary
sewage, residential, commercial or industrial wastes or stormwater
runoff; or the entire system of sewage collection, conveyance,
treatment and disposal.
SEWERED AREA — That portion of the Township designated in the
Official Sewage Facilities Plan in which there is, or may be, constructed
a public sewer system.
SHADE TREE — A woody plant, usually deciduous, which normally
grows with one main trunk and has a canopy which screens and filters
the sun in the summer and winter, respectively.
SHRUBS — Shrubs as required by this chapter shall be self-supporting,
woody, evergreen species, as normally grown in Concord Township.
SHOPS OF CRAFTSMEN — A commercial use which involves the
making and sale of crafts such as pottery, sculpture, clothing, jewelry,
wooden objects, stained glass and the like.
SIDEWALK SALE — A seasonal or occasional sale held on the sidewalk
or other structure along the front or side of a particular store or
establishment where goods are offered for sale to the public, typically
at a discounted price.
SIDE YARD — See "yard."
SIGN — A visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing
the subject thereof to the attention of others. Signs include letters,
numbers, symbols, trademarks, illustrations or designs as they may
appear on signs, billboards, banners, storefronts, marquees, canopies
and other stationary locations on or off the premises of the activity to
which the message pertains. Any device, structure, fixture or placard
using graphics, symbols and/or written copy designed specifically for
the purpose of advertising or identifying any establishment, product,
goods or services.
SIGN, ABANDONED — A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a
bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity and/or for
which no legal owner can be found.
SIGN, ACCESSORY — Any sign which specifically relates to the
permitted use of the premises on which said sign is erected and which
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:545
serves as a further description of products available to or services
provided for the general public.
SIGN, ADDRESS — Sign, not exceeding two square feet in area,
indicating street address.
SIGN, ANIMATED — A sign which utilizes motion of any part by
mechanical, electrical or wind means or which displays flashing,
oscillatory or intermittent lights.
SIGN, AREA OF — The total area of a sign comprised of individual
letters or numbers pinned separately to the wall of a building shall
be measured by the sum of the area of the individual rectangles that
enclose each letter. If letters are applied to a background material other
than a wall of a building, the total area of the sign shall be the entire
surface on which the letters are applied. The area of a ground sign shall
include the total area of the rectangle or other geometric shape which
encloses the message, including all ornamentation, embellishments and
symbols, but excluding the supporting structure which does not form
part of the sign proper or of the display; provided that such supporting
structure shall not exceed in total area 25% of the permitted sign
proper or of the display. Only one face of a double or multifaced sign
will be counted if the other face or faces are visible from any one
vantage point on a public right-of-way.
SIGN, AWNING — Any nonilluminated sign painted on or applied to
a structure made of cloth, canvas, metal or similar material which is
affixed to a building and projects therefrom. Such signs may or may
not be fixed or equipped with a mechanism for raising and holding an
awning in a retracted position against the building.
SIGN, BANNER — A sign having characters, letters or illustrations
applied to cloth, paper or fabric of any kind, with only such nonrigid
material for background.
SIGN, BENCH — A sign located on the seat or back of a bench or seat
placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — A structure utilized for advertising an
establishment, an activity, a product, a service or entertainment which
is sold, produced, manufactured, available or furnished at a place other
than on the property on which the sign is located.
SIGN BOX — A sign, the face of which is enclosed within a box-like
structure,
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY (AUTOMATIC) — A sign on which the copy
changes automatically on a lampbank or through mechanical means,
including electrical or electronic time and temperature units.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY (MANUAL) — A sign on which copy in the
field is changed on a manual basis by the utilization of changeable
letters.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:546
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION — A temporary sign identifying an architect,
engineer, contractor, subcontractor and/or material supplier who
participates in construction on the property on which the sign is
located.
SIGN, DIGITAL — (Electronic reader board.) A self-contained sign
structure, being capable of projecting a multiple-color digital
display.[Added 12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 287; amended 12-6-2011
by Ord. No. 339]
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL/INFORMATIONAL — An on-premise or offpremise
sign giving directions, instructions or facility information; such
sign which may contain the name or logo of an establishment but no
advertising copy.
SIGN, DOUBLE-FACED — A sign with two faces.
SIGN, ELECTRICAL — A sign or sign structure in which electrical
wiring, connections, or fixtures are utilized.
SIGN, FACE OF — The area of a sign on which the copy is placed.
SIGN, FLASHING — A sign which contains an intermittent or sequential
flashing light source used primarily to attract attention. This does not
include changeable copy signs or signs which, through reflection or
other means, create an illusion of flashing or intermittent light.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign supported upon the ground by poles
or braces and not attached to any building.
SIGN, GOVERNMENT — Any temporary or permanent sign erected
and maintained by the Township, county, state, federal government or
school district for traffic direction or for designation of or direction to
any school, hospital site or any public service, property or facility.
SIGN, GROUND — Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or
supported by the ground independent of any structure.
SIGN, HEIGHT OF A — The vertical distance measured from the grade
of the adjacent street or the surface grade beneath the sign to the
highest point of the sign, excluding decorative embellishments.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign whose copy is limited to the name
and address of a building, institution or person and/or the activity or
occupation being identified.
SIGN, ILLEGAL — A sign which does not meet the requirements of this
chapter and/or which has not received legal nonconforming status.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign with an artificial light source
incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the
sign.
SIGN, INCIDENTAL — A small sign, emblem or decal informing the
public of goods, facilities or services available on the premises, e.g., a
credit card sign or a sign indicating hours of operation.
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:547
SIGN, MAINTENANCE OF — The cleaning, painting, repair or
replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter
the basic copy, design or structure of the sign.
SIGN, MARQUEE — Any sign attached to or supported by a marquee
structure.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE — A nonelectric sign indicating the name and/or
profession or address of a person or persons residing on or legally
occupying the premises.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING — A sign which does not comply with the
applicable provisions of the Sign Ordinance159 or amendment
heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such sign lawfully existed prior
to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign advertising an establishment,
merchandise, service or entertainment which is not sold, produced,
manufactured or furnished at the property on which said sign is
located, e.g., billboards or outdoor advertising.
SIGN, ON-PREMISES — A sign which pertains to the use of the
premises on which it is located.
SIGN, PAINTED WALL — A sign which is applied to the face of a wall
with paint or similar substance.
SIGN, POLE — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other
single support.
SIGN, POLICITAL — A sign which indicates the name, cause or
affiliation of anyone seeking public office or which refers to an issue
concerning which a public election is scheduled to be held.
SIGN, POTABLE — A temporary sign designed to be moved easily
and not to be affixed permanently to the ground or to a structure or
building.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is
attached to and projects from a building wall or other structure not
specifically designed to support the sign.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A temporary sign erected by the owner or his
agent advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as
being for rent, lease or sale.
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign erected or constructed upon the eaves or
below the ridge or parapet of any building.
SIGN, ROTATING — A sign which in its entirety or in part moves in a
revolving or similar manner. Such motion does not include methods of
changing copy.
SIGN, SIDEWALK OR SANDWICH — A moveable sign not secured or
attached to the ground.
159. Editor's Note: See Art. XXIII, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:548
SIGN, SNIPE — A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence
or similar support, the message appearing thereon not applying to
the present use of the premises or structure upon which such sign is
located.
SIGN, SPECIAL EVENT — Portable signs erected on the premises of an
establishment having a grand opening or special event.
SIGN, SUBDIVISION/DEVELOPMENT — A sign which designates or
identifies a subdivision or development.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign not constructed or intended for long-term
use.
SIGN, TIME AND TEMPERATURE — A sign which indicates time and/
or temperature by intermittent lighting.
SIGN, TRESPASSING — A sign not exceeding two square feet indicating
the private nature of a driveway or premises.
SIGN, UNDER-CANOPY — A sign suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling,
roof or marquee.
SIGN, WALL — A sign attached to, painted on or erected against a wall
or flat vertical surface of a structure, which sign extends not more than
12 inches from the face of the building.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign affixed to or visible through any window and
which is intended to be viewed from the outside.
SIGN PERMIT — Authorization in written form by the Township to
permit the erection of a sign.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by
one or more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is
separate and distinct from that of any abutting or adjoining lot.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — See "dwelling single family
detached."
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE WITH AN ACCESSORY APARTMENT —
See "dwelling, single-family residence with an accessory apartment."
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — See "dwelling, singlefamily
semidetached."
SITE — The place where a significant event or pattern of events
occurred, depicted on the Historic Resources Map.160
SITE AREA — The area of a lot in the C-2 District which may be for one
principal permitted use or may be an aggregate of smaller lot areas of a
unified development such as a planned shopping center, or other mixeduse
or multiple-use development.
SKILLED NURSING FACILITY — A facility operated by a legal entity
holding a certificate of compliance document issued by the
160. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:549
Pennsylvania Department of Health (license) permitting the operation
of a nursing facility (NF) at the location of the facility, according to
appropriate Pennsylvania Department of Health program licensure or
approval regulations. The facility should provide nursing services on
a continuing basis, admit the majority of its occupants upon advice of
physicians as ill or infirm persons requiring nursing services, provide
physicians' services or supervision and maintain medical records,
including also provisions for similar medical or nursing services.
Facilities for the care of the acutely ill or surgical or obstetrical services
shall not be considered similar services under this definition, nor shall
hospitals be construed to be included in this definition.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use which, because of its potential for
impact on the surrounding neighborhood, is permitted only after the
Zoning Hearing Board determines that the applicable standards and
criteria stated in this Chapter 210 have been complied with.161
STABLE — Any building, structure or portion thereof which is used in
whole or in part for the shelter or care of sheep, goats, horses, cattle or
other livestock.
STABLE, PUBLIC — A building where horses and ponies are sheltered,
fed and/or kept for hire.
STAGE — A section or sections of which an applicant proposes to
commence development at the same time, as a part of a timetable for
development of a planned residential development over a period of
years.
STEEP SLOPES — Those areas of land which are characterized by a
change in elevation of 15% or more but not exceeding 25% over the
specified distance or contour as specified in § 160-49, Natural features
protection standards, Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
STORAGE BUILDING, INDOOR — A building which provides space for
the storage of personal property, typically in the form of a self-storage
facility.
STORAGE GARAGE — See "garage, storage."
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground
water drainage but excludes sewage and residential, commercial and
industrial wastes.
STORY — That part of a structure included between any floor and the
floor or roof next above. When applied to the permissible height of
buildings, the term "story" shall not include a basement if the basement
is not designated for living quarters and if the floor thereof is more than
five feet below the average ground level.
161. Editor’s Note: The former definition of "special permit," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 331 and subsequently repealed 6-1-2010 by
Ord. No. 332. See now Art. XX, § 210-191.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:550
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, land, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to
be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private,
abutting and furnishing access to more than one lot and used to provide
space for installation of improvements such as sewers, other utilities,
street trees and sidewalks.
STREET CLASSIFICATION —
STREET LINE or ROAD LINE — The edge of the right-of-way of the road
or street, and the dividing line between road or street and a lot.
STREET, PRIVATE — A street privately owned and maintained which
is used as the principal means of access to abutting lot or lots or to
more than two dwellings on a lot on which a private way is exclusively
located.
STREETSCAPE — The space formed by buildings located close to the
street which is embellished with amenities such as, but not limited
to, sidewalks, street trees, streetlights, curbs, on-street parking, and
cartways. The streetscape is framed by buildings located across from
one another that create an outdoor room character.[Added 5-1-2007
by Ord. No. 310]
STREET WALL — The building wall adjoining a sidewalk at the edge of
a street right-of-way; or architectural elements such as, but not limited
to, walls, pillars, colonnades, and the like, in lieu of a building wall
when a building is setback from the street wall line.[Added 5-1-2007
by Ord. No. 310]
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in or addition to the
supporting or structural members of a structure, such as the bearing
walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any change which could
convert an existing structure into a different structure or adapt the
structure to a different use. See also, "alteration."
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the
land.
STUDIO — A commercial establishment where a photographer, dance
instructor, music instructor, artist, sculptor or other like-type craftsman
maintains space for the performance or instruction of their artistic
endeavor.
ARTERIAL STREET — A major street for carrying a large volume of
through traffic in the area; normally controlled by traffic signs and
signals.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREET — A main street within neighborhood or
development which intercepts secondary-residential streets; traffic
controlled by signs.
(2)
SECONDARY — RESIDENTIAL STREET — A residential street or
access road to individual properties.
(3)
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:551
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs or devisees, conveyance or other transfer of
ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
of any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION PLAN — A sketch, preliminary or final plan, submitted
in compliance with Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development,
showing the provision for the subdivision of a tract of land.162
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — Any permanent pool or open tank,
not located within a completely enclosed building, and containing or
normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater
than three feet. Farm ponds and/or lakes are not included, provided
that swimming was not the primary purpose for their construction and
is not the primary purpose for their current use.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC OR SEMIPUBLIC — Any swimming pool
other than a private swimming pool, including publicly and privately
owned pools open to the general public and pools owned and operated
in conjunction with membership organizations, motels, hotels and other
similar uses.
TATTOO PARLOR — A business having as its principal activity the
application or placing, by any method, of designs, letters, scrolls,
figures, symbols or other marks upon or under the human skin with ink
or any other substance or method resulting in the coloration of the skin
by aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture
the skin.[Added 10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 317]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — The building in
which the electronic receiving and relay equipment for a cellular
telecommunications facility is housed.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure intended for limited duration,
of less than 30 days, for which a permit and fee is required.
TEMPORARY USE — A use intended for limited duration, of less than
30 days, for which a permit and fee is required.
TOURIST HOUSE/HOME — A licensed dwelling in which overnight
accommodations are provided or offered for up to a maximum of seven
transient guests for compensation. A tourist house shall not be
considered an accessory use or as a home occupation.
TOWER — A structure that is intended to support equipment used to
transmit and/or receive telecommunications signals.
162. Editor’s Note: The former definitions of "substantial damage" and "substantial
improvement," which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 1-4-2010 by Ord.
No. 331 and subsequently repealed 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 332. See now Art. XX, § 210-191.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:552
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling, single-family attached."
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — See "Municipal Engineer."
TRACT — A lot; the area of a property before subdivision or land
development.
TRACT AREA — The total acreage within the lot lines, excluding rightsof-
way of existing public roads/streets.
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS (TDR) — The attaching of
development rights to specified lands which are desired by the
Township to be kept undeveloped, and permitting the rights to be
transferred from those lands so that the development potential which
they represent may occur on other lands within the Township where
more intensive development is deemed by the Township to be suitable,
in accordance with Article XXVII.[Added 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 310]
TRAVEL TRAILER — A recreational vehicle requiring a separate power
source for pulling it, which may include living, sleeping, eating and
sanitary facilities, but which is designed for vacation travel and not for
long-term or permanent occupancy.
TREE MASS — Naturally occurring vegetation characterized by trees
whose crowns meet to form a 70% to 100% closed canopy. Tree masses
shall be at least 0.5 acre in area and contain trees at least 20 feet tall
or 12 inches DBH, although not all trees need be this size. Tree masses
smaller than 0.5 acre on a tract or lot shall also be considered tree
masses if they are part of a larger continuous tree mass that extends
onto other tracts or lots.[Added 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
TREES — Trees shall be defined as self-supporting woody plants of
species that normally grow to a height of a minimum of 15 feet in
Concord Township.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The public street right-of-way in
accordance with the dimensional requirements specified in Chapter
160, Subdivision and Land Development.
UNDERGROUND STORAGE — The storage of materials, goods or
objects below grade in a structure approved by the Township.
USE — The purpose for which a building, lot, sign or structure is
intended, designed, occupied or maintained.
USE AND OCCUPANCY PERMIT (CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY) — A
permit issued on a form provided by Concord Township which permits
the use and occupancy of a building or the use of a property.
UTILITIES — Facilities such as sewers, water mains, fire hydrants,
streetlights and other facilities of the same general character;
installations of a community which pertain to their consumption and
emission characteristics, including facilities such as those used for
water supply, sewage disposal, refuse disposal, storm drainage,
communications and electrical transmission.
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:553
UTILITY INSTALLATION — A facility or appurtenance operated by a
public utility corporation or a public body in connection with providing
gas, electrical, water, telephone or other essential public services to the
public.
UTILITY OFFICE — An office open to the general public operated
by a public utility corporation or a public body in connection with
providing gas, electric, water, telephone, sewerage or other essential
public services to the public.
VARIANCE — Permission, approval or authorization granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board, constituting a modification or deviation from the
exact provisions of Chapter 210, as applied to a specific property, in
accordance with the provisions of Article XXVIII of Chapter 210.
VEHICLE PARKING LOT — An open-air parking lot for conventional
passenger automobiles for a period of time not exceeding 24 hours.
VERY STEEP SLOPES — The area of land which is characterized by
a change in elevation of 25% or more over the specified distance or
contour as specified in § 160-49, Natural features protection standards,
Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
VETERINARY OFFICE — The office of a veterinarian with accessory
animal kennel; keeping of animals shall not be the primary use.
VINES — Plants that normally require support to reach mature form.
WAREHOUSE, WHOLESALE, STORAGE, DISTRIBUTION — A building
used primarily for the storage of goods and materials either on a
short-term or long-term basis. If the short-term storage facilities are
for a specific commercial establishment, this establishment is then
considered a distribution center.
WATERCOURSE — A stream with year-round or substantially yearround
flow such as a creek, run or other body of running water.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS, CENTRALIZED — A development-wide
supply system designed to transmit water from a common source, to
residents of the development.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A supply system serving a major
portion of a municipality or municipalities developed and administered
by a governmental agency or authority.
WETLANDS — Areas with hydric soils that are inundated or saturated
by surface and/or groundwater which support hydrophytic vegetation
such as swamps, bogs, marshes and the like, such areas being
regulated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and/or the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
WETLANDS MARGIN — The transitional area extending from the outer
limit of the wetlands. For the purposes of this chapter, the wetlands
margin shall extend 75 feet from the wetland boundary or to the limit
of the hydric soils, whichever is greater.[Added 12-22-2015 by Ord.
No. 370]
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:554
WHOLESALE BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment that
is primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; industrial,
commercial, institutional or professional business users; or other
wholesalers. Such an establishment may also act as agents or brokers
or buy merchandise for, or sell merchandise to, such businesses.
WILDLIFE HABITAT — In the context of the open space provisions
of Article XXXII, the woodland resources that are typically utilized by
animals for purposes such as shelter for deer wintering areas in a forest
interior, or for browse/food supply at forest edges.[Added 12-22-2015
by Ord. No. 370]
WIND DEVICE — Any streamer, propeller, pennant or similar device
that is activated by the wind or any other air stream.
WOODLAND AND FOREST — Those areas of extensive vegetation in
which the dominant plants are trees that are indigenous to the area,
such areas being illustrated in the Areas of Environmental Concern
Map in the Comprehensive Plan.
YARD — An open area on a lot that lies between the permitted principal
or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard
shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except
as provided otherwise in this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot along
the front lot line and extending in depth from the front lot line to
the nearest points of the permitted principal or accessory building or
building on the lot, exclusive of steps, overhanging eaves, chimneys,
gutters or cornices. In the case of corner lots which do not have
reversed frontage, a front yard of the required depth shall be provided
along the frontage which abuts the primary street and the yard along
the other frontage which abuts the secondary street shall be designated
as the second front yard and have the same depth as that which applies
to the front yard. In the case of reversed frontage corner lots, a front
yard of the required depth shall be provided on either frontage, and
a second front yard of equal depth shall be provided on the other
frontage.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full width of the lot along the rear
lot line depth from the rear lot line to the nearest point of the permitted
principal or accessory building or buildings on the lot, exclusive of
steps, chimneys, overhanging eaves, gutters or cornices.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending the full depth of the lot along the side
lot line and extending in width from such side lot to the nearest on the
lot, exclusive of steps, overhanging eaves, gutters or cornices.
YARD, INNER COURT — An open space substantially enclosed on all
sides by the exterior walls of one or more buildings.
YARD, OUTER COURT — An open space enclosed on three sides by the
exterior walls of one or more buildings.
§ 210-4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-4
196:555
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer designated by the
Board of Supervisors to administer the Zoning Ordinance and issue use
and occupancy permits (sometimes referred to as "Code Enforcement
Officer").
B. Note: Words not defined above shall have the meaning given in the
Municipalities Planning Code,163 the Concord Township Code, Chapter
160, Subdivision and Land Development or other Township codes and
ordinances, applicable state and federal statutes, laws and regulations,
or, if not defined in the aforementioned documents, the most recent
edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
163. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-4 CONCORD CODE § 210-4
196:556
ARTICLE II
Districts
[Amended 2-4-1986 by Ord. No. 148; 2-5-1991 by Ord. No. 176;
3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177; 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 225; 12-15-1998
by Ord. No. 232]
§ 210-5. Designation of districts.
For the purposes of this Chapter 210, the Township of Concord is hereby
divided into districts which shall be designated as follows:
R-1 Residence
R-2 Residence
R-2D Residence
R-3 Residence
R-4 Residence [Added 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 235]
R-A Residence — Garden Apartment
R-AH Residence — High-Rise Apartment
R-MHD Mobile Home Development
R-PRD-1 Residence — Planned Residential Development
R-PRD-2 Residence — Planned Residential Development
R-PRD-3 Residence — Planned Active Adult Community District
R-PLO Planned Laboratory — Office
C-1 Local Commercial
C-2 Planned Business and Commercial
PBP Planned Business Park
M/I Municipal/Insitutional [Added 7-5-2000 by Ord. No. 249]
LI Light Industry
PIP Planned Industrial Park
FP Floodplain Conservation
SU Special Use — Swimming Club
CCRC Continuing Care Retirement Community Overlay [Added
12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 286]
CVO Concordville Village Overlay [Added 5-1-2007 by Ord. No.
310]
RMO Route 202 Median Overlay [Added 12-18-2012 by Ord. No.
344]
LRO Loop Road Overlay [Added 6-4-2013 by Ord. No. 348]
§ 210-5 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-6
196:557
§ 210-6. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of said districts shall be as shown upon the map attached
to and made a part of this Chapter 210 which shall be designated "Zoning
Map." The Zoning Map dated October 22, 1998, prepared by Thomas
Comitta Associates, Inc., shall be considered the Official Zoning Map.164
§ 210-7. (Reserved)
§ 210-8. Division of lot by districts.
When a district boundary line divided a lot held in single and separate
ownership at the effective date of this Chapter 210, the regulations as to the
use in the less-restricted district shall extend over the portion of the lot in
the more-restricted district a distance of not more than 50 feet beyond the
district boundary line.
164. Editor's Note: A copy of said map is on file in the Township offices, where it is available for
examination and inspection by the public.
§ 210-6 CONCORD CODE § 210-8
196:558
ARTICLE III
R-1 Residence District
§ 210-9. Purpose. [Amemded 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 245]
The purpose of this zoning district is to preserve existing residential
developments of low density and to encourage the future development
of designated areas as similar low-density single-family residential areas.
Another purpose of this district is to encourage cluster development in
accordance with § 210-238 and Article XXXII in an effort to designate open
space within single-family residential areas.
§ 210-10. Use regulations. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177;
6-4-1991 by Ord. No. 180; 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 218; 3-3-1998 by
Ord. No. 222; 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 245; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255]
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be
used, for any of the purposes set forth in this section and for no other,
provided that the demolition of or special exception or conditional use
for an historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map165 or any
subdivision, land development or construction activity within 300 feet of an
historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map shall be subject to
the provisions of Article XIXA relating to historic preservation.
A. Uses by right.
(1) Single-family detached dwelling, whenever less than five lots are
created.
(2) Single-family detached dwelling, cluster development, in
accordance with § 210-12, and the open space provisions of Article
XXXII, excluding agricultural use, on any residential lot.
(3) Agriculture and horticulture, including the keeping of livestock and
animals customarily incidental thereto and permitting;
(a) Private garden.
(b) On a lot five acres or larger in size, agricultural uses as
permitted below:
[1] Planting, growing, storing and selling plants and crops
therefrom; and
[2] Breeding, raising, keeping and selling of animals and
products thereof, provided that such uses shall be
conducted on a lot not less than five acres in size and shall
not include a commercial piggery, poultry hatchery, dog
kennel or establishment for slaughtering or processing
poultry or livestock. All structures for animals or sales
165. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-9 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-10
196:559
shall be located not less than 100 feet from any street
right-of-way and not less than 150 feet from any other
property line.
[3] Temporary roadside stand for the sale of farm products,
provided that:
[a] The stand shall be removed during seasons when
products are not being offered for sale.
[b] Substantially all products sold are produced on the
property.
[c] Such building shall be located at least 50 feet from the
right-of-way of the road.
[d] Parking space shall be provided behind the highway
right-of-way line at a ratio of one space for each 100
square feet of building floor area, but in no case fewer
than three spaces.
(4) Home occupation, as defined in § 210-4, and subject to the
following special requirements in addition to all other applicable
requirements of this chapter for the residential district in which the
use is located:
(a) Such occupation shall be located in the dwelling in which the
person resides.
(b) No one shall be engaged or employed in a home occupation
unless he/she is a resident of the dwelling.
(c) The area used for the home occupation shall not exceed 25% of
the total floor area of the first floor of the principal permitted
dwelling unit or 600 square feet, whichever is less.
(d) No external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of
the dwelling shall be permitted, and there shall be no exterior
display, sale or storage of materials, products, equipment or
refuse related to the conduct of the home occupation.
(e) There shall be no sign visible from outside the building except
for a name sign as permitted in the sign regulations, outside a
dwelling. (See Article XXIII.)
(f) No business vehicle shall be parked on the property with a sign
or lettering on such indicating the location of the business.
(g) No goods or services shall be offered for sale or lease to the
general public on the premises, except that business
conducted primarily by mail, telephone, e-mail, telefax, or
Internet shall be permitted.
§ 210-10 CONCORD CODE § 210-10
196:560
(h) No additional traffic and/or parking demand shall be generated
by such home occupation beyond that which would normally
occur at the dwelling unit in accordance with Article XXII.
(i) No equipment or process shall be used in such home
occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors
or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off
the lot if the occupation is conducted in a single-family
residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment
or process shall be used which creates visual or audible
interference in any radio or television receivers off the
premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
(j) No sale or storage for sale of chemicals or biological agents
shall be permitted.
(k) All home occupations shall be registered with the Zoning
Officer and shall be kept on file by the Zoning Officer. No
registration shall be approved until the Zoning Officer has
determined that the proposed home occupation complies with
all the regulations of this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall
issue a home occupation registration if the regulations of this
chapter are met.
(l) Upon the approval of the plans and the proposed home
occupation use by the Zoning Officer, one application shall be
returned to the applicant and one application filed with the
Township by the Zoning Officer.
(m) If the home occupation shall cease to be conducted in
compliance with these regulations, the home occupation
registration shall be revoked. The Zoning Officer may inspect
the premises at any time upon reasonable notice to determine
compliance with this chapter and the home occupation
registration.
(n) If the occupant moves from and sells the dwelling and a new
home occupation is started, a new home occupation
registration shall be submitted to the Township and obtained
prior to the conduct of any new home occupation.
(5) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses.
B. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article XXVII.
(1) Community center.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Single-family detached dwelling, whenever five or more lots are
created, in accordance with § 210-238.
§ 210-10 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-10
196:561
(4) Bed-and-breakfast homestay.
(5) Day care, subject to the requirements of § 210-220A(3).
C. Uses by special exception, subject to the provisions of § 210-242C.
(1) Library.
(2) Religious institution.
(3) Recreational club, provided that any such facility used for shooting
or archery shall be subject to § 204-4, Target ranges, of Chapter
204, Weapons. The following requirements shall apply:
(a) All methods to be used for outdoor lighting shall be shown on
the development plan. Such lighting shall not intrude on the
privacy of adjacent residentially zoned properties.
(b) The location, height and size of all freestanding signs shall be
shown on the development plan.
(c) Buffer yards shall contain screening materials which, in the
opinion of the Board of Supervisors, are of adequate type,
height and width to properly buffer adjacent residentially
zoned properties from the structures inside or any excessive
light or noise created by the development.
(d) The hours of operation for all outside activities and outdoor
lighting shall be subject to approval or disapproval by the
Board of Supervisors.
(4) Emergency service facility.
(5) Public stable.
(6) Home professional office, as defined in § 210-4, and subject to the
following special requirements in addition to all other applicable
requirements of this chapter for the residential district in which the
use is located:
(a) Such office shall be located in the dwelling in which the
professional practitioner resides.
(b) Not more than one person who resides off the premises shall
be employed by the practitioner of the professional office, such
as a secretary, clerk, professional or technical assistant, except
that two members of a recognized profession related to each
other by blood, marriage or legal adoption shall be permitted
to practice together.
(c) The area used for the practice of a profession shall occupy no
more than 25% of the total floor area of the first floor of the
principal permitted dwelling, or 600 square feet, whichever is
less.
§ 210-10 CONCORD CODE § 210-10
196:562
(d) The profession shall not change the essential residential
character of a dwelling.
(e) No external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of
the dwelling shall be permitted, and there shall be no exterior
display, sale or storage of materials, products, equipment or
refuse related to the conduct of such office.
(f) No more than one sign, nonilluminated, shall be permitted,
which shall be no larger than four square feet in aggregate
area, identifying the name and profession of the practitioner.
The area of any sign on a vehicle or structure which is
regularly visible from the street shall be included in calculating
compliance.
(g) Three off-street parking spaces, located to the side or rear of
the premises and not in the front yard, shall be required in
addition to those otherwise required in this chapter for a
single-family dwelling. The perimeter of such parking area
shall be continuously landscaped with shrubs at least 30 inches
in height at the time when the office begins.
(h) The home professional office of a physician shall not include a
biological or other medical testing laboratory.
(i) No more than one business vehicle may be parked on the
property on a regular basis. Any trucks, vans or other business
vehicles shall have loading capacities not exceeding one ton.
The business vehicle shall be parked in an enclosed structure
or in an area screened from view from neighboring properties
and streets through the use of a fence, wall, hedge, or other
landscape material.
(j) Any lot on which a home professional office is conducted or
proposed shall have a minimum lot size as required in the
applicable district. However, the Zoning Hearing Board may
require a greater minimum lot size if it determines that more
acreage is required to maintain the residential character of the
property and/or to provide adequate off-street parking and/or
to provide adequate visual or noise buffers to neighboring
residences.
(k) All home professional offices shall be registered with the
Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall issue an annual home
professional office permit if the regulations of this chapter are
met.
(l) All applications for home professional office permits shall be
made to the Zoning Officer and shall be kept on file by the
Zoning Officer. No home professional office permit shall be
issued until the Zoning Officer has determined that the
§ 210-10 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-10
196:563
§ 210-11. Yard, area and height regulations. [Amended 1-4-2000 by
Ord. No. 245]
proposed home professional office complies with all the
regulations of this chapter.
(m) Upon the approval of the plans and the proposed home
professional office use by the Zoning Officer, one application
shall be returned to the applicant and one application filed with
the Township by the Zoning Officer.
(n) An annual use permit for all home professional offices shall be
obtained. The person conducting the home professional office
shall be responsible for applying for the annual use permit,
utilizing forms available from the Township. The fee for the
application shall be set by resolution by the Board of
Supervisors.
(o) If the home professional office shall cease to be conducted in
compliance with these regulations, the home professional
office permit shall be revoked. The Zoning Officer may inspect
the premises at any time to determine compliance with this
chapter and the home professional office permit.
(p) If the professional moves and sells the dwelling, and a new
home professional office is started, a new home professional
office permit application shall be submitted to the Township
and obtained prior to the conduct of any new home
professional office.
(7) Utility installation, subject to the exemptions of § 210-221,
provided that:
(a) No public business office is operated.
(b) Any storage of parts and equipment is incidental to the primary
use and is enclosed in a building.
(8) Subject to the provisions of Articles XXA and XXVII, a cellular
telecommunications facility with antenna attached to a
nonresidential building or a structure of a permitted church,
municipal or governmental building or facility and a building or
structure owned by a public utility regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission and subject to the provisions of Articles
XXA and XXVII.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
(1) Lot area. A lot area not less than one acre, 43,560 square feet, per
family shall be provided for every building hereafter erected,
altered or used in whole or in part as a dwelling.
§ 210-10 CONCORD CODE § 210-11
196:564
§ 210-12. Special development regulations. [Added 1-2-2001 by
Ord. No. 255]
(2) Lot width. The lot for each dwelling hereafter erected or altered
shall have a width at the building line of not less than 150 feet.
(3) Building area. The building area shall not exceed 25% of the lot
area.
(4) Minimum structure setback.
(a) Front yard: 75 feet from each street right-of-way on which the
lot abuts.
(b) Side yards, either side: 20 feet; total of 50 feet for both.
(c) Rear yard: 30 feet.
B. Height regulations. The maximum height of buildings and other
structures shall be 35 feet.
C. Other permitted uses. Yard, area and height regulations shall be the
same as single-family detached dwelling.166
D. Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be an accessory use by right in
all residential districts so long as they comply with the following
requirements: [Added 9-2-2003 by Ord. No. 273]
(1) Height. In all residential districts, no fence or wall (except a
retaining wall or a wall of a building permitted under the terms of
this chapter) shall be erected to a height of more than four feet
measured from finished grade in the front yard. Such fences or
walls when erected in side or rear yards may not exceed six feet
from finished grade except those fences surrounding tennis courts,
ball fields and swimming pools.
(2) Location. All fences shall be constructed immediately inside and
not directly on the property line, and no fence or wall shall be
located so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way.
(3) Orientation. All fences shall be erected so that the finished side of
the fence shall face the adjacent property or the public right-of-way.
(4) Materials. No fence or wall shall be of a type or design so as to be
clearly out of character with the architecture of the surrounding
area. All wire chain-link fences shall be made of green plasticcoated
wire, and all cinder-block walls shall be faced with stone,
stucco or a similar finishing.
A. Single-family detached cluster development.
166. Editor's Note: See Subsection A above.
§ 210-11 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-12
196:565
(1) Objectives. The single-family detached cluster development
concept is intended to permit flexibility in lot layout, lot size and
the efficient and economical placement of single-family detached
dwellings on lots. The purpose of this section is to permit such
flexibility and to apply such criteria as will result in single-family
detached dwellings with:
(a) A pattern of development that preserves trees, outstanding
natural topographic and geologic features, and historic and
scenic resources, and prevents soil erosion.
(b) A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
development.
(c) An environment of a similar character to adjacent and
surrounding developed areas.
(d) Permanent open space. Open spaces, as approved by the
Township on cluster development site plans, shall not be
further subdivided or used for any other purpose than open
space.
(e) A contiguous network of interconnected open spaces, which
links with open spaces within the tract and to neighboring
tracts of existing or proposed open space.
(2) Plans must meet the following conditions:
(a) Clustering is confined to single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Single-family detached cluster development shall not involve a
tract of land of less than 10 acres of net lot area.
(c) The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership or,
if owned by more than one entity, shall be the subject of an
application filed jointly by the owners of the entire tract, and it
shall be agreed that the tract shall be developed under single
direction and in the manner approved.
(d) Public water and public sewer shall be provided. No sewage
disposal systems for servicing dwelling units shall be located in
open space areas or floodplains.
(e) The maximum number of lots shall not exceed one dwelling
unit per acre, provided a minimum of 40% open space is
provided. However, minimum lot areas for single-family
detached dwellings shall be exclusive of the features listed in
the definition of "lot area".
(3) Design standards.
(a) In addition to the provisions contained in Chapter 160,
Subdivision and Land Development, Article VIII, Design
§ 210-12 CONCORD CODE § 210-12
196:566
Standards, and the requirements for off-street parking in
Article XXII, the following design standards shall be met:
[1] The cartway width for all streets in a cluster development
shall be 28 feet along the entire length of the street.
(b) Area regulations.
[1] Lot area: 21,780 square feet minimum, subject to the
provisions of § 210-12A(2)(e).
[2] Minimum lot width at building line: 65 feet.
[3] Yard requirements.
[a] No principal building or structure shall be located
within 16 feet of a side property line or rear property
line in their longest dimensions, except that walkways
or decks related to an in-ground pool may encroach
the rear yard not in excess of three feet.
[b] No building and no part of a building shall be erected
within or shall project into the front yard except
cornices, eaves, gutters or chimneys projecting not
more than 18 inches, bay windows not extending
through more than one story and not projecting more
than five feet, one-story open porches projecting not
more than 10 feet, steps and balconies.
[c] No building or structure shall be located within 20
feet of the street right-of-way line.
[4] The building area shall not exceed 20% of the net lot area.
(c) Coordination with environment. In addition to the
requirements contained in Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land
Development, the site plan shall show a pattern of
development which preserves trees, outstanding natural
topography and geologic features, and historic and scenic
resources, prevents soil erosion, and which provides an
interconnected network of open spaces. The Board of
Supervisors may request the applicant to provide, in support of
the application, surveys and maps concerning the existing and
proposed traffic conditions, topographic conditions and
grading, other ground features, hydrologic conditions, soils,
historic resources and visual resources, and methods to
mitigate adverse impacts upon these conditions and resources.
(d) Open spaces, landscaping and planting. Open spaces with
provision for recreation, landscaping and planting shall be an
essential element of the site plan. In cluster developments of
10 or more acres, the following shall apply: [Amended
8-25-2015 by Ord. No. 367]
§ 210-12 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-12
196:567
[1] A total of 40% of the tract shall be designated and
maintained as a permanent open space, in accordance
with Article XXXII.
[2] Twenty-five percent of the required open space shall be in
one contiguous piece, as determined by allowing a circle
with a diameter of 250 feet to travel freely through it,
without touching the boundaries of the contiguous open
space.
[3] A twenty-five-foot-wide buffer shall be designated and
maintained along the tract boundaries which shall not be
counted toward the minimum open space requirement.
The twenty-five-foot-wide buffer shall conform to the
screening and buffering requirements of § 210-193, and
§ 160-50 of Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land
Development.
[4] Small parklets or greens are encouraged as an organizing
space around which dwellings can front, where such open
spaces are at least 6,500 square feet.
(e) Siting of buildings. The height and placement of buildings and
any variation in setbacks or lot sizes shall create and result in
attractive frontages and lots. Houses shall be grouped so as to
provide direct access to open space. Open space shall be so
distributed as to provide adequate buffering, serving as a
screen between dwellings and arterial and collector roads.
(f) Street, sidewalk, building and parking relationships. The
arrangement and pattern of the cluster development shall have
parking placed to the side and/or rear of the buildings and
sidewalks installed and maintained on both sides of the street.
(g) Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall exceed one
story in height, nor shall it contain any indoor plumbing
fixtures not previously approved and inspected by the
Plumbing Inspector of the Township.
(4) Special requirements governing open space.
(a) The open space provisions of Article XXXII shall apply.
(b) Any areas to be set aside or reserved for parks, recreational
areas, woodlands, conservation, or other open space purposes,
such as the preservation of natural features, historical areas or
scenic areas, shall:
[1] Be suitable for the designated purpose.
[2] Be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the Open
Space and Recreation Plan.
§ 210-12 CONCORD CODE § 210-12
196:568
§ 210-13. Landscaping regulations.
See Article XXI.
§ 210-14. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII.
§ 210-15. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
See Article XXII.
§ 210-16. Site plan review requirements.
See the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.167
[3] Contain no new structures, paving or other physical
improvements, except for natural plantings, necessary
underground utilities, pedestrian walkways, fences, walls,
gazebos, pergolas, and other features permitted in Article
XXXII.
(c) The provisions of the public dedication of land for recreational
purposes, or the fee-in-lieu thereof shall apply in accordance
with Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development,
§ 160-52.
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-12 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-16
196:569

ARTICLE IV
R-2 Residence District
[Amended 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 218; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255;
5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 310]
§ 210-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this zoning district is to preserve existing residential
developments of low density and to encourage the future development of
designated areas as similar low-density single-family residential areas.
§ 210-18. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the purposes set forth in this section and for no other,
provided that the demolition of or special exception or conditional use for a
historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map or any subdivision,
land development or construction activity within 300 feet of a historic
resource shown on the Historic Resources Map shall be subject to the
provisions of Article XIXA relating to historic preservation, and further
provided that development shall be in accordance with the design
guidelines of Article XIII for the Concordville Village Overlay District.
§ 210-19. Yard and area regulations.
§ 210-20. Special development regulations.
See design guidelines of Article XIII for the Concordville Village Overlay
District.
§ 210-21. Landscaping regulations.
See Article XXI.
A. Uses by right.
(1) A use by right permitted in R-1 Residence District.
B. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article XXVII.
(1) A conditional use permitted in R-1 Residence District.
(2) Cemetery.
C. Uses by special exception, subject to the provisions of § 210-242.
(1) A use permitted by special exception in R-1 Residence District.
A. Single-family detached dwelling (same as in use regulations in the R-1
Residence District).
B. Other permitted uses (same as in R-1 Residence District).
§ 210-17 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-22
196:571
§ 210-22. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII.
§ 210-23. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
See Article XXII.
§ 210-24. Site plan review requirements.
See the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.168
168. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-22 CONCORD CODE § 210-24
196:572
ARTICLE V
R-2D Residence District
§ 210-25. Purpose.
The purpose of this zoning district is to preserve existing residential
developments of low density and to encourage the future development of
designated areas as similar low-density single-family residential areas.
§ 210-26. Use regulations. [Amended 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 218]
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the purposes set forth in this section and for no other,
provided that the demolition of or special exception or conditional use for a
historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map or any subdivision,
land development or construction activity within 300 feet of a historic
resource shown on the Historic Resources Map shall be subject to the
provisions of Article XIXA relating to historic preservation.
§ 210-27. Yard and area regulations.
§ 210-28. Special development regulations.
(Reserved)
§ 210-29. Landscaping regulations.
See Article XXI.
§ 210-30. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII.
A. Uses by right.
(1) A use by right permitted in R-1 Residence District.
B. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article XXVII and
§ 210-11. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255]
(1) A conditional use permitted in R-1 Residence District.
C. Uses by special exception, subject to the provisions of § 210-242.
[Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255]
(1) A use permitted by special exception in R-1 Residence District.
(2) Cemetery.
A. Single-family detached dwelling (same regulations as in § 210-11, use
regulations for R-1 Residence District).
B. Other permitted uses (same regulations as in § 210-11).
§ 210-25 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-31
196:573
§ 210-31. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
See Article XXII.
§ 210-32. Site plan review requirements.
See the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.169
169. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-31 CONCORD CODE § 210-32
196:574
ARTICLE VI
R-3 Residence District
[Amended 5-7-1985 by Ord. No. 142; 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 218;
1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255; 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 310]
§ 210-33. Purpose.
The purpose of this zoning district is to preserve existing residential
developments of medium density and to encourage the future development
of designated areas as similar medium-density single-family residential
areas.
§ 210-34. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the purposes set forth in this section and for no other,
provided that the demolition of or special exception or conditional use for a
historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map or any subdivision,
land development or construction activity within 300 feet of a historic
resource shown on the Historic Resources Map shall be subject to the
provisions of Article XIXA relating to historic preservation, and further
provided that development shall be in accordance with the Design
Guidelines of Article XIII for the Concordville Village Overlay District.
A. Uses by right.
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Agriculture and horticulture, including the keeping of livestock,
animals and poultry customarily incidental thereto, and permitting:
(a) Private garden.
(b) The keeping of two small household animals for each dwelling
unit and one additional small household animal for each 1/2
acre of lot size.
(3) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above-permitted uses. The term "accessory use" shall not
include a business but shall include:
(a) Home professional office or studio, as defined in § 210-4, and
subject to the following special requirements in addition to all
other applicable requirements of this chapter for the
residential district in which the use is located.
[1] Such office shall be located in the dwelling in which the
practitioner resides.
[2] Not more than one person shall be employed by the
practitioner of the professional occupation, such as a
secretary, Cclerk, professional or technical assistant,
§ 210-33 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-34
196:575
except that two members of a recognized profession
related to each other by blood, marriage or legal adoption
shall be permitted to practice together.
[3] The area used for the practice of a profession shall occupy
no more than 25% of the total floor area.
[4] The profession shall be clearly incidental to the residential
use of the dwelling or dwelling unit and shall not change
the essential residential character of a dwelling.
[5] No external alterations inconsistent with the residential
use of the dwelling shall be permitted.
[6] No display of products and no window or other sign shall
be visible from outside the building, except for a name or
accessory use sign as permitted outside a dwelling in the
sign regulations (Article XXIII).
[7] Three off-street parking spaces, located to the side or rear
of the premises and not in the front yard, shall be required
in addition to those otherwise required in this chapter for a
single-family dwelling.
[8] The home professional office of a physician shall not
include a biological or other medical testing laboratory.
(b) Home occupation, as defined in § 210-4, and subject to the
following special requirements in addition to all other
applicable requirements of this chapter for the residential
district in which the use is located.
[1] Such office shall be located in the dwelling in which the
practitioner resides or within a building accessory thereto.
[2] Not more than one person shall be engaged or employed in
such practice or home occupation who is not a resident of
the dwelling.
[3] The area used for the practice of a profession or a home
occupation shall not exceed 25% of the total floor area.
[4] The occupation shall be clearly incidental to the
residential use of the dwelling and dwelling unit.
[5] No external alterations inconsistent with the residential
use of the dwelling shall be permitted.
[6] There shall be no display of products, storage of goods or
materials or window or other sign visible from outside the
building (except for a name or accessory use sign or a
professional office as permitted outside a dwelling in the
§ 210-34 CONCORD CODE § 210-34
196:576
§ 210-35. Yard and area regulations.
sign regulations, and no accessory use shall have any
other external evidence for a secondary use).
[7] No goods or services shall be offered for sale or lease to
the general public on the premises except that business
conducted primarily by mail or telephone shall be
permitted.
[8] No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in
greater volumes than would normally be expected in a
residential neighborhood, and any need for parking
generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall
be met off the street and other than in a required front
yard.
[9] No equipment or process shall be used in such home
occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes,
odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal
senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a
single-family residence. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which
creates visual or audible interference in any radio or
television receivers off the premises or which causes
fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
B. Conditional uses. (Reserved)
C. Uses by special exception, subject to the provisions of Article XXVIII.
(1) Utility installation, subject to the exemptions of § 210-221,
provided that:
(a) No public business office is operated.
(b) Any storage of parts and equipment is incidental to the primary
use and is enclosed in a building.
(2) A cellular telecommunications facility with antennas attached to a
nonresidential building or a structure of a permitted church,
municipal or governmental building or facility and a building or
structure owned by a public utility regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, subject to the applicable provisions of
Articles XXA and XXVIII. [Added 11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 325]
A. Single-family detached dwelling constructed, altered, renovated and/or
added to pursuant to Township approval of a development plan prior to
May 11, 1959, in any R-3 Residence District.
(1) Lot area. A lot area not less than 15,000 square feet per family shall
be provided for every building hereafter erected, altered or used in
whole or in part as a dwelling.
§ 210-34 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-35
196:577
§ 210-36. Special development regulations.
See design guidelines of Article XIII for the Concordville Village Overlay
District.
§ 210-37. Landscaping regulations.
See Article XXI.
§ 210-38. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII.
(2) Lot width. The lot for each dwelling hereafter erected or altered
shall have a width at the building line of not less than 75 feet.
(3) Building area. The building area shall not exceed 25% of the lot
area.
(4) Minimum structure setback.
(a) Front yard: 30 feet from each street right-of-way on which the
lot abuts.
(b) Side yards, either side: 15 feet; total of 30 feet for both.
(c) Rear yard: 25 feet.
B. Single-family detached dwelling constructed, altered, renovated and/or
added to pursuant to Township approval of a development plan
subsequent to May 11, 1959, in any R-3 Residence District.
(1) Lot area. A lot area not less than 30,000 square feet per family shall
be provided for every building hereafter erected, altered or used in
whole or in part as a dwelling.
(2) Lot width. The lot for each dwelling hereafter erected or altered
shall have a width at the building line of not less than 100 feet.
(3) Building area. The building area shall not exceed 25% of the lot
area.
(4) Minimum structure setback.
(a) Front yard: 50 feet from each street right-of-way on which the
lot abuts.
(b) Side yards, either side: 25 feet; total of 50 feet for both.
(c) Rear yard: 30 feet.
C. Other permitted uses. Yard and area regulations shall be the same as
for such uses in R-1 Residence District.
§ 210-35 CONCORD CODE § 210-39
196:578
§ 210-39. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
See Article XXII.
§ 210-40. Site plan review requirements.
See the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.170
170. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-39 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-40
196:579

ARTICLE VIA
R-4 Residence District
[Added 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 235]
§ 210-40.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this zoning district is to provide medium-density housing
while preserving flexibility in lot layout and design through the use of lot
size averaging.
§ 210-40.2. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be
used, for any of the purposes set forth in this section and for no other,
provided that the demolition of or special exception or conditional use
for an historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map171 or any
subdivision, land development or construction activity within 300 feet of an
historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map shall be subject to
the provisions of Article XIXA relating to historic preservation.
§ 210-40.3. Yard and area regulations.
A. Uses by right.
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses. The term "accessory use" shall not
include a business or home professional office or studio as defined
in § 210-4 or any home occupation as defined in § 210-4.
B. Uses by special exception. [Added 11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 325]
(1) A cellular telecommunications facility with antennas attached to a
nonresidential building or a structure of a permitted church,
municipal or governmental building or facility and a building or
structure owned by a public utility regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, subject to the applicable provisions of
Articles XXA and XXVIII.
A. Eligibility.
(1) The proposed development shall consist of one or more contiguous
tract areas of land under one ownership containing 50 acres or
more of land, located in an R-4 Zoning District of the Township.
(2) The proposed development shall be connected to public water and
public sewers.
171. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-40.1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-40.3
196:581
§ 210-40.4. Special development regulations. [Amended 2-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 256]
(3) Both water supply and sewage disposal system shall be operational
at the time of the first completed structure.
B. Yard and area requirements.
(1) Lot area:
(a) A lot area of not less than 15,000 square feet per family shall
be provided for every building hereafter erected, altered or
used in whole or in part as a dwelling.
(b) An average lot area of not less than 19,500 square feet for
every building lot shall be provided for all lots in the
development, and a minimum of 70% of all lots shall contain a
minimum of 16,000 square feet.
(c) Maximum dwelling unit density. The maximum permissible
dwelling unit density shall be 2 1/2 units per acre using the net
site area and using the total tract area, exclusive of rights-ofway
of dedicated streets, fire lanes, rights-of-way or easements
proposed for dedication or public utility easements other than
those directly servicing the tract.
(2) Lot width: The lot for each dwelling hereafter erected or altered
shall have a width at the building line of 75 feet.
(3) Building area: The building area shall not exceed 20% of the lot
area.
(4) Minimum structure setbacks:
(a) Front yards: twenty feet from each street right-of-way on which
the lot abuts.
(b) Side yards: either side 10 feet, total of 30 feet for both.
(c) Rear yard: minimum of 16 feet.
A. No lot of such size as to be capable of further subdivision or of
development shall be included in calculating the permissible number of
lots (dwelling units) unless the possibility of such further subdivision or
development is eliminated either by deed restriction or other
agreement in a form acceptable to the Township Solicitor and duly
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds.
B. No rear lots, as defined in § 160-8 of Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land
Development, as "lot, rear," shall be permitted.
C. A buffer area of at least 25 feet, consisting of berms and/or trees, shall
be provided along the entire perimeter of the tract.
§ 210-40.3 CONCORD CODE § 210-40.5
196:582
§ 210-40.5. Landscaping regulations.
See Article XXI.
§ 210-40.6. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII.
§ 210-40.7. Off-street parking and loading regulations.
See Article XXII.
§ 210-40.8. Site plan review requirements.
See the Township Code, Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-40.5 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-40.8
196:583

ARTICLE VII
R-A Residence — Garden Apartment District
[Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177; 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 218;
1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221; 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231]
§ 210-41. Purpose.
§ 210-42. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the purposes set forth in this section and for no other,
provided that the demolition of or special exception or conditional use
for an historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map172 or any
subdivision, land development or construction activity within 300 feet of an
historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map shall be subject to
the provisions of Article XIXA relating to historic preservation.
A. The purpose of the R-A Residence - Garden Apartment District shall be
to encourage attractive, large-site, low-lot-coverage apartment uses in
accordance with the objectives, policies and proposals of the
Comprehensive Plan; to provide for higher densities in selected areas
capable of accepting the increased density without overburdening
services; to provide for market demand, recognizing the economics of
garden-type apartment development; to accommodate increased
population on smaller tracts of land while preserving open space; to
provide a choice in residential structure types; and to provide for
adequate traffic, fire, landscaping and screening controls so as to
present an attractive and safe addition to residential development
patterns in the Township. This effort is intended to be consistent with
regulating density, congestion, adequate light and air as purposes of
zoning.
B. The protective standards contained in this article are intended to
minimize any adverse effect of garden apartments on nearby property
values.
C. The purpose of the R-A Residence - Garden Apartment District is also to
provide an opportunity for residential retirement communities.
A. Uses permitted by right.
(1) Garden-type apartment house, subject to the requirements of this
article.
(2) Accessory use regulations for apartment houses.
(a) Parking areas and private garages in conformance with
§§ 210-44 and 210-47.
172. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-41 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-42
196:585
(b) Storage garages, provided that all storage for other than
passenger vehicles is structurally enclosed.
(c) Living accommodations for watchmen and caretakers
employed upon the premises, provided that any such accessory
living accommodation shall be located within an apartment
house.
(d) Laundry, provided that it is for the exclusive use of residents of
the site.
(e) Recreation facilities, provided that it is for the exclusive use of
residents of the site and their guests.
(f) Swimming pools and patios or terraces are permitted, provided
that safety and sanitary standards, as specified by the Board of
Supervisors, are maintained.
(g) Refuse collection centers accessible to the street system,
provided that they are screened from adjoining property and
public view by a wall, fence or hedge.
(h) Any other uses that are similar to those set forth in this
subsection and that are customarily incidental to an apartment
house, subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(3) Residential retirement community, consisting of two or more of the
following uses, in accordance with § 210-44B:
(a) Personal care facility.
(b) Residential retirement facility.
(c) Independent living facility.
(d) Continuing care retirement facility.
(e) Skilled nursing facility.
(f) Medical/educational center, including such facilities as:
[1] Medical offices.
[2] Wellness center.
[3] Ambulatory surgery.
[4] Dental office.
[5] Diagnostic imaging services.
[6] Dialysis center.
[7] Medical clinic.
[8] Laboratory services.
§ 210-42 CONCORD CODE § 210-42
196:586
§ 210-43. Yard and area regulations.
[9] Medical research center.
[10] Pharmaceutical services.
[11] Physical therapy and rehabilitation center.
[12] Adult day care.
[13] Child day care.
[14] Private preschool/kindergarten.
[15] Private primary school.
[16] Cafe/delicatessen.
[17] Community education and meeting center.
B. Uses by special exception. [Added 11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 325]
(1) A cellular telecommunications facility with antennas attached to a
nonresidential building or a structure of a permitted church,
municipal or governmental building or facility and a building or
structure owned by a public utility regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, subject to the applicable provisions of
Articles XXA and XXVIII.
A. Garden-type apartment house.
(1) Height and area requirements.
(a) Maximum height. The maximum height of an apartment house
shall be 35 feet. No accessory building shall exceed 20 feet in
height.
(b) Maximum building length. In no case shall a wall of any one
apartment house exceed 100 feet in length.
(c) Minimum apartment size. No apartment shall be less than 700
square feet in net usable floor area, including partitions and
walls and excluding areas of joint use with other occupants.
Apartments with two or three bedrooms shall be no less than
1,000 square feet in net usable floor area, including partitions
and walls and excluding areas of joint use with other
occupants. The minimum apartment sizes may be reduced by
up to 15% for apartment house units which are age restricted
pursuant to the United States Fair Housing Act and/or the
Pennsylvania Human Relations Act and pursuant to
declarations and covenants to be filed of record. [Amended
3-2-1999 by Ord. No. 238]
§ 210-42 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-43
196:587
(d) Minimum lot area with width. An apartment site shall be a lot
not less than two acres in size and shall have a width at the
building line not less than 280 feet.
(e) Determination of number of units. The number of apartments
permitted on a lot shall be determined according to the
following schedule:
Bedrooms Per
Apartment
Lot Area That Shall Be Provided Per
Apartment
1 2,700 square feet
2 3,100 square feet
3 3,500 square feet
(f) Floor use restriction. Apartments shall be permitted only on
any floor where the apartment floor is completely above grade
at one exterior wall.
(g) Bedroom restriction. Not more than three bedrooms shall be
permitted in any one apartment.
(h) Maximum lot coverage. Not more than 20% of the lot area may
be covered by buildings used for human occupancy.
(i) Yards.
[1] Front yard. There shall be a front yard not less than 40 feet
in depth between any apartment house or accessory
building wall and any public street. If said street is
designated as an arterial or collector street, then the front
yard depth shall be not less than 50 feet. Whenever a
service entry to an apartment house faces a public street
lying within 100 feet of the entry, there shall be a
continuous vision-screening wall, fence or hedge not less
than six feet in height between the public street and the
apartment house.
[2] Side and rear yards. There shall be side and rear yards not
less than 30 feet in depth. Whenever a service entry to an
apartment house faces a dwelling on an adjacent lot within
one hundred feet, there shall be a continuous visionscreening
wall, fence or hedge not less than six feet in
height between the adjacent dwelling lot and the
apartment entry.
[3] Inner courtyard. Whenever a two-story or two-and-onehalf-
story apartment house faces on a rectangular inner
court, the minimum width and length of the court shall be
60 feet. When all apartment houses facing on a
rectangular inner court are one story in height, the
minimum width and length of the court shall be 40 feet. All
§ 210-43 CONCORD CODE § 210-43
196:588
such courts shall have a minimum of four openings
permitting access from outside the building groups into
the court. These openings shall be at least 10 feet in width
between buildings and may be covered by a roof, but not
by any other part of a building.
[4] Outer courtyard. The minimum width of any outer court
shall be 40 feet, and its depth shall not exceed its width.
[5] Special conditions.
[a] No building intended for human occupancy on any lot
shall intrude into the area enclosed by the arc of a
circle with a radius of 60 feet extending 45° on each
side of a line perpendicular to the center of any
window other than a bathroom, bedroom or kitchen
window. If both buildings involved are one story in
height, the radius of the circle may be reduced to 40
feet. This limitation shall not apply to any wall of the
same or another building, the plane of which
intersects the plane of the wall in which the window is
mounted at an exterior angle of 90° or more.
[b] No window of an apartment shall be so situated such
that the projection of a line perpendicular to the wall
within which said window is mounted from any point
within the jambs of said window, or within four feet
outside the jambs of said window, shall intersect the
wall of the same or another apartment house within 40
feet.
[c] In no case shall the wall of an apartment house be less
than 15 feet from the wall of any apartment house
measured along any line perpendicular to either wall.
[d] In no case shall the wall of any detached accessory
building be less than 20 feet from the wall of any
apartment house measured along any line
perpendicular to either wall.
[e] The front of any apartment shall not face the rear of
any other apartment unless the distance between the
apartments is at least 60 feet and the service entries
are screened by a continuous wall or fence at least six
feet high.
(j) Use of the open space. No more than 45% of the lot area may
be occupied by a combination of buildings, streets, driveways
or parking areas. Of this open space, a minimum of 50% must
be suitable for such recreation purposes as tot lot, sifting area
and suitable games and similar activity. Such open space shall
§ 210-43 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-43
196:589
§ 210-44. Special development regulations.
satisfy the open space provisions of Article XXXII, §§ 210-270
to 210-276 inclusive. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 245]
(k) Other requirements.
[1] Walls, fences and hedges may be placed anywhere on the
apartment house lot unless specifically restricted by any
section contained in this Chapter 210, Zoning.
[2] All planting required to be six feet in height shall be of
such species and size as will produce a substantial visual
screen within five years from the date of approval of the
plan by the Township Supervisors.
[3] All of the property shall be suitably landscaped as
determined by the Board of Supervisors and shall be
suitably maintained. Insofar as possible, existing trees and
grades are to be preserved.
[4] Where an R-A District abuts an R-1, R-2, R-2D or R-3
Residence District, a buffer zone shall be provided. This
buffer zone shall not encroach on any yard or right-of-way.
For width and nature of planting, see Article XXI,
§ 210-193A.
B. Refer to § 210-44B for yard and area regulations for residential
retirement communities.
A. Garden-type apartment house.
(1) Fire protection. See Article XXIV, § 210-220.
(2) Private streets. Private streets or lanes, where not required for use
as fire lanes as specified herein, may have a minimum right-of-way
width of 25 feet and a minimum cartway width of 18 feet and shall
have a durable and well-drained all-weather surface. The location
and use of private streets or lanes is subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
(3) Driveways. All driveways shall conform to standards specified
above for private streets.
(4) Lighting. All streets and driveways are to be property lighted to
assure safe driving conditions at night and security for the
residents. Such lighting is to be so planned as to not create a
nuisance for residents of adjacent lots.
(5) Location of lot lines. No driveway, private street or fire lane shall be
located within 10 feet of any lot line except where required to
provide access to and from a public street.
§ 210-43 CONCORD CODE § 210-44
196:590
B. Residential retirement community.
(1) Objectives: to set forth the criteria for the use of a property as a
residential retirement community. The use shall meet all licensing
and certification requirements of state and other regulating
agencies.
(2) Yard and area regulations.
(a) Lot and building area. The tract on which the facility is to be
located must have a total area of at least five acres, and any
individual lot must have a total area of at least three acres. The
maximum percentage of the tract area covered by buildings
shall not exceed 25%, and the maximum percentage of any
individual lot covered by buildings shall not exceed 30%.
(b) Density.
[1] The maximum gross density for any independent living
facility shall not exceed 35 dwelling units per acre.
[2] The maximum number of beds permitted for a personal
care facility or skilled nursing facility shall not exceed 35
beds per acre. No more than two beds shall be permitted
in any such unit in the facility.
(c) Minimum building setback.
[1] Front yard. There shall be a building setback on each
street which a site abuts which shall be not less than 50
feet in depth from the ultimate right-of-way line. The front
yard shall be planted with an all-season groundcover not to
exceed one foot in height, except as may be otherwise
mandated by any buffering, screening and landscaping
requirements.
[2] Side yards. For each building or unified group of buildings
erected on a building development lot or group of lots,
there shall be two side yards, neither of which shall be less
than 30 feet in width, provided further that the combined
width of both side yards shall total a minimum of 80 feet.
[3] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard that shall not be less
than 50 feet in depth.
[4] Minimum lot width at building line. The width of the
building development lot or group of lots on which a
facility is to be erected must be at least 200 feet at the
building line.
[5] Minimum lot width at street line. Where the building
development lot or group of lots on which a building is to
be erected fronts a public street, the lot must be at least
§ 210-44 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-44
196:591
200 feet wide, or a combination of 200 feet if the lot is a
corner lot.
[6] Impervious coverage. The maximum percentage of the
tract covered by buildings, driveways, parking lot
surfaces, walkways and other impervious surfaces shall
not exceed 55%. The maximum percentage of any
individual lot within the tract covered by impervious
surfaces shall not exceed 60%.
[7] Minimum required frontage. The building development lot
or group of lots must have at least 200 feet of frontage on a
public principal arterial street or collector street, as
defined in the Township Code, § 160-8, Subdivision and
Land Development, and mapped in Appendix G thereto, or
a combination of 200 feet if the lot is a corner lot.
[8] Minimum distance between buildings: 30 feet.
[9] Maximum height: 50 feet measured at the mean grade
with no more than four floors above grade.
(3) Permitted accessory uses shall be as follows:
(a) The following accessory uses when provided for the exclusive
use of the residents, staff and guests:
[1] Common dining facilities and an associated kitchen or
kitchens.
[2] Activity, social, recreation, physical therapy and exercise
facilities.
[3] Administrative office facilities.
[4] Laundry and housekeeping facilities.
[5] Chapel.
[6] Beauty salon, barber shop or related personal services.
[7] Library.
[8] Retail store, not to exceed two percent of the gross floor
area of all buildings.
(4) Utilities. A personal care facility must be served by public sewer
and public water.
(5) Open space. A minimum of 10% of the tract and/or lot area shall be
maintained as open space, and no individual open space parcel
shall be less than 5,000 square feet in area and 50 feet in width.
The minimum required open space shall be measured 10 feet from
all buildings, so as to provide for a ten-foot limited common
§ 210-44 CONCORD CODE § 210-44
196:592
element zone around all buildings. Such open space shall satisfy
the open space provisions of Article XXXII, §§ 210-270 to 210-276
inclusive. [Amended 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 245]
(6) Construction and layout.
(a) Site layout. The buildings, streets, driveways and related
structures shall be laid out and constructed with the intent of
encouraging an attractive facility with the buildings sited as
compactly as is reasonably feasible and in a manner intended
to duplicate the appearance and feel of a small, integrated
community or village, or a small neighborhood. The physical
design of the facility and the appurtenant improvements shall
provide for adequate control of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, make adequate provisions for public water, public
sewer, soil erosion and sedimentation control, stormwater
management, fire protection and other public services and
further the amenities of light, air and visual enjoyment.
(b) Physical appearance of buildings. The buildings comprising the
facility shall be architecturally designed and constructed so as
to integrate to the extent that is reasonably practical with the
existing development and existing land use adjacent to the site.
If practical, the buildings shall be oriented with a gable end
facing a street frontage and shall appear to be residential in
nature. No building shall exceed four stories or 50 feet in
height.
(c) Access. There shall be at least two separate means of vehicular
access to the facility, each of which is of a sufficient size to
provide uninhibited ingress and egress to emergency vehicles
and which complies with Article XXIV, § 210-220. In addition,
street access that complies with Article XXIV, § 210-220, shall
be provided to the front, both sides and back of the facility.
(d) Loading and delivery areas. There shall be provided areas for
loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles and
for servicing permitted establishments with refuse collection,
fuel and other service vehicles, which areas shall be located at
the side or rear of the buildings, shall be adequate in size, shall
be so arranged that they may be used without blockage or
interference with the use of the accessways or parking
facilities, shall be located as far as possible from the residential
areas of the facility and shall be constructed so as to be as
unobtrusive as possible and screened from abutting properties
through landscaping, berming, fencing or walls. There shall
additionally be at least one entrance to which there is
unobstructed access in accordance with the provisions of
Article XXIV, Chapter 210, § 210-220, Zoning. The entrance
shall be constructed so that when an emergency vehicle such
as an ambulance is parked at the entrance, shelter from the
§ 210-44 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-44
196:593
weather is provided to a person who is being loaded or
unloaded at the facility.
(e) Parking.
[1] Off-street parking shall be provided at the following
minimum levels:
[a] 1.25 parking spaces per unit for an independent living
facility.
[b] 0.33 parking spaces per bed for a personal care
facility and/or skilled nursing facility.
[c] At a blended level for a residential retirement facility
and continuing care retirement facility, depending on
the composition of independent living facility units,
and beds at a personal care facility or skilled nursing
facility.
[d] In addition to the above, one parking space for each
employee who works on the shift with the highest
number of employees.
[2] Off-street parking for a medical/educational center shall
be provided at the minimum ratio of one parking space per
350 square feet of gross floor area.
[3] Off-street parking for residents, employees and visitors
shall be placed in the rear or on the side of the facility and
shall be made as unobtrusive as possible through the use
of berming and landscaping that complies with Article
XXII, § 210-201, of Chapter 210, Zoning.
[4] Parking in the front yard shall be limited to spaces to be
used for visitors, resident pickup and dropoff and shall not
exceed, where possible, 25% of the total parking.
[5] All parking shall be directly accessible to the units being
served and shall be illuminated in accordance with Article
XXII, Chapter 210, Zoning.
[6] If the use(s) of the residential retirement community and/
or the medical/educational center changes, a new
conditional use approval shall be required in order to
reevaluate the parking demand and other attributes of the
new use(s).
[7] All other aspects of off-street parking shall be governed by
Article XXII, Chapter 210, Zoning.
(f) Pedestrian facilities and access.
§ 210-44 CONCORD CODE § 210-44
196:594
[1] Pedestrian amenities shall be located around the facility
within the required open space. These amenities may
include, but are not limited to, bus stop shelters, benches
and sidewalks. Crosswalks shall be line-striped across all
streets in compliance with Chapter 160, Subdivision and
Land Development, § 160-42B, at intersections; where
street crossings are appropriate for the facility's residents;
or where sidewalks would otherwise extend across the
street.
[2] A continuous walking system throughout the site shall be
provided as a sidewalk and pathway system of at least four
feet in width. It shall be integrated with building entrances
and exits, curb cuts, crosswalks and other features, to
ensure an interconnected flow of pedestrian circulation.
No walkway or ramp shall be steeper than 5% in grade.
(7) Landscaping.
(a) All landscaping shall comply with Article XXI, Chapter 210,
Zoning. The amount of landscaping, berming and buffering
may be enlarged as a condition to granting the use approval
where the Board of Supervisors determines that it is
reasonably necessary.
(b) The landscaping is encouraged to include such features as
hedges, fences, walls, pergolas, gazebos, pavilions, benches,
outdoor sifting areas and community gardens.
(8) Signs. All signs associated with the facility shall comply with Article
XXIII, Chapter 210, Zoning, as it existed at the time the signs were
installed or otherwise erected.
(9) Procedure to obtain approval of use.
(a) In addition to the requirements of the Township Code, Chapter
160, Subdivision and Land Development, notes shall be added
on the final plan for the execution of covenants to be filed of
record with the plan. The covenants shall include provisions
requiring that:
[1] All marketing materials reflect that the development is
intended for occupancy by persons 55 years of age or
older.
[2] Agreements of sale and leases include provisions and
verification requirements to evidence that units will be
occupied by at least one person who is 55 years or older.
[3] At regular intervals, the homeowners' association or
manager shall survey the occupants for purposes of
verifying ages and provide standards for acceptable
§ 210-44 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-44
196:595
§ 210-45. Landscaping requirements.
See Article XXI and § 210-44B.
§ 210-46. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII.
§ 210-47. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
See Article XXII and § 210-44B.
§ 210-48. Site plan review requirements.
Each application for a permit to construct a structure in an R-A Residence
- Garden Apartment District shall be accompanied by the following
information:
evidence, such as requiring copies of birth certificates or
drivers' licenses.
[4] Written rules and regulations for the development are
established and published for the community.
[5] The landowner or developer shall comply with the
provisions of the United States Fair Housing Act, the Fair
Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the Housing for
Older Persons Act of 1995 and the Pennsylvania Human
Relations Act.173
A. Site plan. A site plan or plans which shall describe the integrated or
overall development of the tract of land or district for which an
application is made, which site plan or plans shall be drawn at
appropriate scale, and which shall show:
(1) The location, orientation, boundaries, dimensions and ownership of
the land to be included in the district or area for which the
application is made.
(2) The location, use, dimensions and arrangements of all buildings
and structures, streets, sidewalks and open spaces, including the
height of all buildings; the number of bedrooms contained in each
apartment; the location area in square feet and capacity of all areas
to be used for off-street parking; the location and dimensions of all
driveways, fire lanes and private and public streets; the location of
all areas devoted to planting, landscaping or similar purposes; and
the location and height of all walls, fences or hedges required as
visual screens.
173. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
§ 210-44 CONCORD CODE § 210-48
196:596
(3) The floor plans and areas in square feet of all dwelling units and
accessory buildings and the location of all windows and external
doors.
(4) The physical features of the tract, including contours at two-foot
intervals, regarding planned or proposed final contours and
elevations.
(5) The provisions and proposed facilities made for and the location of
all sewage, water supply, surface water and stormwater drainage,
exterior lighting and similar facilities and the dimensions of all
existing or proposed utility easements.
B. Sufficient data received. In all instances, sufficient data shall be
provided to enable the Board of Supervisors to determine that the
requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the Township
relevant to the proposed plan have been fulfilled.
C. See § 210-44B for residential retirement community.
§ 210-48 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-48
196:597

ARTICLE VIII
R-AH Residence — High-Rise Apartment District
§ 210-49. Purpose.
§ 210-50. Use regulations. [Amended 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 218]
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the purposes set forth in this section and for no other,
provided that the demolition of or special exception or conditional use
for an historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map174 or any
subdivision, land development or construction activity within 300 feet of an
historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map shall be subject to
the provisions of Article XIXA relating to historic preservation.
A. The purpose of establishing high-rise apartment districts shall be to
encourage the logical and timely development of land for high-rise
apartment purposes in accordance with the objectives, policies and
proposals of the Comprehensive Plan; to provide for higher density in
selected areas capable of accepting the increased density without
overburdening services; to provide for market development; to
accommodate increased population on smaller tracts of land while
preserving open space; to provide for a balance of choice in residential
structure types; and to provide for adequate traffic, fire, landscaping
and screening controls so as to present an attractive and safe addition
to residential development patterns in the Township. This effort is
intended to be consistent with regulating density, congestion, adequate
light and air as purposes of zoning.
B. The protective standards contained in this article are intended to
minimize any adverse effect of high-rise apartments on nearby property
values.
A. Uses permitted by right. [Amended 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 242]
(1) Apartment house or group of apartment houses which constitute a
single operating or proprietary unit. For purposes of this article, an
"apartment house" is defined to be a multiple-family dwelling of
four or more stories using elevators and not stairways for principal
vertical circulation.
(2) Accessory uses. Accessory uses designed for the exclusive use of
the residents of a multiple dwelling shall be permitted as follows:
(a) Laundry and/or locker room facilities.
(b) Recreational uses in accordance with § 210-51.
(c) An office or studio such as that of a physician, dentist, artist,
teacher, architect, lawyer or other professional person and
174. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-49 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-50
196:599
§ 210-51. Area and height regulations. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord.
No. 177; 7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 242]
supporting retail areas, the total floor area of such professional
offices and/or supporting retail areas in any one principal
building not to exceed 10% of the total floor area of that
principal building. Professional uses shall be limited to the first
floor above grade.
(3) Nonconforming uses. No lot on which an apartment house or group
of apartment houses is to be constructed shall contain a use that is
nonconforming to the terms of this chapter.
B. Uses by special exception. [Added 11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 325]
(1) A cellular telecommunications facility with antennas attached to a
nonresidential building or a structure of a permitted church,
municipal or governmental building or facility and a building or
structure owned by a public utility regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, subject to the applicable provisions of
Articles XXA and XXVIII.
A. Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall not be less than 10
acres.
B. Minimum frontage and lot width. The lot shall have a minimum of 500
feet along a street. That portion of the lot upon which buildings are
located shall have a minimum width of 300 feet at the building line.
Where outparcels or multiple frontages prohibit 500 feet continuous
frontage and further require split access entry points, then there shall
be at least two entry frontages of 80 feet each with a minimum width at
the building line in the interior of the property of 500 feet.
C. Building area. The building area shall not exceed 15% of the total lot
area, provided that the definition of building area does not include
decks, patios and breezeways for access to units.
D. Maximum paved area. A maximum of 40% of the total lot area shall be
covered with all-weather paving for all vehicular access, circulation and
parking.
E. Minimum open area. No more than 55% of the total lot area may be
occupied by a combination of buildings, streets, driveways or parking
area. Of the remaining open space, a minimum of 50% must be suitable
and usable for active recreation purposes. A minimum of 30% of the
open area shall be undeveloped, other than maintained ground cover
and landscaping. One hundred square feet of enclosed play space for
children must be provided for each apartment containing two or more
bedrooms. Such open space shall satisfy the open space provisions of
Article XXXII, §§ 210-270 to 210-276, inclusive. [Amended 1-4-2000
by Ord. No. 245; 11-7-2000 by Ord. No. 251]
§ 210-50 CONCORD CODE § 210-51
196:600
§ 210-52. Special development regulations.
F. Dwelling units per acre to total land area. The number of apartment
units shall in no case exceed 35 units per acre.
G. Setback from streets. There shall be setback from the right-of-way of
each street on which the high-rise apartment district abuts which shall
be not less than 100 feet in depth, provided that the buildings in excess
of 40 feet in height shall provide for an additional one foot of depth.
H. Setback from property lines. Front yard shall be as specified in
Subsection G above. Side and rear yards which occur on properties
within the high-rise district, but not abutting adjacent districts, shall be
equal to the height of the apartment structure closest to the relevant
property line. Where such development property lot lines abut district
boundaries, then the side or rear yards shall be equal to 50 feet plus the
height of the apartment structure closest to the relevant district line.
I. Distance between buildings.
(1) Inner courtyards. Whenever one apartment building faces an inner
court, the minimum width and length of the court shall be equal to
the height of the tallest building in the court group.
(2) Outer courtyards. An outer courtyard is defined as one created by
three or fewer unconnected buildings or the area created by
projections or wings of a single or connected building. A minimum
width of rectangular outer courts shall be equal to the height of the
building and its depth shall not exceed 1/2 its width.
J. Building height.
(1) Maximum height. No building shall exceed the height of 85 feet or
seven stories (exclusive of basements), whichever is greater. No
accessory building shall exceed 20 feet in height.
(2) Minimum height. The minimum height of a high-rise apartment
shall be 40 feet and not less than four stories. No accessory
building shall exceed 20 feet in height.
A. General requirements. The general plan for a high-rise apartment shall
include evidence and facts showing that the developer has considered
and made provision for, and the development shall be executed in
accordance with, the following essential conditions:
(1) The proposed development shall be substantially in accordance
with the Comprehensive Plan of the community, shall consider the
surrounding land features of the area, including but not limited to
residences, schools, parks, other reservations of open spaces,
locations, width and grade of streets and location and arrangement
of parking spaces, local and regional business areas and shopping
centers, densities proposed for surrounding areas, and other such
§ 210-51 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-52
196:601
features as shall contribute to the harmonious development of the
area, with due regard to the character of the neighborhood and its
peculiar suitability for this type of use.
(2) The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance with
an overall plan and shall be designed as a unified architectural unit
with appropriate landscaping.
(a) If the development of the high-rise apartment is to be carried
out in stages, each stage shall be so planned that the foregoing
requirements and the intent of this chapter shall be
substantially complied with at the completion of any stage. The
initial stage of the development shall comprise at least one
apartment building.
(b) The developer shall assure the provision of required street,
utility and drainage improvements by means of a proper
completion guaranty in the form of a bond or the deposit of
funds or securities in escrow to cover the cost of the
improvements. The work shall be performed in accordance
with all requirements and the approved plans.
(3) The area to be used for R-AH development shall be adaptable to
community development. It shall be located in close proximity to
major thoroughfares, streets, railroads, public transportation,
shopping or other facilities.
B. Street requirements.
(1) Private streets. Private streets or lanes where not required for use
as fire lanes as specified herein may have a minimum right-of-way
width of 28 feet and a minimum cartway width of 22 feet. The
location and use of private streets or lanes is subject to the
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(2) Driveways and off-street parking. All driveways shall conform to
standards specified above for private streets.
(3) No driveway, private street or fire lane shall be located within 10
feet of any lot line except where required to provide access to and
from a public street.
C. Access. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress
to and from public streets and highways serving the apartment without
undue congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow. The
Planning Commission shall satisfy itself as to the adequacy of the
thoroughfare to carry the additional traffic engendered by the
apartment complex as well as the street frontage of the proposed
district. All accessways to a street shall be at least 40 feet in paved
width and shall not be located within 200 feet of any other public access
on the street or highway. No access road shall be less than 26 feet in
paved width unless provided in a boulevard configuration with 16 feet
§ 210-52 CONCORD CODE § 210-52
196:602
minimum in each direction. All walkways shall be paved with an allweather
surface and not less than four feet in width. [Amended
7-6-1999 by Ord. No. 242]
D. Landscaping and planting. A planted landscaped area or an existing
wooded area of at least 30 feet in width shall be located along any street
and along all property lines except when such property lines are located
in a body of water or are adjacent to a maintained park. All open areas
shall be landscaped with a suitable ground cover or retained as natural
woodland or rock outcroppings.
E. Preservation of natural features.
(1) The developer shall be required where possible to preserve or
incorporate natural features such as woods, streams and open
space areas, which add to the overall cohesive development of the
high-rise apartment and overall community. However, all conditions
deemed hazardous by the Planning Commission, including natural
feature hazards, are to be eliminated or all precautions deemed
appropriate by the Planning Commission to reduce the hazard are
to be provided by the developer.
(2) The developer shall be required to plant street trees abutting each
street or road and trees for shade and beautification within a lot.
(3) Those areas occupied by required easements that are not within a
stream channel and are suitable for recreational purposes may
qualify as usable open space subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors.
F. Waste storage and screening.
(1) In the case of any use other than a single- or two-family dwelling,
all trash, rubbish and debris of every kind and nature shall be
stored in properly closed verminproof containers within an
enclosure until such time as it shall be scheduled for collection and
disposal and shall be collected and disposed of as often as may be
necessary under the particular circumstances.
(2) All occupant or tenant laundry washing and drying facilities shall
be within the apartment building or screened by suitable walls or
solid fences from both the street and adjoining properties.
G. Provision of features for comfort and convenience.
(1) The developer shall be encouraged to give consideration to the
provision of community areas, laundry facilities, playground and tot
lots and other services necessary for the comfort and convenience
of high-rise apartment residents.
(2) If the open space lands are to be reserved for private use, including
the residents of the high-rise apartment district, it shall be held in
§ 210-52 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-52
196:603
§ 210-53. Landscaping requirements.
See Article XXI.
§ 210-54. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII.
§ 210-55. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
See Article XXII.
§ 210-56. Site plan review requirements.
corporate ownership and shall be set aside by deed restriction for
a minimum period of 99 years.
(3) If open space lands are to be developed for use by the general
public, the Township shall be given first option for purchase and
maintenance of such land.
H. Adequate lighting.
(1) All streets, driveways and parking areas are to be properly lighted
to assure safe driving conditions at night and security for the
residents. Such lighting is to be so planned as to not create a
nuisance for residents of adjacent lots.
(2) All outside lighting, including sign lighting, shall be directed in
such a way as not to create a nuisance in any agricultural,
institutional or residential district, and in every district all such
lighting shall be arranged so as to protect the street or highway
and adjoining property from direct glare or hazardous interference
of any kind. Any luminary shall be equipped with a glare shielding
device approved by the Township Engineer. The height of any
luminary must also be approved by the Township Engineer.
I. Flood hazard. All roof, parking, delivery collection areas and traveling
lanes shall be provided with drainage facilities to collect, transport and
deliver, via underground conduit, stormwaters or surface waters to the
nearest storm sewers or stream as approved by the Township Engineer.
A. See the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.175
B. Special plan requirements. Each application for a permit to construct a
structure in an R-AH Residence — High-Rise Apartment District shall
be accompanied also by the following information:
(1) A site plan or plans which shall describe the overall development of
the tract of land for which an application is made, which site plan
175. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-52 CONCORD CODE § 210-56
196:604
or plans shall be drawn at appropriate scales, and which shall
show:
(a) The location, orientation, boundaries, dimensions and
ownerships of the land to be included in the district or area for
which the application is made.
(b) The location, uses, dimensions and arrangement of all
buildings and structures, streets, sidewalks and open spaces,
including the height of all buildings; the number of bedrooms
contained in each apartment; the location, area in square feet
and capacity of all areas to be used for off-street parking; the
location and dimensions of all driveways, fire lanes and private
and public streets; the location of all areas devoted to planting,
landscaping or similar purposes; and the location and height of
all walls, fences or hedges required as visual screens.
(c) The floor plans and areas in square feet of all dwelling units
and accessory buildings and the location of all windows and
external doors.
(d) The physical features of the tract, including contours at two
foot-intervals for areas of site at less than fifteen-percent slope,
and five-foot intervals for areas of the site at more than fifteenpercent
slope, regarding plan or proposed final contours and
elevations.
(e) The provisions and proposed facilities made for and the
location of all sewage collection and treatment or sewerage,
water supply, surface water and stormwater drainage, exterior
lighting and similar facilities and the dimensions of all existing
or proposed utility easements.
(2) In all instances, sufficient data shall be provided to enable the
Board of Supervisors to determine that the requirements of this
chapter and other ordinances of the Township relevant to the
proposed plan have been fulfilled.
§ 210-56 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-56
196:605

ARTICLE IX
R-MHD Mobile Home Development District
§ 210-57. Declaration of legislative intent.
In addition to the statement of community development objectives set forth
in § 210-2 of this chapter, as amended, it is hereby declared to be the
specific intent of this article with respect to the R-MHD Mobile Home
Development District to establish standards of performance and to promote
the desirable benefits which planned mobile home developments may have
upon the community and the residents within them. It is further the intent
of this article to ensure the interdependency and compatibility of proposed
mobile home developments with essential utilities and surrounding land
uses in the Township. It shall further be the intent of this district to:
§ 210-58. Use regulations. [Amended 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 233]
A. Reflect the changes in the technology of home building and land
development so that resulting economies may enure to the benefits of
those who need homes.
B. Further the general welfare by extending greater opportunities for
better and more affordable housing to all present and prospective
residents of Concord Township.
C. Provide for better quality and greater variety in type, design and layout
of mobile home developments than has been evident in many mobile
home parks in the past by enforcing uniform standards, desirable
design criteria and encouraging innovative site design approaches.
D. Provide for a diversity in housing types and prices.
E. Encourage mobile home developments that are beneficial rather than
detrimental to property values and the general welfare of the area in
which they are proposed.
A. Uses by right.
(1) A mobile home development (MHD), which may include mobile
homes of single width or multiple width, or both, single-family
detached modular homes, conventionally built single-family
detached homes, or any combination thereof, but shall not include
travel trailers or motor homes. No more than 30% of the total
number of dwelling units in a mobile home development may be
conventionally built or modular single-family detached dwellings.
(2) An adult residential community, as defined herein, which may
consist of multiple widths, single-family detached mobile homes,
but shall not include travel trailers or motor homes.
(a) "Adult residential community" shall mean a residential
development planned, designed and developed with the
§ 210-57 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-58
196:607
particular purpose of accommodating and providing for
dwelling units and related facilities which provide an
environment specifically suited to the needs, wants and desires
of older persons, including housing authorized and permitted
by the United States government and the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(b) Such housing for older persons may including housing:
[1] Provided under any state or federal program that the
United States Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development determines is specifically designed and
operated to assist elderly persons (as defined in
Pennsylvania or in Housing and Urban Development
programs);
[2] Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of
age or older; or
[3] Intended and operated for occupancy by persons 55 years
of age or older, in which case:
[a] At least 80% of the units shall be occupied by at least
one adult who is age 55 or older;
[b] The adult residential community must publish and
adhere to policies and procedures that demonstrate
its intent to be housing for adults who are age 55 or
older; and
[c] The adult residential community must comply with
applicable state and federal regulations governing the
verification of occupancy of units in the community.
(c) No residents are permitted in an adult residential community
who are under the age of 18 years, provided that children
under 18 years are permitted for an aggregate of 90 days in
any calendar year. Provided further that the age restrictions
set forth in this definition shall not apply to employees of the
adult residential community who perform duties substantially
related to managing or maintaining the adult residential
community or to providing reasonable accommodations for
disabled residents.
(d) The age restriction provision applicable to the development
shall be set forth on the final approved development plan as
part of plan notes, shall be contained in the final land
development approval and shall also be set forth as restrictions
and covenants in a recorded declaration that encumbers the
property and runs with the land and enforceable by the
Township as beneficiary.
§ 210-58 CONCORD CODE § 210-58
196:608
§ 210-59. Site regulations.
A mobile home development may be allowed by the Board of Supervisors
in the R-MHD District only pursuant to the procedure specified in § 210-67
and subject to the following regulations. The burden of proving compliance
with these regulations shall be on the applicant.
(3) An adult residential community, as defined in Article IX,
§ 210-58A(2), consisting exclusively of modular homes. [Added
4-3-2001 by Ord. No. 257]
B. Uses by special exception. [Added 11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 325]
(1) A cellular telecommunications facility with antennas attached to a
nonresidential building or a structure of a permitted church,
municipal or governmental building or facility and a building or
structure owned by a public utility regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, subject to the applicable provisions of
Articles XXA and XXVIII.
A. The tract of land to be developed shall be in single and separate
ownership.
B. Any parcel to be used as a mobile home development must have a
minimum tract area of 15 contiguous acres of land.
C. Any site proposed for a mobile home development shall not be subject
to adverse environmental influence, such as swamps, marshes, garbage
or rubbish disposal areas or other potential breeding places for insects
or rodents.
D. Any site proposed for a mobile home development shall not be subject
to any hazard or nuisance, such as excessive noise, vibration, smoke,
toxic matter, radiation, heat, odors or glare, as defined by the Board of
Supervisors and all appropriate ordinances.
E. The location of all mobile home developments shall be protected by
screening or other appropriate means against any undesirable off-site
views or any adverse influence (such as heavy commercial or industrial
use, heavy traffic or brightly lighted activities) from adjoining streets
and areas.
F. Mobile home developments shall not be located directly abutting
conventionally built single-family detached housing of significantly
different unit value and density than the proposed mobile homes,
except where extensive natural buffering exists and will be retained or
can be created so as to functionally and visually separate the two sites
or where compatible units or modular or conventionally built homes will
be located in the mobile home development adjacent to the existing
residences. The developer shall provide any necessary transition
between differing residential structural types, unit values and densities
within the mobile home development tract.
§ 210-58 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-59
196:609
G. Any site proposed for a mobile home development shall, in the opinion
of the Board of Supervisors, be easily accessible to essential community
facilities and services such as employment centers, shopping centers,
schools and police and fire protection.
H. Every area to be used as a mobile home development must be served
exclusively by the municipal waste disposal system and a centralized
water supply system, if those facilities are available, the word
"available" being defined here and elsewhere in this subsection as
"within 500 yards," and if each such system is found to contain the
necessary capacity to serve the proposed development; or, alternatively,
the area to be used as a mobile home development must, if it cannot
connect to either or both the centralized water supply and municipal
sanitary sewer systems, be served by a common single water supply
system serving all dwelling units and other structures in the
development and/or a common single sanitary sewer system doing
likewise consistent with the Master Sewage Treatment Plan of Concord
Township (as amended) as filed with the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, either or both of which, as applicable, must
have the approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, the Pennsylvania Utilities Commission and the Delaware
River Basin Commission.
(1) The satellite system shall be designed and constructed in a manner
that will permit adequate connection to the centralized or public
system in the future.
(2) The administrative structure for the satellite system shall be
organized in a manner that will facilitate easy interconnection of
the two systems.
(3) The developer shall be required to show proof that the satellite
system intended to serve the proposed development will not
interfere with any existing sewage disposal system or any existing
water supplies, be they wells for nearby properties or sources of
water for other community systems.
(4) When the centralized or public system reaches the development
site, connection to it shall be mandatory, and the cost of the
eventual interconnection shall be borne by the developer or the
organization that is set up to own and operate the satellite system.
(5) If, after development occurs, the satellite water system is deemed
to be the cause of interference with existing water supplies or the
satellite sewer system is deemed to be the cause of any pollution,
extension of the centralized or public systems may be required at
that time. The cost of the extension and hookup shall be borne by
the developer or organization owning and operating the satellite
system.
I. Any tract intended for a mobile home development must have direct
access to a collector type road (or a road of a higher classification), as
§ 210-59 CONCORD CODE § 210-59
196:610
defined by the Township Comprehensive Plan or Ultimate Right-of-
Way Ordinance, which the Board of Supervisors deems capable of
accommodating the transport of mobile home units, upon
recommendation of the Township Engineer. Plans evidencing provision
of safe and efficient ingress and egress to and from the public streets
and highways servicing the mobile home development district, without
causing undue confusion or interference with the normal traffic flows,
shall be submitted to the Board of Supervisors and must be approved by
the Township Engineer, who shall make the determination based on the
adequacy of the thoroughfare to carry the additional traffic generated
by the mobile home development. The applicant shall demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors that he has complied with
or will comply with all requirements of Chapter 179 of Title 25, Part I,
Subpart D, Article II, of the Rules and Regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and with all other pertinent
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which are applicable
to mobile home parks.
J. Density. The total number of lots in a mobile home development shall
not exceed a maximum density of five per net acre. All area not
contained in net acreage, as defined in this chapter, shall be excluded
from density calculations.
K. Notes shall be placed on the plan for an adult residential community in
an MHD District that set forth covenants that shall be recorded. These
covenants shall include, without limitation, covenants to ensure that the
adult residential community complies with the provisions of the United
States Fair Housing Act and the Pennsylvania Human Relations Act.176
The covenants shall run to the benefit of the Township, and shall not be
amended or stricken without the express prior written consent of the
Township. [Added 1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 233]
(1) All marketing materials for the adult residential community shall
state that the development is intended to be used as housing for
older persons.
(2) Any and all documents conveying an interest in a mobile home or
modular home in the adult residential community, including but not
limited to agreements of sale and leases, shall contain provisions
intended to ensure compliance with the requirements for an adult
residential community. [Amended 4-3-2001 by Ord. No. 257]
(3) The adult residential community shall survey the occupants of the
community at least once every two years to verify compliance with
the Township's definition of an adult residential community. In
verifying age, the adult residential community shall require
documentation that satisfies the requirements of the United States
Fair Housing Act and any regulations promulgated thereunder.
176. Editor's Note: See 43 P.S. § 951 et seq.
§ 210-59 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-59
196:611
§ 210-60. Yard and area regulations.
(4) An adult residential community shall promulgate, adopt, publish
and enforce rules and regulations that comply with the provisions
and requirements of the United States Fair Housing Act and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
A. Mobile homes.
(1) Setback from tract boundary. No mobile home or other primary
building may be located closer than 75 feet to any boundary of a
mobile home development regardless of whether that boundary
abuts a lot, water body, road or other right-of-way. In the event that
a mobile home development abuts another such development, this
provision will not apply unless said abutting mobile home
developments are separated by a public highway; however, all
other applicable setbacks prescribed herein shall apply. Should two
abutting mobile home developments be separated by a public
highway, then the seventy-five-foot setback requirement shall
apply.
(2) Lot area. All mobile home lots in a mobile home development,
regardless of tenure, shall have a minimum lot size of 5,000 square
feet, when on-lot parking is provided, excluding the area of any
private driveway to a rear lot, except that this may be reduced to no
less than 4,500 square feet when common parking is provided.
(3) Lot width. No individual mobile home lot shall be less than 55 feet
in width at the building setback line, although this may be reduced
to 45 feet where roofed additions are prohibited or where the
applicant can demonstrate that roofed additions can be added
without violating the provisions of Subsections A(5)(a) and B
herein. No individual mobile home lot shall be less than 25 feet in
width at the right-of-way line of a public street or the equivalent
right-of-way line or the edge of the pavement of a private street,
measured 50 feet from the center line of a public or private street
or right-of-way, as applicable. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No.
177]
(4) Building area. The maximum coverage of any individual mobile
home lot by all primary and accessory buildings and structures,
including covered patios or decks, shall be not greater than 25%.
(5) Minimum structure setbacks.
(a) Front yard. In no case shall the long side of a mobile home, or
any side of another primary building or accessory use, be
located closer than 50 feet from the center line of a public or
private street or right-of-way; provided, however, that the short
side of a mobile home may be located no closer to the ultimate
right-of-way than 15 feet. No more than six homes in a row
§ 210-59 CONCORD CODE § 210-60
196:612
shall have the same setback; where varied setbacks are
utilized, the difference shall be at least four feet.
(b) Side and rear yards.
[1] No mobile home or accessory building may be located
closer than four feet to any side or rear lot line of an
individual mobile home lot; provided, however, that all
minimum requirements of Subsection B below must be
met.
[2] Mobile homes placed on individual lots are encouraged to
utilize the minimal setbacks specified in Subsection
A(5)(b) and to be placed off center on the lots so as to
provide a large usable open yard space and outdoor living
area in one section of the lot. [Amended 3-5-1991 by
Ord. No. 177]
(6) Height. No structure built in a Mobile Home Development District
shall exceed a height of two stories or a maximum of 25 feet.
B. Conventionally built and modular homes. Relative to the required lot
size and setback requirements of the R-1 District, the lot size required
for conventionally built and modular homes in the R-MHD District may
be reduced a maximum of 25% and the lot width and yard setbacks may
be reduced a maximum of 15%. All other requirements applicable to
mobile homes as specified in Subsection A above remain applicable to
modular homes and conventionally built single-family homes.
C. Residential adult community. An adult residential community shall
comply with the yard and area regulations for mobile homes set forth in
§ 210-60A, except where otherwise provided below: [Added
1-12-1999 by Ord. No. 233]
(1) Setback from tract boundary. Where the primary buildings in an
adult residential community will parallel the boundary of the
mobile home development, the setback may be reduced to 55 feet.
In addition, should two mobile home developments which
substantially abut one another, both of which are adult residential
communities, be separated by a public highway, then the seventyfive-
foot setback requirements from the highway may be reduced to
55 feet from the highway.
(2) Building area. The maximum building coverage of any individual
mobile home lot in an adult residential community by all primary
and accessory buildings and structures, including covered patios or
covered decks, may be increased to not more than 40% if a garage
is built on the lot, provided that the maximum building coverage of
the adult residential community development as a whole does not
exceed 25%. Driveway areas, unroofed patios and unroofed decks
shall not be included in calculating the coverage of either an
§ 210-60 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-60
196:613
individual mobile home lot or the adult residential community
development.
(3) Minimum front yard structure setbacks. In no case shall the long
side of a mobile home, or any side of another primary building or
accessory use, that is located in an adult residential community,
except for an accessory use of a garage for the lot owner's vehicle
or vehicles, be located closer than 45 feet from the center line of a
public or private street or right-of-way; provided, however, that the
short side of a mobile home may be located no closer to the
ultimate right-of-way than 15 feet. No more than eight mobile
homes in a row (unless faced parallel to the street) shall have the
same setback; where varied setbacks are utilized, the difference
shall be at least four feet.
D. Adult residential community of modular homes. An adult residential
community consisting exclusively of modular homes shall comply with
all applicable yard and area regulations set forth in § 210-60A, B and C
and § 210-61A and B, except where otherwise provided below: [Added
4-3-2001 by Ord. No. 257]
(1) Lot width. Eighty percent of the individual lots within an adult
residential community consisting exclusively of modular homes
shall be at least 55 feet in width at the building setback line. The
width of the remaining 20% of the individual lots may be reduced to
30 feet at the building setback line.
(2) Building area. The maximum building coverage on the individual
lots by all primary and accessory buildings and structures,
including covered patios or covered decks, within an adult
residential community consisting exclusively of modular homes
may be increased to not more than 55%, provided that the
maximum building coverage of the development as a whole does
not exceed 25%. Driveway areas, unroofed patios and unroofed
decks shall not be included in calculating the building coverage of
either an individual lot or the overall development.
(3) Minimum front yard structure setbacks. In no case shall the long
side of a modular home within an adult residential community
consisting exclusively of modular homes be located closer to the
legal right-of-way of any road than 15 feet. In the event that the
legal right-of-way constitutes a tract boundary, this requirement
shall take precedence over the tract boundary setback
requirements set forth in § 210-60A(1) of the Township Code.
(4) Distance between structures. Modular homes and roofed
structures attached thereto within an adult residential community
consisting exclusively of modular homes shall be separated from
each other, and from other buildings and structures, other than
accessory structures, a minimum of 10 feet at their closest points.
§ 210-60 CONCORD CODE § 210-60
196:614
§ 210-61. Special development regulations. [Amended 1-12-1999 by
Ord. No. 233]
§ 210-62. Common open space.
At least 20% of the site area of the mobile home development must be in
common open space, as defined herein, no more than 1/3 of which may be
required buffer area. The configuration and location of the common open
space must be consistent with the requirements of § 160-60J of the Concord
Township Subdivision Ordinance.
§ 210-63. Community impact analysis.
An application for a mobile home development in the R-MHD District shall
be accompanied by an analysis of the impact of the proposed development
(5) Patios and decks. Accessory patios and decks within an adult
residential community consisting exclusively of modular homes
may encroach a maximum of 10 feet into any setback and/or buffer
yard of 35 feet or more. [Amended 11-5-2003 by Ord. No. 274]
A. Setback from common parking facilities. No mobile home or accessory
use shall be located within 25 feet of any common parking area.
B. Distance between structures.
(1) Mobile homes and roofed structures of areas attached thereto shall
be separated from each other, and from other buildings and
structures, other than accessory structures, at their closest points
by a minimum of 20 feet; provided, however, that whenever two
mobile homes have their longer sides parallel or essentially parallel
to each other for more than 25% of the length of either, the
minimum distance between the two mobile homes shall be 30 feet.
The sides shall be considered essentially parallel if they form an
angle of less than 45° when extended to intersect.
(2) Mobile homes and roofed structures of areas attached thereto in an
adult residential community shall be separated from each other,
and from other buildings and structures, other than accessory
structures, at their closest points by a minimum of 20 feet.
Provided further, however, that where an attached accessory
structure, such as a garage, parallels the longer walls of a mobile
home or accessory structure on an adjacent lot, the minimum
distance between two structures (whether primary or accessory)
may be 10 feet, but only for one wall of an accessory structure
which shall not exceed 27 feet. The sides shall be considered
essentially parallel if they form an angle of less than 45° when
extended to intersect. Unroofed patios and decks shall not be
considered to be a structure or an accessory structure for the
purposes of calculating these setback distances.
§ 210-60 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-63
196:615
upon public facilities, utilities and roadway systems. This analysis must
include at least the following information:
§ 210-64. Landscaping regulations.
See Article XXI.
§ 210-65. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII.
§ 210-66. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
See Article XXII.
§ 210-67. Site plan review requirements.
A. Projections of the ultimate population of the development.
B. Projections of the ultimate number of school age (five to 17 years)
children in the development.
C. Projections of the number of vehicular traffic movements into and out of
the development both during and after its construction phase.
A. Application. Any person desiring to develop a tract of land for a mobile
home development shall make application, in writing, to the Township
Zoning Officer. Such applications shall include, as a minimum, a
tentative sketch plan indicating basically how the applicant intends to
develop the property and sufficient data to document compliance with
the standards specified in § 210-59. The Board of Supervisors shall
schedule a public hearing on said application within 60 days, unless this
time limit is waived by the applicant, and shall render its decision on
the application within 60 days of the closing of the record of the
hearing. If no decision is published within 60 days of the closing of the
record, the application shall be deemed to have been denied.
B. Public hearing. Prior to deciding to approve or deny the development of
a tract for a mobile home development, the Board of Supervisors shall
hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice. At least 45 days
prior to the date of the hearing, one copy of the development proposal
and all additional submitted information shall be transmitted to the
Township Planning Commission and one to the Delaware County
Planning Commission, together with a request that these agencies
submit recommendations regarding said use. Any and all costs incurred
by the Township by reason of the public hearing, including legal
advertising costs, cost of stenographer attending the hearing and
transcription of the notes of testimony offered at the hearing, shall be
paid for by the applicant.
C. Initiation of development. If approval is granted for the development of
a mobile home development based on the submittal of a development
§ 210-63 CONCORD CODE § 210-67
196:616
plan and a developer's agreement acceptable to the Board of
Supervisors, development of the tract shall be initiated within two years
of the date of approval, and if not, the approval is void. At such time, if
development of the tract is desired, a reapplication must be made which
shall be processed and acted upon by the normal procedure established
in the Township Subdivision Ordinance.177
177. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-67 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-67
196:617

ARTICLE X
R-PRD-1 Residence — Planned Residential Development District
[Amended 2-4-1986 by Ord. No. 148]
§ 210-68. Purposes.
The purposes are:
§ 210-69. (Reserved)178
A. To recognize the need for rational direction for increasing land
development and to meet the growing need for housing of all types,
while at the same time minimize the loss of open countryside; to
preserve the atmosphere of the Township; to forestall inadequacies in
community services and facilities; and to protect property values in
existing residential areas.
B. To encourage innovations in residential development and renewal so
that the growing demand for housing may be met by greater variety in
type, design and layout of dwellings and by conservation and more
efficient use of open space ancillary to said dwellings.
C. To provide greater opportunities for better housing and recreation for
all who are or will be residents of the Township.
D. To encourage a more efficient use of land and public services and to
reflect changes in the technology of land development so that the
economies so secured may enure to the benefit of those who need
homes.
E. To encourage more flexible land development which will respect and
conserve natural resources such as streams, lakes, floodplains,
groundwater, wooded areas, steeply sloped areas and areas of unusual
beauty or importance to the natural ecosystem.
F. In aid of these purposes, to provide a procedure which can relate the
type, design and layout of residential development to the particular site
and the particular demand for housing existing at the time of
development in a manner consistent with the preservation of the
property values within existing residential areas and to assure that the
increased flexibility of regulations over land development established
hereby is carried out pursuant to sound, expeditious and fair
administrative standards and procedures and to design the abovementioned
procedure so that it permits higher densities in the areas
recognized in the Comprehensive Plan as most capable of receiving and
supporting such densities.
178. Editor's Note: Former § 210-69, Definitions, as amended, was repealed 12-15-1998 by Ord.
No. 231. See now § 210-4.
§ 210-68 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-70
196:619
§ 210-70. Approving body.
The Board of Supervisors shall administer the provisions of this article,
which administration shall include the approval, modification or disapproval
of any development plan; provided, however, that subject to any
inconsistent provisions of the Planning Code, the Board of Supervisors
may by resolution from time to time designate the Township Planning
Commission as the official agency of the Board of Supervisors for any or all
of such purposes, either generally or with respect to one or more specific
developments, and may from time to time by resolution revoke or amend
any such designations.
§ 210-71. Eligibility.
No application for tentative approval of a planned residential development
shall be considered or approved unless the following conditions are met:
§ 210-72. Permitted uses.
A. The proposed planned residential development consists of one or more
contiguous parcels of land under one ownership containing 50 or more
acres of land, located in a R-PRD Planned Residential District of the
Township. [Amended 2-4-1986 by Ord. No. 148]
B. The proposed planned residential development will be connected to
public water and sanitary sewer systems.
C. Both water supply and sewage disposal system shall be operational at
the time of occupancy of the first completed structure.
D. The proposed development is found to be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for Concord Township.
A. Uses by right.
(1) Residential uses. It is the objective of this article to encourage the
utilization of a variety of housing types in planned residential
developments. A mix of housing types appropriate to the site
determined according to the provisions set forth in §§ 210-74B(2)
and 210-77A and subject to the approval of the Board may include
the following residential uses:
(a) Detached single-family dwellings.
(b) Semiattached single-family dwellings.
(c) Attached single-family dwellings (townhouses).
(d) Garden apartments.
(e) Medium-rise and high-rise apartments.
(f) Single-family residence with an accessory apartment. [Added
2-4-1997 by Ord. No. 209]
§ 210-70 CONCORD CODE § 210-72
196:620
§ 210-73. Density.
§ 210-74. Design standards.
B. Uses by special exception. [Added 11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 325]
(1) A cellular telecommunications facility with antennas attached to a
nonresidential building or a structure of a permitted church,
municipal or governmental building or facility and a building or
structure owned by a public utility regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, subject to the applicable provisions of
Articles XXA and XXVIII.
A. The maximum permissible average gross density, computed over the
entire planned residential development, shall be four dwelling units per
acre.
B. Not less than 50% of the total area of the planned residential
development shall be designated as and devoted to common open
space.
C. No more commercial development shall be allowed than expert market
analysis shows, to the satisfaction of the Board, will be needed to serve
the resident population of the planned residential development.
A. General.
(1) Community impact analysis. An analysis of the impact of
development of the site upon public facilities, utilities and roadway
systems will be required in accordance with the procedures of
§ 210-77A and B.
B. Landscaping.
(1) Landscaping shall be regarded as an essential feature of every
planned residential development. In addition to the preservation of
natural features, trees and slopes of the site, careful attention shall
be given to landscaping of parking areas and provisions of street
trees as required by this article.
(2) In order to determine the suitability of specific areas of the total
PRD site for specific land uses and land use intensities, a thorough
analysis of the natural features of the site will be required in
accordance with § 210-77. The following subject categories must
be included in such an analysis:
(a) Hydrology. Analysis of natural drainage patterns in site area,
including denoting surface water, marsh, floodplain,
permanent high-water table and seasonal high-water table
areas throughout the site.
(b) Geological. Analysis of characteristics of rock formations
underlying the site, including defining aquifers (particularly
§ 210-72 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-74
196:621
those subject to pollution), shallow bedrock areas and areas in
which formations are unstable.
(c) Soils. Analysis of types of soils present in the site area,
including defining of prime agricultural soils, aquifer recharge
soils areas, unstable soils and soils susceptible to erosion.
(d) Topography. Analysis of terrain of site, including designation of
slope areas over 25% and between 15% and 25%. [Amended
1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
(e) Vegetation. Analysis of land cover of site, including
designations of forest and woodland areas, meadowland areas
and areas with little or no land cover.
(3) Landscaping shall be planned and effectuated in the planned
residential development so as to integrate buildings with their
surrounding lands and to present a total pattern throughout the
site. The use of berms is encouraged. In the planning and
effectuation of such landscaping as well as in the effectuation of
Subsection B(4) and (5) of this section, the developer shall be
guided by the following criteria. Plant material, including both
deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs, shall be chosen on the
basis of:
(a) Aesthetic values such as autumn coloration, flowers, fruit, bark
and crown characteristics, susceptibility and dieback.
(b) Susceptibility to insect and disease infestation and air
pollution.
(c) Species longevity.
(d) Wind firmness and suitability of plant material to soil types.
(e) Wildlife values (ability of plant material such as oak, hickory,
dogwood and walnut to provide food for bird and animal life).
(f) Trees and shrubs which are prone to cause pavement heaving
or whose roots have a tendency to invade water and sewer
lines (i.e., poplar, willow, silver and Norway maple, beech) shall
not be planted where their presence will result in pavement
heaving or the clogging of mains and drains.
(g) Where land is open or barren, the planting of trees is
encouraged.
(4) The protection of trees of eight-inch caliper or over measured 4.5
feet off the ground shall be a factor in determining the location of
open space, buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas,
playgrounds, parking areas and finished grade levels.179
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-74 CONCORD CODE § 210-74
196:622
(5) The development shall be designed and programmed so as to
minimize earthmoving, erosion, tree clearance and the destruction
of natural amenities. Natural features, such as lakes, streams and
wooded slopes, shall be preserved and incorporated into the final
landscaping of the development, wherever possible and desirable.
The applicant shall demonstrate the means whereby trees and
other natural features shall be protected during construction.
Wherever possible, scenic points, historic spots and other
community assets and landmarks shall be preserved.
(6) Seeding, sodding and other planting shall be applied to stabilize
topsoil on steep slopes and to enhance the appearance of open
space. This program must be approved by the Soil Conservation
District of the Federal Soil Conservation Service. Excessive cuts
and fills shall be avoided. Topsoil shall not be stripped, covered or
removed from the development site.
(7) Erosion control measures, such as minimizing the areas of exposed
soil, mulching, building silt catchment basins and planting
temporary ground cover, shall be instituted as necessary. All
construction, including grading and regrading, shall be
accomplished under and in accordance with the conservation plan
required by § 210-77A of this article. Where adequate surface
drainage is not possible by grading alone, a supplementary
drainage system, approved by the Township Engineer, will be
required.
(8) All parking areas shall be landscaped. The interior of each lot shall
have one two-inch-caliper shade tree for every four cars.
(9) Wherever the site is not naturally wooded, shade trees shall be
provided along all streets. No fewer than two two-inch-caliper trees
measured 4.5 feet off the ground shall be planted for each twentyfive-
foot section of collector streets. For the purpose of these
regulations, street trees are limited to the following: honey locust,
red oak, columnar-type maples, sugar maple and sweet gum.
(10) Subject to the approval of the review agency, the planting strip or
utility strip between the curb and sidewalk may be moved and
placed into an acceptable public park area on an equal basis,
resulting in an integral curb, gutter and sidewalk treatment where
this is accomplished. Where integral curb, gutter and sidewalk is
permitted, a planting and utility easement shall be required. The
combined dimension of such sidewalk and planting and utility
easement together shall not exceed the residual dimension of road
right-of-way measured from the back of the curb to the right-of-way
line for each side, respectively. Such integral treatment shall,
however, not be permitted on arterial or collector thoroughfares.
Areas within planting strips cannot be used to enable larger lot
sizes or used for park purposes.
§ 210-74 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-74
196:623
C. Buildings.
(1) All housing shall be designed with regard to the topography and
natural features of the site. The effects of prevailing winds,
seasonal temperatures and hours of sunlight on the physical layout
and form of the proposed buildings shall be taken into account.
(2) The approximate location and arrangement of buildings and open
spaces must be shown to the Board on tentative plans so that it may
review the intensity of land use and serve the public interest by
protecting neighboring land uses.
(3) Good quality development is encouraged by taking into
consideration the appearance of all elevations and layouts of
buildings and external spaces and materials used therein.
(4) Variation of conventional siting practices such as building setbacks
from streets and minimum distances between buildings may be
required by the Board in order to produce a more attractive and
interesting arrangement of buildings.
(5) All housing shall be sited so as to ensure natural light for all
principal rooms and to enhance privacy within and adjacent to the
planned residential development.
(6) Housing and other facilities near the periphery of the planned
residential development shall be designed so as to be harmonious
with neighboring areas.
(7) Townhouses shall be arranged in groups or clusters and not in long
rows parallel to street lines.
(8) Density and dwelling unit composition. Single-family houses,
semidetached houses and townhouses may be arranged so as to
provide for individual lots for each unit or may be arranged as
rental units or condominiums. Apartments, where permitted, shall
be constructed as rental units or condominiums. [Amended
2-4-1997 by Ord. No. 209]
(a) Sufficient yard areas shall be set aside and designated on the
plan for each type of housing so that on an average throughout
the development:
[1] The maximum net residential density for apartment areas
shall not exceed 16 dwelling units per acre.
[2] The maximum net residential density for attached housing
(townhouse) use areas shall not exceed eight dwelling
units per acre.
[3] The maximum net residential density for semidetached
housing areas shall not exceed six dwelling units per acre.
§ 210-74 CONCORD CODE § 210-74
196:624
[4] The maximum net residential density for single-family
detached housing areas shall not exceed three units per
acre.
[5] The maximum net residential density for single-family
residence with accessory apartment housing areas shall
not exceed five dwelling units per acre.
(b) The acreage set aside for common open space, rights-of-way of
streets or specific lots or areas set aside for commercial,
institutional or other purposes shall not be used for
computation of net residential density for any residential use.
(c) The composition of the dwelling units within the PRD shall
meet the following requirements:
[1] The number of dwelling units contained within the
detached single-family type of housing shall not exceed
70% of the total number of dwelling units in the PRD.
[2] The number of dwelling units contained within the
semiattached single-family type of housing shall not
exceed 70% of the total number of dwelling units in the
PRD.
[3] The number of dwelling units contained within the
attached single-family (townhouse) type of housing shall
not exceed 70% of the total number of dwelling units in the
PRD.
[4] The number of dwelling units contained within the garden
apartment type of housing plus the number of dwelling
units contained within the medium-rise apartment type of
housing plus the number of dwelling units contained
within the high-rise apartment type of housing shall not
exceed 85% of the total number of dwelling units within
the PRD.
[5] The number of dwelling units contained within the singlefamily
with an accessory apartment type of housing shall
not exceed 30% of the total number of dwelling units in the
PRD.
(9) No structure shall be less than 50 feet from the property lines of
the development and a planting strip of trees and shrubs, as
defined, of at least 50 feet wide shall be provided along all property
lines at the periphery of the development where necessary to
protect the privacy of the neighboring residents.
(10)No structure shall be within 50 feet of the right-of-way of access
roads or of common parking areas.
(11)No structure shall be erected within 30 feet of any other structure.
§ 210-74 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-74
196:625
(12) There shall be a minimum of 50 feet between any wall containing
10% percent or more of principal windows in living areas and any
other such wall.
(13) In order to promote good design of dwelling and structures, the
review agency may vary the terms of these requirements, where
necessary.
(14) Each garden apartment or townhouse building should be provided
with not less than the following space standards: [Amended
2-4-1986 by Ord. No. 148]
(a) Heights and area requirements.
[1] Maximum height. The maximum height of an apartment
house or townhouse building shall be 35 feet and not more
than 2 1/2 stories or floors above ground level for human
habitation. No accessory building shall exceed 20 feet in
height.
[2] Maximum building length. In no case shall a wall of any
one apartment building exceed 160 feet in length or any
townhouse building exceed 225 feet in length in not more
than five residential units.
[3] Minimum apartment size. No apartment shall be less than
700 square feet in net usable floor area, including
partitions and walls and excluding areas of joint use with
other occupants. Apartments with two or three bedrooms
shall be no less than 1,000 square feet in net usable floor
area, including partitions and walls and excluding areas of
joint use with other occupants.
[4] Floor use restrictions. Apartments shall be permitted only
on any floor where the apartment floor is completely above
grade at one exterior wall.
[5] Bedroom restriction. Not more than three bedrooms shall
be permitted in any one apartment.
[6] Yards.
[a] Front yards. There shall be a front yard not less than
40 feet in depth between any apartment house or
townhouse building or accessory building wall and any
public street. If said street is designated as an arterial
or collector street, then the front yard depth shall not
be less than 50 feet. Whenever a service entry to an
apartment house faces a public street lying within 100
feet of the entry, there shall be a continuous visionscreening
wall, fence or hedge not less than six feet in
§ 210-74 CONCORD CODE § 210-74
196:626
height between the public street and the apartment
house.
[b] Side and rear yards. There shall be side and rear yards
not less than 30 feet in depth. Whenever a service
entry to an apartment house faces a dwelling on an
adjacent lot within 100 feet, there shall be a
continuous vision-screening wall, fence or hedge, not
less than six feet in height, between the adjacent
dwelling lot and the apartment entry.
[c] Inner courtyards. Whenever a two-story or two-andone-
half-story apartment house faces on a rectangular
inner court, the minimum width and length of the
court shall be 60 feet. When all apartment houses
facing on a rectangular inner court are one story in
height, the minimum width and length of the court
shall be 40 feet. All such courts shall have a minimum
of four openings permitting access from outside the
building groups into the court. These openings shall
be at least 10 feet in width between buildings and may
be covered by a roof, but not by any other part of a
building.
[d] Outer courtyards. The minimum width of any outer
court shall be 40 feet, and its depth shall not exceed
its width.
[e] Special conditions.
[i] No building intended for human occupancy on any
lot shall intrude into the area enclosed by the arc
of a circle with a radius of 60 feet extending 45°
on each side of a line perpendicular to the center
of any window other than a bathroom, bedroom or
kitchen window. If both buildings involved are one
story in height, the radius of the circle may be
reduced to 40 feet. This limitation shall not apply
to any wall of the same or another building the
plane of which intersects the plane of the wall in
which the window is mounted at an exterior angle
of 90° or more.
[ii] No window of an apartment shall be so situated
such that the projection of a line perpendicular to
the wall within which said window is mounted
from any point within the jambs of said window or
within four feet outside the jambs of said window
shall intersect the wall of the same or another
apartment house within 40 feet.
§ 210-74 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-74
196:627
[iii] In no case shall the wall of an apartment house be
less than 10 feet from the wall of the same or
another apartment house measured along any line
perpendicular to either wall.
[iv] In no case shall the wall of any detached
accessory building be less than 20 feet from the
wall of any apartment house measured along any
line perpendicular to either wall.
[v] The front of any apartment shall not face the rear
of any other apartment unless the distance
between the apartments is at least 60 feet and the
service entries are screened by a continuous wall
or fence at least six feet high.
(15) The following height and area requirements apply to high-rise
apartments:
(a) Distance between buildings.
[1] Inner courtyards. Whenever one apartment building faces
an inner court, the minimum width and length of the court
shall be two times the height of the tallest building in the
court group.
[2] Outer courtyards. An outer courtyard is defined as one
created by three or fewer unconnected buildings or the
area created by projections or wings of a single or
connected building. A minimum width of rectangular outer
courts shall be equal to the height of the building and its
depth shall not exceed 1/2 its width.
[3] Special conditions. The walls of any two buildings or two
walls of one building shall not be closer than the distance
equal to two times the height of the taller building
measured along any line drawn perpendicular to either
wall when either or both walls contain one or more doors,
windows or other openings and the walls are parallel or
the planes of the walls intersect at less than 90°. Where
the planes of such walls are extended and intersect in
plane at an exterior angle of 90° or more, the distance
between the two walls shall be not less than equal to the
height of the taller building. Where two walls such as end
walls or such walls with nonresidence window openings as
elevator-stair towers shall face each other, the distance
between those two walls shall be not less than 1/2 of the
height of the taller building. Where buildings are joined or
are continuous, although angled relative to one another,
the interior angle shall always be equal to or greater than
90°.180
§ 210-74 CONCORD CODE § 210-74
196:628
(b) Building height.
[1] Definition. Effective ground elevation shall first be
determined by taking the average elevation above sea
level of the ground level corners of the building. Heights of
building then shall be determined by the difference in
elevation of the finished roof parapet line (not including air
conditioning or utility superstructures) and the effective
ground elevation.
[2] Maximum height. No building shall exceed the height of
135 feet or 12 stories (exclusive of basements), whichever
is greater.
[3] Minimum height. The minimum height of a high-rise
apartment shall be 40 feet and not less than four stories.
No accessory building shall exceed 25 feet in height.
(c) Access.
[1] Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and
egress to and from public streets and highways serving the
apartment, without undue congestion to or interference
with normal traffic flow. The Board shall satisfy itself as to
the adequacy of the thoroughfare to carry the additional
traffic engendered by the apartment complex. All
accessways to a street shall be at least 40 feet in paved
width and shall not be located within 200 feet of any other
public access on the street or highway. No access road
shall be less than 26 feet in paved width. All walkways
shall be paved with an all-weather surface and not be less
than four feet in width.
(16) Dwelling unit structures shall be located and sited so as to promote
pedestrian and visual access to common open space wherever
possible.
(17) Each single-family residence with an accessory apartment shall be
provided with the following space standards: [Added 2-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 209]
(a) Area requirements.
[1] The accessory apartment shall contain a minimum of 600
square feet and a maximum of 1,000 square feet.
[2] The accessory apartment shall contain a maximum of two
bedrooms.
[3] Yards.
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-74 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-74
196:629
[a] Front yard. There shall be a front yard not less than 40
feet in depth between any single-family residence with
an accessory apartment and any street.
[b] Side yards. The minimum side yard shall be not less
than 15 feet in depth and the aggregate of the side
yards shall not be less than 40 feet in depth.
[c] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard not less than 25
feet in depth.
D. Nonresidential uses.
(1) Shopping areas within the planned residential development shall
be located so as not to interfere with the residential character of
nearby dwelling units. Parking and loading places must be carefully
screened from view of adjacent residential development.
(2) All commercial uses shall be located in a single area of the planned
residential development.
(3) Commercial and other such nonresidential uses are limited in total
extent as follows:
(a) No more than 2,400 square feet for every 100 dwelling units
may be devoted to commercial areas.
(b) No one single commercial area shall have a total of more than
2,400 square feet of floor area.
(c) One parking space shall be provided for every 400 square feet
of commercial floor area.
(d) No commercial use shall be included except those in the C-1
Local Commercial District.
(4) Commercial uses otherwise permitted in a development shall be in
a separate commercial building and not in a residence. Any
commercial structure shall be of an architectural design
compatible with that of the adjacent residential structures.
(5) Signs for commercial uses are permitted subject to the following
restrictions:
(a) A single, permanently installed, freestanding sign for the
commercial center is permitted. Such signs shall be limited to
a height of 15 feet with a total area of 30 square feet.
(b) Signs for individual uses shall be permitted on the structure.
Roof signs or freestanding signs for individual uses are
prohibited. Such signs shall be limited to the width of the store
and shall be no more than 12 square feet in area and shall be
mounted flush on the structure. Signs should be of similar
design.
§ 210-74 CONCORD CODE § 210-74
196:630
(c) Signs may be illuminated by shielded floodlights, provided that
such lighting is designed and located so as to direct light away
from adjacent residences.
(d) No sign shall have a flashing, moving, rotating, oscillating,
shuttered or similar device.
(6) Community recreational areas, such as swimming pools and
outdoor skating rinks, shall be located so as not to interfere with
the residential character of adjacent dwelling units and shall
conform with Township ordinances and regulations.
E. Utilities.
(1) All streets, off-street parking areas and areas of high pedestrian
use shall be adequately lighted. All such lighting shall be designed
and located so as to direct light away from adjacent residences.
Adequate lighting shall be provided after dark. Appropriate
lighting fixtures shall be provided for walkways and to identify
steps, ramps and signs. Such lighting shall be designed and located
so as to direct light away from adjacent residences.
(2) The requirements for lighting may be waived by the Board, where
density of development may not justify its use.
(3) Electric, telephone and all other utility facilities shall be installed
underground by the subdivider unless, in the opinion of the Board
of Township Supervisors, special conditions require otherwise. In
such event, such installations shall be as directed by the Board.
(4) Where telephone and electric service lines are placed
underground, conduits or cables shall be placed within easement
or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with
other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be
located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
(5) Easements shall be provided to account for the distribution of unit
substations to service the area. The design of the utility structures
should be architecturally compatible with the surrounding
structures.
(6) The storm sewage for a planned residential development shall be
designed and constructed subject to the determinations of the site
analysis of the natural features and so as to minimize erosions,
flooding and runoff, using, as necessary, drainage easements,
swales, catchment basins, silt traps and design of cartways so as to
minimize runoff. Design is to be based upon an anticipated 2.5
inches per hour rainfall, with one-hundred-percent runoff.
(7) Drainage facilities shall be provided:
(a) To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
§ 210-74 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-74
196:631
(b) To ensure adequate drainage of all points along the line of
streets; and
(c) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
(8) In the design of drainage facilities, special consideration shall be
given to problems that may arise from concentration of stormwater
runoff over adjacent properties and roads.
(9) Storm sewer, as required, shall be placed in back of the curb when
located in a street or right-of-way. When located in undedicated
land, they shall be placed within an easement not less than 20 feet
wide, as approved by the Township. Open ditches shall be limited in
length as required.
(10) In some cases, stormwater must travel in original stream beds or in
open channels. Concreted or riprapped channels shall be required.
Open channels, whether concreted or not, shall generally be
straightened, widened or otherwise adjusted to conform to
hydraulic requirements.
(11) Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of 18 inches and a
minimum grade of 0.5%. Changes in alignment shall be by straight
sections connected by inlets or manholes.
(12) Where storm sewer passes between houses, sufficient width shall
be allowed between houses to accommodate said sewer. The
ground shall drain in the same direction as the sewer. No pockets
or craters shall be left in the road or on the ground.
(13) Manholes shall be not more than 300 feet apart on sizes up to 24
inches and not more than 450 feet apart on greater sizes. Inlets
may be substituted for manholes on approval by the Township.
(14) Inlets and manhole covers and frames shall conform to Township
standards. At street intersections, inlets shall be placed in the
tangent and not in the curved portion of the curbing. Inlets shall
generally be Pennsylvania Standard Combination Special Inlets.
They shall be located at intersections and, as needed, between
intersections. Inlets shall be required when the design flow in any
gutter exceeds seven cubic feet per second. They shall be designed
to deliver a rainfall intensity of 2 1/2 inches per hour with onehundred-
percent runoff. The upstream end of the inlet shall be
recessed by 10 inches and shall be depressed to show eight inches
or more of curb face instead of six inches as shown elsewhere.
Inlets shall be so placed in an intersection that rainwater shall not
have to cross any road before entering.
(15) Bridges and culverts shall have ample water way to carry expected
flows. Culverts shall be provided with wing walls and constructed
for the full width of the right-of-way. Bridges shall be provided with
§ 210-74 CONCORD CODE § 210-74
196:632
a paved flow line and with deep aprons and wing walls at each end.
Bridges shall be constructed no narrower than the cartway of the
road they serve; and, in addition, sidewalks on both sides shall be
required.
(16) Land subject to flooding.
(a) Land subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health or
property and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable
shall not be platted for residential or institutional occupancy or
for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or
property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard.
(b) Such land within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plat
for uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional
inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living
conditions.
(c) Where flooding is known to have occurred within an area
shown on the plat, such area shall be clearly marked "subject
to periodic flooding" and shall not be platted in streets and lots.
(17) Planned residential development shall be provided with water
supply systems through one of the following methods:
(a) Connection to a public water system is required where a public
water system is accessible to the planned residential
development site, the word "accessible" being defined here
and elsewhere in this subsection as "within 500 yards." Where
the public water system is not yet accessible to the site, but is
planned for extension to the area, the developer shall provide
adequate facilities for future connection to the projected
extension of the public system.
(b) Provision by the developer of a central water supply system
serving the entire development where a public water system is
not accessible to the site. Central water supply systems shall
be designed and constructed in a manner that will permit
adequate connection with the public water system when the
public water system becomes accessible to the site. The design
and construction of such a central water supply system shall
also conform to the current applicable standards of the
municipal water authority, the State Department of
Environmental Protection and, where applicable, the
Pennsylvania Utilities Commission and Delaware River Basin
Commission.
(c) If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells
owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within
the proposed development, applicants shall present evidence
to the Board of Supervisors or the Planning Commission, as the
case may be, that the proposed development is to be supplied
§ 210-74 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-74
196:633
by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association
of lot owners or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility.
A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for
such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment
or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.181
(18) Planned residential developments shall be provided with sanitary
sewer systems through the following method:
(a) Connection to a public sewer system is required.
(19) Refuse stations to serve residential, recreational or commercial
areas shall be verminproof and shall be designed with suitable
screening and located so as to be convenient for trash removal and
not offensive to nearby residential area.
F. Streets.
(1) The street system of the planned residential development shall be
designed so as to:
(a) Create a separation of automobile and pedestrian circulation
through a hierarchy of roadway functions and design and
pedestrian walkways.
(b) Relate harmoniously with land uses within and adjacent to the
PRD.
(c) Create efficient and safer connections with the existing road
systems of the municipality in order to ensure proper ingress
and egress to and from the PRD.
(d) Minimize through traffic in residential areas.
(2) Location and arrangement of streets.
(a) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location
of all streets shall conform to the Official Map of Concord
Township as adopted or amended and shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical
conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be
served by such streets.
(b) Where such is not shown in the Official Map, the arrangement
of streets in the development shall either provide for the
continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal
streets in surrounding areas or conform to a plan for the
neighborhood approved or adopted by the Board of Township
181. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-74 CONCORD CODE § 210-74
196:634
Supervisors to meet a particular situation where topographical
or other conditions make continuance or conformance to
existing streets impracticable.
(c) Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
(d) To facilitate snow removal and to permit easy access for firefighting
equipment and delivery trucks, dead-end streets (culsde-
sac), designed to be so permanently, shall be provided at the
closed end with a turnaround having an outside cartway radius
of at least 40 feet and a right-of-way line radius of at least 50
feet. Such streets shall be not longer than 600 feet, measured
from its intersecting center line to the center of the turnaround
except where topographical or other conditions make this
limitation impracticable as determined by the Board.
(e) Collector streets shall have sidewalks. Secondary streets shall
have sidewalks as deemed necessary by the Board.
(3) Access to streets.
(a) Where a development abuts or contains a present or proposed
arterial or collector street, the Board shall require reverse
frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
easement along the rear property line, marginal access street
or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate
protection of residential properties and other abutting
properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
(b) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where control thereof is vested in the Township under
conditions approved by the Board of Township Supervisors.
When the development adjoins unsubdivided acreage, new
streets shall be provided through to the boundary lines of the
development with temporary easements for turnaround.
(4) Street intersections.
(a) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 150 feet shall be
avoided.
(b) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at
less than 60°.
(c) Right-of-way lines at street intersections shall be rounded with
a radius of 35 feet or of a greater radius where the Board may
permit comparable cutoffs or chords in place of rounded
corners.182
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-74 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-74
196:635
(d) To the fullest extent possible, intersections with major traffic
streets shall not be located less than 800 feet apart, measured
from center line to center line.
(e) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets shall be avoided, and where such avoidance is
impossible, such intersections shall be designed with extreme
care for both vehicular and pedestrian safety.
(f) Grades at intersections shall be in conformance with
§ 210-74F(7)(c) following. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No.
177]
(g) Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections of
streets. There shall be a clear sight triangle measuring 75 feet
along the intersecting street lines from the point of
intersection indicated on the plan that is maintained free and
clear of shrubs, structures, signs and other visual obstructions.
(h) The intersection should be designed and graded to allow for
proper drainage.
(5) Street widths and building setback lines.
(a) Street right-of-way and cartway widths shall be as determined
by resolution by the Board. Streets serving an apartment site
and grounds, where not required for use as fire lanes, may
have a minimum right-of-way width of 25 feet and a minimum
cartway width of 18 feet and shall have a durable and welldrained
surface. The location of such streets is subject to the
approval of the Board.
(b) 183Additional rights-of-way and cartway widths than those
specified by the Board of Township Supervisors in order to
lessen traffic congestion, to secure safety from fire, panic and
other dangers, to facilitate the adequate provision for
transportation and other public requirements or to promote
the general welfare shall be as follows:
Street Type Cartway Width
Collector street 24 feet(excluding shoulder
development as paved bicycle
trail)
Secondary-residential
street
22 feet (excluding shoulder
development as paved bicycle
trail)
Drive 20 feet
Shared driveway 16 feet
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-74 CONCORD CODE § 210-74
196:636
Street Type Cartway Width
Double driveway 16 feet
Single driveway 10 feet
(c) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street or
inadequate right-of-way width, additional right-of-way width
shall be dedicated to conform to the standards established in
this Subsection F. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
(6) Street alignment.
(a) Except for secondary-residential streets, there shall be a
tangent of at least 100 feet measured at the center line
between curves.
(b) The minimum radius at the center line for curves on collector
streets shall be 300 feet, and for secondary-residential streets
it shall be 150 feet. Proper superelevation shall be provided for
curves less than 600 feet in radius on collector streets.
(7) Street grades.
(a) Street grades shall not exceed the following:
Street Type Percent Grade
Collector 6%
Secondary-residential 10%
(b) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding 1%
and shall be designed in relation to the extent of grade change
and to provide the following minimum lengths of curves:
[1] For over crests (summits), for each four-percent difference
in gradients, 125 feet in length of curve shall be provided.
[2] For under crests (sags), for each four-percent difference in
gradients, 100 feet in length of curve.
(c) Where the grade of any street at the approach to an
intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided
having a minimum length of 50 feet measured back from the
street line within which no grade shall exceed a maximum of
5%. Furthermore, the maximum grade within an intersection
shall not exceed 1%.
(d) No street grade shall be less than 0.5%.
(e) All streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way.
Maximum side slopes within the right-of-way shall not exceed
1 1/2 feet horizontal to one vertical (1.5 to 1) and shall be
adequately stabilized with appropriate plant materials.
§ 210-74 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-74
196:637
(8) Street names.
(a) No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall
be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(9) Street signs and lighting.
(a) Street name signs conforming to Township specifications shall
be erected and painted in accordance with said specifications
at all street intersections or junctions in all developments at
the expense of the developer.
(b) The developer shall install or cause to be installed at the
developer's expense such streetlighting facilities as may be
deemed adequate and as may be prescribed at the time the
development plan is approved, and the developer shall pay the
cost of operating said streetlights until such time as the street
or streets upon which said lights are installed shall be accepted
by resolution of the Board of Township Supervisors and
consented to by the Court of Quarter Sessions, as part of the
public road system of the Township, or until the Board
condemns such street or streets for use as a public street.
(10) Easements.
(a) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall
be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least
20 feet wide.
(b) Where a development is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such
further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for
the purpose.
(c) The area occupied by required easement shall be provided in
addition to the required net lot area specified herein.
(11)Walkways.
(a) Pedestrian walkways with a minimum right-of-way of 12 feet
and a minimum pavement width of four feet shall be required
where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and
other community facilities.
G. Parking.
(1) Each dwelling unit must have space to park two automobiles off the
street. Spaces must be 10 feet by 20 feet and, in parking areas,
aisles 22 feet wide.
§ 210-74 CONCORD CODE § 210-74
196:638
(2) There shall be 300 square feet of off-street parking space, in 10 feet
by 20 feet spaces, for each 100 square feet of commercial space
exclusive of storage areas. In addition, paved truck loading areas
shall be provided such that all loading, unloading and maneuvering
can be accommodated within these areas.
(3) Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent structures, access
roads and traffic arteries by hedges, dense planting, earth berms,
changes in grade or walls. All parking areas shall be a minimum of
50 feet from all structures, access roads and traffic arterials.
(4) Parking areas shall be arranged so as to prevent through traffic to
other parking areas.
(5) No more than 15 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous
row without being interrupted by approved landscaping.
(6) No more than 60 parking spaces shall be accommodated in any
single parking area.
(7) Off-street parking or loading areas shall be surfaced with a
pervious asphaltic pavement, if the Township Engineer finds that
the soil will permit a pervious pavement. Otherwise, an impervious
pavement shall be laid.
H. Open space.
(1) The open space shall be located so as to be consistent with the
objectives set forth in the application for planned residential
development. Where possible, it shall be designed as a contiguous
area easily accessible to the residents and preserving and
enhancing natural features.
(2) Areas set aside for open space shall be suitable for the designated
purpose and in any event shall be consistent with the plan policy for
future land use in the Township. Any such area shall contain no
structure other than a structure related to the purposes of open
spaces.
(3) Such open space shall satisfy the open space provisions of Article
XXXII, §§ 210-270 to 210-276 inclusive. [Added 1-4-2000 by Ord.
No. 245]
I. Fire lanes and hydrants.
(1) No dwelling unit or part of a unit shall be located more than 150
feet from a duly improved and accessible fire lane, as defined
below, nor more than 600 feet from a private or public street or a
fire hydrant. All fire hydrants and fire lanes shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Fire Chief.
(2) Fire lanes shall have a minimum unobstructed right-of-way width of
40 feet; and there shall be constructed within this right-of-way an
§ 210-74 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-74
196:639
§ 210-75. Management of open space.
all-weather and well-drained surfaced cartway with a minimum
width of 28 feet. Rolled gutters or upright curbs may be required
by the Board. The extension of fire lanes shall begin from one or
more private or public streets.
(3) Dead-end fire lanes shall be terminated with an unobstructed
vehicular turnaround or cul-de-sac with a minimum right-of-way
radius of 50 feet and shall have a minimum surfaced radius of 40
feet. Dead-end fire lanes shall have a maximum length of 400 feet.
(4) The location of fire lanes shall conform to plans for the extension of
streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewer and other
drainage facilities and public utilities as contained in this chapter
and other ordinances of the Township of Concord and shall provide
adequate access to buildings by firemen and other emergency
services.
(5) Fire hydrants must be provided by the developer. The number, type
and location of fire hydrants and the size and rate of flow of feeder
lines shall be subject to the approval of the Township Fire Chief.
(6) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until fire lanes are
constructed and hydrants tested and approved by the Borough Fire
Chief.
A. There shall be provisions which ensure that the open space land shall
continue as such and be properly maintained.
(1) The developer shall either:
(a) Dedicate such land to public use if the Township or another
public agency has indicated it will accept such dedication;
(b) Retain ownership and responsibility for maintenance of such
open space land; or
(c) Provide for and establish one or more organizations for the
ownership and maintenance of all common open space.
(2) In the case of Subsection A(1)(c) above, each organization shall be
a nonprofit homeowners' corporation, unless the developer
demonstrates that a community open space trust is a more
appropriate form of organization.
B. If a homeowners' association or open space trust is formed, it shall be
governed according to the following regulations:
(1) The organization is organized by the developer and operating with
financial subsidization by the developer, if necessary, before the
sale of any lots within the development.
§ 210-74 CONCORD CODE § 210-75
196:640
(2) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers of
dwelling units therein and their successors.
(3) The organization shall be responsible for maintenance of and
insurance and taxes on common open space.
(4) The members of the organization shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining and developing common open space, in accordance
with procedures established by them.
(5) The organization shall have or hire adequate staff to administer
common facilities and maintain the common open space.
(6) Maintenance.
(a) In the event that the organization established to own and
maintain a common open space, or any successor organization,
shall at any time after establishment of the planned residential
development fail to maintain the common open space in
reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
development plan, the Township may serve written notice upon
such organization or upon the residents and owners of the
planned residential development setting forth the manner in
which the organization has failed to maintain the common open
space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a
demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within
30 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a hearing
thereon which shall be held within 14 days of the notice. At
such hearing the Township may modify the terms of the
original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension
of time within which they shall be cured. If the deficiencies set
forth in the original notice or in the modification thereof shall
not be cured within said 30 days or any extension thereof, the
Township, in order to preserve the taxable values of the
properties within the planned residential development and to
prevent the common open space from becoming a public
nuisance, may enter upon said common open space and
maintain the same for a period of one year. Said entry and
maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
common open space except when the same is voluntarily
dedicated to the public by the residents and owners. Before the
expiration of said year the Township shall, upon its initiative or
upon the request of the organization theretofore responsible
for the maintenance of the common open space, call a public
hearing upon notice to such organizations or to the residents
and owners of the planned residential development, who shall
show cause why such maintenance by the Township shall not,
at the election of the Township, continue for a succeeding year.
If the Township shall determine that such organization is ready
and able to maintain said common open space in reasonable
condition, the Township shall cease to maintain said common
§ 210-75 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-75
196:641
open space at the end of said year. If the Township shall
determine such organization is not ready and able to maintain
said common open space in a reasonable condition, the
Township may, in its discretion, continue to maintain said
common open space during the next succeeding year and
subject to a similar hearing and determination in each year
thereafter. The decision of the Township shall be subject to
appeal to court in the same manner, and within the same
time limitations, as is provided for zoning appeals by the
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.184185
(b) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be
assessed ratably against the properties within the planned
residential development that have a right of enjoyment of the
common open space and shall become a tax lien on said
properties. Said assessments or charges shall be subordinate
in lien to the lien of any mortgage or mortgages on the
property which is subject to such assessments or charges
regardless of when said mortgage or mortgages were created
or when such assessments or charges accrued, provided that
such subordination shall apply only to assessments or charges
that have become payable prior to the passing of title under
foreclosure of such mortgage or mortgages, and the transferee
shall not be liable for payment of any assessments or charges
accruing prior to said foreclosure, but nothing herein shall be
held to affect the right herein given to enforce the collection of
such assessments or charges accruing after sale under
foreclosure of such mortgage or mortgages; and provided,
further, that such charges accruing after sale shall also be
subordinate in lien to the lien of any further mortgage or
mortgages which are placed on property subject to such
assessments or charges, with the intent that no such charges
shall at any time be prior to lien or any mortgage or mortgages
whatsoever on such property. The Township, at the time of
entering upon said common open space for the purpose of
maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the
Prothonotary of the county upon the properties affected by
such lien within the planned residential development.
(7) In accordance with Section 706 of Act 247,186 the provisions of the
development plan relating to the use, bulk and location of buildings
and structures, the quantity and location of common open space
and the intensity of use or the density of residential units shall run
in favor of the Township and shall be enforceable in law or in equity
by the Township, without limitation on any powers or regulation
otherwise granted the Township by law. The development plan shall
184. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
186. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10706.
§ 210-75 CONCORD CODE § 210-75
196:642
§ 210-76. Development in stages.
A developer may construct a planned residential development in stages if
the following criteria are met:
§ 210-77. Feasibility review.
specify those of its provisions which shall run in favor of and be
enforceable by residents of the planned residential development
and, in addition, the manner in which such residents may modify or
release such rights.
C. The Township will consider floodplain land as particularly suitable for
dedication for public use for such purposes as walking and bridle paths.
While the Township is open to the dedication of land involving historic
sites and properties, it is also agreeable to the consideration of
imaginative use of such historic site and/or property by the developer or
by a homeowners' association.
A. The application for tentative approval covers the entire planned
residential development and shows the location and approximate time
of construction for each stage, in addition to other information required
by this article.
B. At least 15% of the dwelling units in the plan given tentative approval
are included in the first stage.
C. At least 33% of the dwelling units in any stage are rented or sold before
any commercial development shown in that stage shall be completed.
D. The second and subsequent stages are completed consistent with the
tentatively approved plan and are of such size and location that they
constitute economically sound units of development. In no event shall
such stages contain less than 15% of the dwelling units receiving
tentative approval.
E. Gross residential density may be varied from stage to stage; provided,
however, that final approval shall not be given to any stage if the gross
residential density by type of dwelling of the area which includes stages
already finally approved and the stage for which final approval is being
sought exceeds by more than 10% the gross residential density for each
type of dwelling unit allowed for the entire planned residential
development in the tentatively approved plan. Where it is necessary to
allocate open space to early stages to avoid exceeding maximum gross
residential densities, the developer may be required to grant an open
space easement or covenant to the Township specifying the amount
and, if necessary, the location of open space.
A. Prior to application for tentative approval, the findings of the natural
features analysis and the community impact analysis of the site
explained in § 210-74A(1) and B(1) will be presented to the Board of
Supervisors. The review will not affect the application procedures of the
§ 210-75 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-77
196:643
§ 210-78. Application for tentative approval.
applicant but is intended to thoroughly familiarize both the applicant
and the review agency with the potential of the site for planned
residential development.
B. Materials illustrating the following information will be presented at the
review.
(1) A site map or maps at one inch equals 100 feet illustrating the
hydrology, geology, soils, topography and vegetation of the site as
explained in § 210-74B(2). The combined impact of the natural
features upon the development potential of each specific area of
the site will be clearly illustrated on the map.
(2) Materials indicating the impact of the completed planned
residential development upon public facilities, utilities and
roadway systems. Projections as to the number of school children
in the PRD and the vehicular traffic generated by the PRD shall be
included. Where connection to public water supply and sewer
systems is contemplated, projections as to the required water
supply capacity and wastewater volumes generated by the PRD
shall also be included.
A. The application for tentative approval shall be executed by or on behalf
of the landowner and filed with the Township Secretary. An initial
deposit in the amount as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors shall be paid upon filing of the application to be
applied against such expenses, and additional deposits shall be made
from time to time as requested by the Township to be applied against
the expenses of processing the application, not to exceed actual
expenses incurred by the Township.187
B. The application for tentative approval shall include documentation
illustrating compliance with all of the standards for planned residential
development in § 210-74, and where necessary, the Board shall order
such documentation to aid it in its review.
C. Required documentation shall include but not be limited to documents
illustrating the following:
(1) The location and size of the area involved and adjoining areas; and
the nature of the landowner's interest in the planned residential
development.
(2) The proposed use areas and the net residential and commercial
density of each proposed land use.
(3) The location, function, size, ownership and manner of maintenance
of the common open space.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-77 CONCORD CODE § 210-78
196:644
(4) The use and the approximate height, bulk and location of buildings
and other structures.
(5) Information showing the feasibility of proposals for sanitary
sewerage, stormwater disposition and adequate water supply.
(6) Utility systems.
(7) The substance of covenants, grant of easement or other restrictions
to be imposed upon the use of land, buildings and structures,
including proposed grants and/or easement for public utilities.
(8) The provision for parking of vehicles and locations, rights-of-way
and cartway widths of proposed streets and public ways.
(9) In the case of plans which call for development in stages, a
schedule showing the time within which applications for final
approval of all parts of the planned residential development are
intended to be filed, and which shall be updated annually on the
anniversary of submission for final approval.
(10) The application shall, insofar as possible, indicate compliance with
the provisions set forth herein, governing the requirements for
final approval.
D. Application for tentative approval shall include but not be limited to the
following documents:
(1) Plans at one inch equals 200 feet of existing natural features of the
land, including topography, vegetation, drainage and soils.
(2) A site plan showing approximate locations of buildings, road and
parking areas at one inch equals 100 feet.
(3) A plan at one inch equals 100 feet delineating common open space
indicating size, nature of facilities, structures, if any, and uses.
(4) A plan at one inch equals 100 feet delineating approximate
locations, street types, right-of-way and cartway widths.
(5) Site plan illustrating phasing, including a time schedule for all onsite
and off-site improvements to be dedicated for public use, which
may be modified from time to time by the Board.
(6) A plan illustrating connection to public utilities, streets and rightsof-
way accompanied by documentation as to the impact of the
proposed development on said public utilities, streets and rights-ofway.
(7) A plan illustrating the relation of the proposed planned residential
development to the Township.
E. Said application shall also include a written statement by the landowner
setting forth the reasons why, in his opinion, the planned residential
§ 210-78 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-78
196:645
§ 210-79. Public hearings.
§ 210-80. The findings.
development would be in the public interest and would be consistent
with the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
F. One copy of every application for tentative approval received by the
Township Secretary shall be promptly forwarded to the Township
Planning Commission and to the Delaware County Planning
Commission for study and recommendation as required by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.188 The Township Planning
Commission and the Delaware County Planning Commission shall
review and report upon the application to the Board within 30 days of
such referral. One copy of the reports of the respective Planning
Commissions shall be furnished to the landowner not less than five days
before the appointed time of the public hearing provided for in § 210-79
of this article.
G. The landowner, the Board of Supervisors, the Township Planning
Commission and the Delaware County Planning Commission may
consult informally concerning the proposed planned residential
development prior to the filing of an application for tentative approval,
provided that no statement or representation by a member of the Board
or the planning agencies shall be binding upon the Township.
A. Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative approval of
a planned residential development pursuant to this article, a public
hearing pursuant to public notice on said application shall be held by
the Board of Supervisors in the manner prescribed in the Concord
Township Zoning Ordinance for the enactment of an amendment. The
Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors or its designated agency may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing
shall be given under oath, and every party of record at a hearing shall
have the right to cross-examine adverse witnesses.
B. A verbatim record of the hearing shall be caused to be made by the
Board of Supervisors whenever such records are requested by any
party to the proceedings; but the cost of making and transcribing such a
record shall be borne by the party requesting it and the expense of
copies of such record shall be borne by those who wish to obtain such
copies. All exhibits accepted in evidence shall be identified and duly
preserved or, if not accepted in evidence, shall be properly identified
and the reason for the exclusion clearly noted in the record.
A. 189The Board of Supervisors within 60 days following the conclusion of
the public hearing provided for in this article shall, by official written
188. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
189. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-78 CONCORD CODE § 210-80
196:646
communication to the landowner, either grant tentative approval of
the development plan as submitted, grant tentative approval subject to
specified conditions not included in the development plan as submitted
or deny tentative approval to the development plan. Failure to so act
within said period shall be a grant of tentative approval of the
development plan as submitted. In the event, however, that tentative
approval is granted subject to conditions, the landowner may, within 30
days after receiving a copy of the official written communication of the
Board of Supervisors, notify such Board of Supervisors of his refusal to
accept all said conditions, in which case, the Board of Supervisors shall
be deemed to have denied tentative approval of the development plan.
In the event that the landowner does not, within said period, notify
the Board of Supervisors of his refusal to accept all said conditions,
tentative approval of the development plan, with all said conditions,
shall stand as granted.
B. The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings of
fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for
the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial, and said
communication shall set forth with particularity in what respects the
development plan would or would not be in the public interest,
including but not limited to findings of fact and conclusions on the
following:
(1) Those respects in which the development plan is or is not
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
municipality.
(2) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including but not limited to density, bulk and use and the
reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the
public interest.
(3) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the
planned residential development, the reliability of the proposals for
maintenance and conservation of the common open space and the
adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common
open space as related to the proposed density and type of
residential development.
(4) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which said design does or does not make adequate provision for
public services, provide adequate control over vehicular traffic and
further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment.
(5) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed residential
development to the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be
established.
§ 210-80 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-80
196:647
§ 210-81. Status of plan after tentative approval.
(6) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents
of the planned residential development in the integrity of the
development plan.
(7) In the event that a development plan is granted tentative approval,
with or without conditions, the Board of Supervisors may set forth
in the official written communication the time within which an
application for final approval of the development plan shall be filed
or, in the case of a development plan which provides for
development over a period of years, the periods of time within
which applications for final approval of each part thereof shall be
filed. Except upon the consent of the landowner, the time so
established between grant of tentative approval and application for
final approval shall not be less than three months and, in case of
development over a period of years, the tine between applications
for final approval of each part of a plan shall be not less than 12
months.
A. The official written communication provided for in § 210-80 of this
article shall be certified by the Township Secretary and shall be filed in
his or her office, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the landowner.
Where tentative approval has been granted, the same shall be noted on
the Zoning Map.190
B. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of the
planned residential development for recording nor authorize
development or the issuance of any building permits. A development
plan which has been given tentative approval as submitted or which has
been given tentative approval with conditions which have been
accepted by the landowner (and provided that the landowner has not
defaulted nor violated any of the conditions of the tentative approval)
shall not be modified or revoked nor otherwise impaired by action of the
Township pending an application or applications for final approval,
without consent of the landowner, provided that an application for final
approval is filed or, in the case of development over a period of years,
provided that applications are filed within the periods of time specified
in the official written communication granting tentative approval.
C. In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and
thereafter but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to
abandon said development plan and shall so notify the Board of
Supervisors in writing, or in the event that the landowner shall fail to
file application or applications for final approval within the required
period of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative approval shall
be deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area included in the
190. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-80 CONCORD CODE § 210-81
196:648
§ 210-82. Application for final approval.
development plan for which final approval has not been given shall be
subject to those local ordinances otherwise applicable thereto as they
may be amended from time to time, and the same shall be noted on the
Zoning Map and in the records of the Secretary of the Township.
A. An application for final approval may be for all the land included in a
development plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative approval, a
section thereof. Said application shall be made to the Township
Supervisors and within the time or times specified by the official written
communication granting tentative approval. If the application for final
approval is in compliance with the tentatively approved development
plan, a public hearing need not be held.
B. The application for final approval shall consist of a plan or plans and
accompanying documents which shall show and shall include the
following information:
(1) 191 The plan. The final plan shall be at a scale of one inch to 40 feet.
The original drawing and all submitted prints thereof shall be made
on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches. Where necessary to avoid sheets
longer than the maximum size prescribed herein, final plans shall
be drawn in two or more sections accompanied by a key diagram
showing relative location of the sections. All plans shall be clear
and legible white prints of an ink drawing and shall include the
following information:
(a) Development name or identifying title.
(b) Municipality in which the development is located.
(c) North point, scale and date.
(d) Name of record owner and developer.
(e) Name and seal of the registered professional engineer or
surveyor responsible for the plan.
(f) Boundaries of the tract determined by accurate survey in the
field which shall be balanced and closed with an error of
closure not to exceed one foot in 10,000 feet.
(g) Property lines (if any) within the development.
(h) Lot areas (if any) to 1/1,000 of an acre.
(i) Street lines, lot lines, rights-of-way, easements and areas
dedicated to or proposed to be dedicated to public use; profiles
for all streets and for proposed sanitary storm sewer mains,
inlets and manholes.
191. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-81 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-82
196:649
(j) The length of all straight lines, radii, lengths of curves and
tangent bearings for each street.
(k) All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot
and of each area proposed to be dedicated to public use.
(l) The setback line for each building.
(m) Location and width of all private driveways.
(n) Names proposed to be given to all streets.
(o) Location of all structures.
(p) Number of lots.
(q) Number of dwelling units by type and, where applicable, the
number, location and square footage of areas to be devoted to
nonresidential use.
(r) Architectural drawings to scale of all buildings.
(s) A key map showing the relationship of the property being
developed to surrounding properties, such map to be drawn at
a scale of one inch equals 800 feet and showing all streets,
roads, municipal boundaries, subdivisions and adjoining
properties within 1,000 feet of any part of the property. In the
case of development of a section of the entire tract, the key
map shall show the relationship of the section to the entire
tract.
(t) Total property area of the entire development tract and, in the
case of development in sections, the size of the section for
which plans are submitted.
(u) All permanent monuments, streetlights and other lighting.
(v) Finished contours at vertical intervals of five feet.
(w) All existing watercourses, tree masses and other significant
natural features and proposed plantings.
(2) The documentation. The application for final approval shall also be
accompanied by:
(a) Copies of deed restrictions and/or easements, if any.
(b) Information of water supply and sewage disposal, including
copies of permits obtained under authority of statutes of the
commonwealth.
(c) An affidavit that the applicant is the owner of the land
proposed to be developed.
§ 210-82 CONCORD CODE § 210-82
196:650
(d) Offers of dedication and covenants governing the reservation
and maintenance of undedicated open space, provided that all
such offers of dedication and covenants shall bear the
certificate of approval of the Township Solicitor as to their
legal sufficiency.
(e) A statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the owner or
owners of the property to the effect that the development as
shown on the application for final approval is made with his or
their free consent and that it is desired to record the
application and accompanying documents upon their approval.
(f) Whenever a developer proposes to establish a street which is
not offered for dedication and not required to be offered for
dedication, he shall submit a copy of statements cosigned by
the Township Solicitor that he has made an agreement on
behalf of his heirs and assigns with the Township. Said
agreement shall be subject to the Township Solicitor's approval
and shall be recorded with the plan. Said agreement shall
establish the conditions under which the streets may later be
offered for dedication and stipulate, among other things, that:
[1] The street shall be in a good state of repair as certified by
the Township Engineer, or that the owners of the lots along
it agree to include with the offer of dedication sufficient
money, as estimated by the Township Engineer, to restore
the street to conform with Township specifications.
[2] An offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the
street as a whole.
[3] The method of assessing repair costs shall be as
stipulated.
[4] Agreement to offer the street for dedication by the owners
of 60% of the lots shall be binding on owners of the
remaining lots.
C. In the event that the application for final approval has been filed,
together with all drawings, specifications and other documents in
support thereof, and as required by this chapter and the official written
communication of tentative approval, the Township shall, within 45
days of such filing, grant such development plan final approval.192
D. 193In the event that the development plan as submitted contains
variations from the development plan given tentative approval, the
Board of Supervisors may refuse to grant final approval and shall,
within 45 days from the filing of the application for final approval, so
192. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
193. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-82 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-82
196:651
§ 210-83. General requirements prerequisite to approval plans.
advise the landowner, in writing, of said refusal, setting forth in said
notice the reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the
public interest.
(1) In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
(a) Refile his application for final approval without the variations
objected; or
(b) File a written request with the Board of Supervisors that it hold
a public hearing on his application for final approval.
(2) If the landowner wishes to take either such alternate action he may
do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for final
approval, or within 30 additional days if the time for applying for
final approval shall have already passed at the time when the
landowner was advised that the development plan was not in
substantial compliance.
(3) In the event that the landowner shall fail to take either of these
alternate actions within said time, he shall be deemed to have
abandoned the development plan.
(4) Any such public hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice
within 30 days after request for the hearing is made by the
landowner, and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner
prescribed in this ordinance for public hearings on applications for
tentative approval. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the
hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall by official written
communication either grant final approval to the development plan
or deny final approval. The grant or denial of final approval of the
development plan shall, in cases arising under this section, be in
the form and contain the findings required for an application for
tentative approval set forth in this article.
E. A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final
approval shall be so certified without delay by the Board of Supervisors
and shall be filed of record forthwith in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds before any development shall take place in accordance
therewith. Upon the filing of record of the development plan, the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in
such plan shall cease to apply thereto. Pending completion within a
reasonable time of said planned residential development or of that part
thereof, as the case may be, that has been finally approved, no
modification of the provisions of said development plan, or part thereof,
as finally approved, shall be made except with the consent of the
landowner.
A. Improvements or guaranty thereof. Before approving any development
plan for recording, the Board of Township Supervisors shall either
§ 210-82 CONCORD CODE § 210-83
196:652
require that the necessary grading, paving and other street
improvements as required in § 210-74F hereof all have been installed in
strict accordance with the standards and specifications of the Township
or that the Township be assured by means of proper contract and
completion guaranty, as set forth in Subsection B hereof, that the
improvements will subsequently be installed by the developer. Where
the development plan has been approved and recorded, either after
the specified improvements have been completed and approved by the
Board of Township Supervisors or, if prior to completion, upon proper
completion guaranty as aforesaid, purchasers and mortgagees of lots in
the development with or without buildings thereon or on any of them
shall be relieved of any and all liability for any deficiency in lack of or
failure to complete the improvements above mentioned as set out in
said plan or required as a condition precedent to the approval of the
plan of development, and any failure to complete or properly complete
said improvements shall not encumber any or all of the lots in the
development.
B. Agreement to complete improvements. In all cases where the necessary
grading, paving and other street improvements required herein shall
not have been installed in strict accordance with the standards and
specifications of the Township, the developer shall enter into a written
agreement with the Township in the manner and form approved by the
Township Solicitor, wherein the developer shall agree, to the extent
applicable:
(1) To construct or cause to be constructed, at his own expense, all
streets, bridges, culverts, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks,
water systems, drainage facilities, streetlighting facilities, street
signs, monuments, sanitary sewerage, street shade trees and parks
and other improvements shown on said development plan, all in
strict accordance with standards and specifications of the
Township and within the time specified in said agreement.
(2) To make adequate provision with the Township Engineer for the
inspection of the construction of the aforesaid improvements to
assure compliance with Township standards and specifications.
(3) To maintain at his own cost said streets, bridges, culverts, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water systems, drainage facilities,
streetlighting facilities, street signs, monuments, sanitary
sewerage, street shade trees, parks and other improvements until
the same are accepted or condemned by the Township for public
use and for a period of two years thereafter to repair and
reconstruct the same or any part of one of them when such repair
or reconstruction shall be specified by the Board of Supervisors as
necessary by reasons of faulty construction, workmanship or
materials.
(4) To pay all costs, charges or rates of the utility furnishing electric
service for the streetlighting facilities installed by the developer
§ 210-83 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-83
196:653
until such time as the streets shown on the development plans
shall have been accepted or condemned by the Township for public
use and to indemnify and save harmless the Township from and
against all suits, actions, claims and demands for electric service
as aforesaid, or any part thereof, to the time that said streets
shall be accepted or condemned as public streets in the manner
hereinabove set forth.
(5) To post contemporaneous with the execution of such agreement a
bond, with corporate surety approved by the Township Supervisors,
in such amount not less than 110% of the cost of all improvements,
and in a form approved by the Township Solicitor, for the use of the
Township (or in lieu of a bond, cash or negotiable securities in
escrow deposited in a bank approved by the Township Supervisors
pursuant to an escrow agreement in a form approved by the
Township Solicitor), conditioned upon the developer's proper
completion of the improvements as set forth in Subsection A hereof
and the developer's maintenance and repair of the same for the
period of 18 months following completion.194
(6) At or before the acceptance or condemnation of the improvements
by the Township for public use, to post a bond with corporate
surety approved by the Township Supervisors in an amount not less
than 15% of the guaranty set by Subsection B(5) hereof and in a
form approved by the Township Solicitor (or in lieu of a bond, cash
or negotiable securities in escrow, deposit in a bank approved by
the Township Supervisors pursuant to an escrow agreement in a
form approved by the Township Solicitor), conditioned upon the
developer's repair or reconstruction of the improvements for the
period of 18 months following the acceptance or condemnation of
the same by the Township for public use where specified by the
Township as necessary by reason of faulty construction,
workmanship or materials.195
(7) To reimburse the Township promptly for reasonable attorney's,
engineers' and inspection fees and to obtain and pay for the
easements and deeds of dedication and leases required above.
(8) To file two copies of a final plan with the Board of Supervisors
accurately showing the location of all buried utility lines,
underground drains, spring heads, storm drainage lines and
permanent development monuments, as a condition precedent to
acceptance of the streets and other required improvements.
(9) The provisions of this Subsection B shall not relieve the developer
from the penalties provided for in the Second Class Township
Code196 for violation of the resolution.
194. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
195. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
196. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
§ 210-83 CONCORD CODE § 210-83
196:654
C. Security for completion of improvements. In all cases where the
necessary grading, paving and other street improvements required
herein shall not have been installed in strict accordance with the
standards and specifications of the Township, no development plan
shall be approved unless and until a bond shall have been posted or
escrow funds deposited as set forth in Subsection B(5) hereof,
conditioned upon the developer's proper completion of the
improvements, and his maintenance and repair thereof for the period of
18 months following completion. No improvements shall be accepted or
condemned by the Township for public use unless and until a bond shall
have been posted or escrow funds deposited as set forth in Subsection
B(6) hereof, conditioned upon the developer's repair or construction of
the improvements for the period of 18 months following the acceptance
or condemnation of the same by the Township for the public use where
specified by the Township as necessary by reason of faulty construction,
workmanship or materials. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
§ 210-83 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-83
196:655

ARTICLE XI
R-PRD-2 Residence — Planned Residential Development District
[Amended 2-4-1986 by Ord. No. 148]
§ 210-84. Purposes.
The purposes are:
§ 210-85. (Reserved)197
A. To recognize the need for rational direction for increasing land
development and to meet the growing need for housing of all types,
while at the same time to minimize the loss of open countryside, to
preserve the atmosphere of the Township, to forestall inadequacies in
community services and facilities and to protect property values in
existing residential areas.
B. To encourage innovations in residential development and renewal so
that the growing demand for housing may be met by greater variety in
type or design and layout of dwellings and by conservation and more
efficient use of open space ancillary to said dwellings.
C. To provide greater opportunities for better housing and recreation for
all who are or will be residents of the Township.
D. To encourage a more efficient use of land and public services and to
reflect changes in the technology of land development so that the
economies so secured may enure to the benefit of those who need
homes.
E. To encourage more flexible land development which will respect and
conserve natural resources such as streams, lakes, floodplains,
groundwater, wooded areas, steeply sloped areas and areas of unusual
beauty or importance to the natural ecosystem.
F. In aid of these purposes, to provide a procedure which can relate the
type, design and layout of residential development to the particular site
and the particular demand for housing existing at the time of
development in a manner consistent with the preservation of the
property values within existing residential areas and to assure that the
increased flexibility of regulations over land development established
hereby is carried out pursuant to sound, expeditious and fair
administrative standards and procedures and to design the abovementioned
procedure so that it permits higher densities in the areas
recognized in the Comprehensive Plan as most capable of receiving and
supporting such densities.
197. Editor's Note: Former § 210-85, Definitions, was repealed 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231. See
now § 210-4.
§ 210-84 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-86
196:657
§ 210-86. Approving body.
The Board of Supervisors shall administer the provisions of this article,
which administration shall include the approval, modification or disapproval
of any development plan; provided, however, that subject to any
inconsistent provisions of the Planning Code, the Board of Supervisors
may by resolution from time to time designate the Township Planning
Commission as the official agency of the Board of Supervisors for any or all
of such purposes, either generally or with respect to one or more specific
developments, and may from time to time by resolution revoke or amend
any such designations.
§ 210-87. Eligibility.
No application for tentative approval of a planned residential development
shall be considered or approved unless the following conditions are met:
§ 210-88. Permitted uses. [Amended 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 218]
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the purposes set forth in this section and for no other,
provided that the demolition of or special exception or conditional use
for an historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map198 or any
subdivision, land development or construction activity within 300 feet of an
historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map shall be subject to
the provisions of Article XIXA relating to historic preservation.
A. The proposed planned residential development consists of one or more
contiguous parcels of land under one ownership containing 50 or more
acres of land, located in a R-PRD Planned Residential District of the
Township.
B. The proposed planned residential development will be connected to
public water and sanitary sewer systems.
C. Both water supply and sewage disposal system shall be operational at
the time of occupancy of the first completed structure.
D. The proposed development is found to be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for Concord Township.
A. Uses by right.
(1) Residential uses. It is the objective of this article to encourage the
utilization of a variety of housing types in planned residential
developments. A mix of housing types appropriate to the site
determined according to the provisions set forth in §§ 210-90B(2)
and 210-93A and subject to the approval of the Board may include
the following residential uses:
198. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-86 CONCORD CODE § 210-88
196:658
§ 210-89. Density.
§ 210-90. Design standards.
(a) Detached single-family dwellings.
(b) Semiattached single-family dwellings.
(c) Attached single-family dwellings (townhouses).
B. Uses by special exception. [Added 11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 325]
(1) A cellular telecommunications facility with antennas attached to a
nonresidential building or a structure of a permitted church,
municipal or governmental building or facility and a building or
structure owned by a public utility regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, subject to the applicable provisions of
Articles XXA and XXVIII.
A. The maximum possible average gross density computed over the entire
planned residential development shall be one dwelling unit per acre.
B. Not less than 50% of the total area of the planned residential
development shall be designated as and devoted to common open
space.
C. No more commercial development shall be allowed than expert market
analysis shows, to the satisfaction of the Board, will be needed to serve
the resident population of the planned residential development.
D. A density bonus of up to 10% of the permitted average gross density for
the PRD may be granted by the Board of Supervisors, at its discretion,
in the event that the applicant transfers land to the Township for public
use in excess of the minimum fifty-percent open space requirement for
a PRD, provided that the area of the land to be transferred represents at
least 10% of the gross tract area of the proposed PRD. The land
transferred to the Township for public use may be a part of the PRD
tract or may be located on a contiguous tract anywhere within the
Township. [Added 2-5-1989 by Ord. No. 171]
A. General.
(1) Community impact analysis. An analysis of the impact of
development of the site upon public facilities, utilities and roadway
systems will be required in accordance with the procedures of
§ 210-93A and B.
B. Landscaping.
(1) Landscaping shall be regarded as an essential feature of every
planned residential development. In addition to the preservation of
natural features, trees and slopes of the site, careful attention shall
§ 210-88 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-90
196:659
be given to landscaping of parking areas and provisions of street
trees as required by this article.
(2) In order to determine the suitability of specific areas of the total
PRD site for specific land uses and land use intensities, a thorough
analysis of the natural features of the site will be required in
accordance with § 210-93. The following subject categories must
be included in such an analysis:
(a) Hydrology. Analysis of natural drainage patterns in site area,
including denoting surface water, marsh, floodplain,
permanent high-water table and seasonal high-water table
areas throughout the site.
(b) Geological. Analysis of characteristics of rock formations
underlying the site, including defining aquifers (particularly
those subject to pollution), shallow bedrock areas and areas in
which formations are unstable.
(c) Soils. Analysis of types of soils present in the site area,
including defining of prime agricultural soils, aquifer recharge
soils areas, unstable soils and soils susceptible to erosion.
(d) Topography. Analysis of terrain of site, including designation of
slope areas over 25% and between 15% and 25%.199
(e) Vegetation. Analysis of land cover of site, including
designations of forest and woodland areas, meadowland areas
and areas with little or no land cover.
(3) Landscaping shall be planned and effectuated in the planned
residential development so as to integrate buildings with their
surrounding lands and to present a total pattern throughout the
site. The use of berms is encouraged. In the planning and
effectuation of such landscaping as well as in the effectuation of
Subsection B(4) and (5) of this section, the developer shall be
guided by the following criteria. Plant material, including both
deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs, shall be chosen on the
basis of:
(a) Aesthetic values such as autumn coloration, flowers, fruit, bark
and crown characteristics, susceptibility and dieback.
(b) Susceptibility to insect and disease infestation and air
pollution.
(c) Species longevity.
(d) Wind firmness and suitability of plant material to soil types.
199. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-90 CONCORD CODE § 210-90
196:660
(e) Wildlife values (ability of plant material such as oak, hickory,
dogwood and walnut to provide food for bird and animal life).
(f) Trees and shrubs which are prone to cause pavement heaving
or whose roots have a tendency to invade water and sewer
lines (i.e., poplar, willow, silver and Norway maple, beech) shall
not be planted where their presence will result in pavement
heaving or the clogging of mains and drains.
(g) Where land is open or barren, the planting of trees is
encouraged.
(4) The protection of trees of eight-inch caliper or over measured 4.5
feet off the ground shall be a factor in determining the location of
open space, buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas,
playgrounds, parking areas and finished grade levels. [Amended
2-5-1989 by Ord. No. 171]
(5) The development shall be designed and programmed so as to
minimize earthmoving, erosion, tree clearance and the destruction
of natural amenities. Natural features, such as lakes, streams and
wooded slopes, shall be preserved and incorporated into the final
landscaping of the development, wherever possible and desirable.
The applicant shall demonstrate the means whereby trees and
other natural features shall be protected during construction.
Wherever possible, scenic points, historic spots and other
community assets and landmarks shall be preserved.
(6) Seeding, sodding and other planting shall be applied to stabilize
topsoil on steep slopes and to enhance the appearance of open
space. This program must be approved by the Soil Conservation
District of the Federal Soil Conservation Service. Excessive cuts
and fills shall be avoided. Topsoil shall not be stripped, covered or
removed from the development site.
(7) Erosion control measures, such as minimizing the areas of exposed
soil, mulching, building silt catchment basins and planting
temporary ground cover, shall be instituted as necessary. All
construction, including grading and regrading, shall be
accomplished under and in accordance with the conservation plan
required by § 210-93A of this article. Where adequate surface
drainage is not possible by grading alone, a supplementary
drainage system approved by the Township Engineer will be
required.
(8) All parking areas shall be landscaped. The interior of each lot shall
have one two-inch-caliper shade tree for every four cars.
(9) Wherever the site is not naturally wooded, shade trees shall be
provided along all streets. No fewer than two two-inch-caliper trees
measured 4.5 feet off the ground shall be planted for each twentyfive-
foot section of collector streets. For the purpose of these
§ 210-90 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-90
196:661
regulations, street trees are limited to the following: honey locust,
red oak, columnar-typo maples, sugar maple and sweet gum.
(10) Subject to the approval of the review agency, the planting strip or
utility strip between the curb and sidewalk may be moved and
placed into an acceptable public park area on an equal basis,
resulting in an integral curb, gutter and sidewalk treatment where
this is accomplished. Where integral curb, gutter and sidewalk is
permitted, a planting and utility easement shall be required. The
combined dimension of such sidewalk and planting and utility
easement together shall not exceed the residual dimension of road
right-of-way measured from the back of the curb to the right-of-way
line for each side, respectively. Such integral treatment shall,
however, not be permitted on arterial or collector thoroughfares.
Areas within planting strips cannot be used to enable larger lot
sizes or used for park purposes.
C. Buildings.
(1) All housing shall be designed with regard to the topography and
natural features of the site. The effects of prevailing winds,
seasonal temperatures and hours of sunlight on the physical layout
and form of the proposed buildings shall be taken into account.
(2) The approximate location and arrangement of buildings and open
spaces must be shown to the Board on tentative plans so that it may
review the intensity of land use and serve the public interest by
protecting neighboring land uses.
(3) Good quality development is encouraged by taking into
consideration the appearance of all elevations and layouts of
buildings and external spaces and materials used therein.
(4) Variation of conventional siting practices such as building setbacks
from streets and minimum distances between buildings may be
required by the Board in order to produce a more attractive and
interesting arrangement of buildings.
(5) All housing shall be sited so as to ensure natural light for all
principal rooms and to enhance privacy within and adjacent to the
planned residential development.
(6) Housing and other facilities near the periphery of the planned
residential development shall be designed so as to be harmonious
with neighboring areas.
(7) Townhouses shall be arranged in groups or clusters and not in long
rows parallel to street lines.
(8) Single-family houses, semidetached houses and townhouses may
be arranged so as to provide for individual lots for each unit or may
§ 210-90 CONCORD CODE § 210-90
196:662
be arranged as rental units or condominiums. [Amended
2-5-1989 by Ord. No. 171; 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
(a) Sufficient yard areas shall be set aside and designated on the
plan for each type of housing so that, on an average,
throughout the development:
[1] The maximum net residential density for attached housing
(townhouse) use areas shall not exceed eight dwelling
units per acre.
[2] The maximum net residential density for semidetached
housing areas shall not exceed six dwelling units per acre.
[3] The maximum not residential density for single-family
detached housing areas shall not exceed three units per
acre.
(b) The acreage set aside for common open space, rights-of-way of
public streets or specific lots or areas set aside for commercial,
institutional or other purposes shall not be used for
computation of net residential density for any residential use.
(9) No structure shall be less than 50 feet from the property lines of
the development and a planting strip of trees and shrubs as defined
of at least 50 feet wide shall be provided along all property lines at
the periphery of the development where necessary to protect the
privacy of the neighboring residents.
(10)No structure shall be within 50 feet of the right-of-way of access
roads or of common parking areas.
(11)No structure shall be erected within 30 feet of any other structure.
(12) There shall be a minimum of 50 feet between any wall containing
10% or more of principal windows in living areas and any other
such wall.
(13) In order to promote good design of dwelling and structures, the
review agency may vary the terms of these requirements, where
necessary.
(14) Each townhouse building shall be provided with not less than the
following space standards: [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No.
177]
(a) Heights and area requirements.
[1] Maximum heights. No building shall exceed the height of
35 feet or four stories (exclusive of basements), whichever
is greater. No accessory building shall exceed 20 feet in
height. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221200]
§ 210-90 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-90
196:663
[2] Maximum building length. In no case shall a wall of any
townhouse building exceed 225 feet in length in not more
than five residential units.
[3] Bedroom restriction. Not more than four bedrooms shall
be permitted in any one townhouse.
[4] Yards.
[a] Front yards. There shall be a front yard not less than
40 feet in depth between any townhouse building or
accessory building wall and any public street. If said
street is designated as an arterial or collector street,
then the front yard depth shall not be less than 50
feet.
[b] Side and rear yards. There shall be side and rear yards
not less than 30 feet in depth.
[c] Inner courtyards. Whenever a two-story or two-andone-
half-story apartment house faces on a rectangular
inner court, the minimum width and length of the
court shall be 60 feet. When all apartment houses
facing on a rectangular inner court are one story in
height, the minimum width and length of the court
shall be 40 feet. All such courts shall have a minimum
of four openings permitting access from outside the
building groups into the court. These openings shall
be at least 10 feet in width between buildings and may
be covered by a roof, but not by any other part of a
building.
[d] Outer courtyards. The minimum width of any outer
court shall be 40 feet, and its depth shall not exceed
its width.
[e] Special conditions.
[i] No building intended for human occupancy on any
lot shall intrude into the area enclosed by the arc
of a circle with a radius of 60 feet extending 45°
on each side of a line perpendicular to the center
of any window other than a bathroom, bedroom or
kitchen window. If both buildings involved are one
story in height, the radius of the circle may be
reduced to 40 feet. This limitation shall not apply
to any wall of the same or another building the
plane of which intersects the plane of the wall in
which the window is mounted at an exterior angle
200. Editor's Note: This amendment is provided for in Schedule B of this ordinance (see Ch. 1,
Art. I, § 1-6A).
§ 210-90 CONCORD CODE § 210-90
196:664
of 90° or more. No window of an apartment shall
be so situated such that the projection of a line
perpendicular to the wall within which said
window is mounted from any point within the
jambs of said window or within four feet outside
the jambs of said window shall intersect the wall
of the same or another apartment house within 40
feet.
[ii] In no case shall the wall of an apartment house be
less than 10 feet from the wall of the same or
another apartment house measured along any line
perpendicular to either wall.
[iii] The front of any apartment shall not face the rear
of any other apartment unless the distance
between the apartments is at least 60 feet and the
service entries are screened by a continuous wall
or fence at least six feet high.
(15) Building height. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
(a) Maximum height. No building shall exceed the height of 50
feet or four stories (exclusive of basements), whichever is
greater. No accessory building shall exceed 20 feet in height.
(16) Dwelling unit structures shall be located and sited so as to promote
pedestrian and visual access to common open space wherever
possible.
D. Nonresidential uses.
(1) Shopping areas within the planned residential development shall
be located so as not to interfere with the residential character of
nearby dwelling units. Parking and loading places must be carefully
screened from view of adjacent residential development.
(2) All commercial uses shall be located in a single area of the planned
residential development.
(3) Commercial and other such nonresidential uses are limited in total
extent as follows:
(a) No more than 2,400 square feet for every 100 dwelling units
may be devoted to commercial areas.
(b) No one single commercial area shall have a total of more than
2,400 square feet of floor area.
(c) One parking space shall be provided for every 400 square feet
of commercial floor area.
§ 210-90 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-90
196:665
(d) No commercial use shall be included except those in the C-1
Local Commercial District.
(4) Commercial uses otherwise permitted in a development shall be in
a separate commercial building and not in a residence. Any
commercial structure shall be of an architectural design
compatible with that of the adjacent residential structures.
(5) Signs for commercial uses are permitted subject to the following
restrictions:
(a) A single, permanently installed, freestanding sign for the
commercial center is permitted. Such signs shall be limited to
a height of 15 feet with a total area of 30 square feet.
(b) Signs for individual uses shall be permitted on the structure.
Roof signs or freestanding signs for individual uses are
prohibited. Such signs shall be limited to the width of the store
and shall be no more than 12 square feet in area and shall be
mounted flush on the structure. Signs should be of similar
design.
(c) Signs may be illuminated by shielded floodlights, provided that
such lighting is designed and located so as to direct light away
from adjacent residences.
(d) No sign shall have a flashing, moving, rotating, oscillating,
shuttered or similar device.
(6) Community recreational areas, such as swimming pools and
outdoor skating rinks, shall be located so as not to interfere with
the residential character of adjacent dwelling units and shall
conform with Township ordinances and regulations.
E. Utilities.
(1) All streets, off-street parking areas and areas of high pedestrian
use shall be adequately lighted. All such lighting shall be designed
and located so as to direct light away from adjacent residences.
Adequate lighting shall be provided after dark. Appropriate
lighting fixtures shall be provided for walkways and to identify
steps, ramps and signs. Such lighting shall be designed and located
so as to direct light away from adjacent residences.
(2) The requirements for lighting may be waived by the Board, where
density of development may not justify its use.
(3) Electric, telephone and all other utility facilities shall be installed
underground by the subdivider unless, in the opinion of the Board
of Township Supervisors, special conditions require otherwise. In
such event, such installations shall be as directed by the Board.
§ 210-90 CONCORD CODE § 210-90
196:666
(4) Where telephone and electric service lines are placed
underground, conduits or cables shall be placed within easement
or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with
other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be
located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
(5) Easements shall be provided to account for the distribution of unit
substations to service the area. The design of the utility structures
should be architecturally compatible with the surrounding
structures.
(6) The storm sewage for a planned residential development shall be
designed and constructed subject to the determinations of the site
analysis of the natural features and so as to minimize erosion,
flooding and runoff, using, as necessary, drainage easements,
swales, catchment basins, silt traps and design of cartways so as to
minimize runoff. Design is to be based upon an anticipated two
inches per hour rainfall, with one-hundred-percent runoff.
(7) Drainage facilities shall be provided:
(a) To permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses;
(b) To ensure adequate drainage of all points along the line of
streets; and
(c) To intercept stormwater runoff along streets, at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
(8) In the design of drainage facilities, special consideration shall be
given to problems that may arise from concentration of stormwater
runoff over adjacent properties and roads.
(9) Storm sewer, as required, shall be placed in back of the curb when
located in a street or right-of-way. When located in undedicated
land, they shall be placed within an easement not less than 20 feet
wide, as approved by the Township. Open ditches shall be limited in
length as required.
(10) In some cases, stormwater must travel in original stream beds or in
open channels. Concreted or riprapped channels shall be required.
Open channels, whether concreted or not, shall generally be
straightened, widened or otherwise adjusted to conform to
hydraulic requirements.
(11) Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of 18 inches and a
minimum grade of 0.5%. Changes in alignment shall be by straight
sections connected by inlets or manholes.
(12) Where storm sewer passes between houses, sufficient width shall
be allowed between houses to accommodate said sewer. The
ground shall drain in the same direction as the sewer. No pockets
or craters shall be left in the road or on the ground.
§ 210-90 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-90
196:667
(13) Manholes shall be not more than 300 feet apart on sizes up to 24
inches and not more than 450 feet apart on greater sizes. Inlets
may be substituted for manholes on approval by the Township.
(14) Inlets and manhole covers and frames shall conform to Township
standards. At street intersections, inlets shall be placed in the
tangent and not in the curved portion of the curbing. Inlets shall
generally be Pennsylvania Standard Combination Special Inlets.
They shall be located at intersections and, as needed, between
intersections. Inlets shall be required when the design flow in any
gutter exceeds seven cubic feet per second. They shall be designed
to deliver a rainfall intensity of 2 1/2 inches per hour with onehundred-
percent runoff. The upstream end of the inlet shall be
recessed by 10 inches and shall be depressed to show eight inches
or more of curb face instead of six inches as shown elsewhere.
Inlets shall be so placed in an intersection that rainwater shall not
have to cross any road before entering.
(15) Bridges and culverts shall have ample water way to carry expected
flows. Culverts shall be provided with wing walls and constructed
for the full width of the right-of-way. Bridges shall be provided with
a paved flow line and with deep aprons and wing walls at each end.
Bridges shall be constructed no narrower than the cartway of the
road they serve; and, in addition, sidewalks on both sides shall be
required.
(16) Land subject to flooding.
(a) Land subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health or
property and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable
shall not be platted for residential or institutional occupancy or
for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or
property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard.
(b) Such land within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plat
for uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional
inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living
conditions.
(c) Where flooding is known to have occurred within an area
shown on the plat, such area shall be clearly marked "subject
to periodic flooding" and shall not be platted in streets and lots.
(17) Planned residential development shall be provided with water
supply systems through one of the following methods:
(a) Connection to a public water system is required where a public
water system is accessible to the planned residential
development site, the word "accessible" being defined here
and elsewhere in this subsection as "within 500 yards." Where
the public water system is not yet accessible to the site, but is
planned for extension to the area, the developer shall provide
§ 210-90 CONCORD CODE § 210-90
196:668
adequate facilities for future connection to the projected
extension of the public system.
(b) Provision by the developer of a central water supply system
serving the entire development where a public water system is
not accessible to the site. Central water supply systems shall
be designed and constructed in a manner that will permit
adequate connection with the public water system when the
public water system becomes accessible to the site. The design
and construction of such a central water supply system shall
also conform to the current applicable standards of the
municipal water authority, the State Department of
Environmental Protection and, where applicable, the
Pennsylvania Utilities Commission and Delaware River Basin
Commission.
(c) If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells
owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within
the proposed development, applicants shall present evidence
to the Board of Supervisors or the Planning Commission, as the
case may be, that the proposed development is to be supplied
by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association
of lot owners or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility.
A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for
such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or
agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.201
(18) Planned residential developments shall be provided with sanitary
sewer systems through the following method:
(a) Connection to a public sewer system is required.
(19) Refuse stations to serve residential, recreational or commercial
areas shall be verminproof and shall be designed with suitable
screening and located so as to be convenient for trash removal and
not offensive to nearby residential area.
F. Streets.
(1) The street system of the planned residential development shall be
designed so as to:
(a) Create a separation of automobile and pedestrian circulation
through a hierarchy of roadway functions and design and
pedestrian walkways.
(b) Relate harmoniously with land uses within and adjacent to the
PRD.
201. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-90 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-90
196:669
(c) Create efficient and safer connections with the existing road
systems of the municipality in order to ensure proper ingress
and egress to and from the PRD.
(d) Minimize through traffic in residential areas.
(e) Streets shall be constructed in accordance with street
specifications of the Township. [Added 2-5-1989 by Ord. No.
171]
(2) Location and arrangement of streets.
(a) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location
of all streets shall conform to the Official Map of Concord
Township as adopted or amended and shall be considered in
their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical
conditions, to public convenience and safety and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be
served by such streets.
(b) Where such is not shown in the Official Map, the arrangement
of streets in the development shall either provide for the
continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal
streets in surrounding areas; or conform to a plan for the
neighborhood approved or adopted by the Board of Township
Supervisors to meet a particular situation where topographical
or other conditions make continuance or conformance to
existing streets impracticable.
(c) Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
(d) To facilitate snow removal and to permit easy access for firefighting
equipment and delivery trucks, dead-end streets (culsde-
sac), designed to be so permanently, shall be provided at the
closed end with a turnaround having an outside cartway radius
of at least 40 feet and a right-of-way line radius of at least 50
feet. Such streets shall be not longer than 600 feet, measured
from its intersecting center line to the center of the
turnaround, except where topographical or other conditions
make this limitation impracticable as determined by the Board.
(e) Collector streets shall have sidewalks. Secondary streets shall
have sidewalks as deemed necessary by the Board.
(3) Access to streets.
(a) Where a development abuts or contains a present or proposed
arterial or collector street, the Board shall require reverse
frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
easement along the rear property line, marginal access street
or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate
§ 210-90 CONCORD CODE § 210-90
196:670
protection of residential properties and other abutting
properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.
(b) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where control thereof is vested in the Township under
conditions approved by the Board of Township Supervisors.
When the development adjoins unsubdivided acreage, new
streets shall be provided through to the boundary lines of the
development with temporary easements for turnaround.
(4) Street intersections.
(a) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 150 feet shall be
avoided.
(b) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at
less than 60°.
(c) Right-of-way lines at street intersections shall be rounded with
a radius of 35 feet or of a greater radius where the Board may
permit comparable cutoffs or chords in place of rounded
corners. [Amended 2-5-1989 by Ord. No. 171]
(d) To the fullest extent possible, intersections with major traffic
streets shall not be located less than 800 feet apart, measured
from center line to center line.
(e) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets shall be avoided, and where such avoidance is
impossible, such intersections shall be designed with extreme
care for both vehicular and pedestrian safety.
(f) Grades at intersections shall be in conformance with
Subsection F(7)(c) below. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No.
177]
(g) Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections of
streets. There shall be a clear sight triangle measuring 75 feet
along the intersecting street lines from the point of
intersection indicated on the plan that is maintained free and
clear of shrubs, structures, signs and other visual obstructions.
(h) The intersection should be designed and graded to allow for
proper drainage.
(5) Street widths and building setback lines.
(a) Street right-of-way, cartway widths shall be as determined by
resolution by the Board. Streets serving an apartment site and
grounds, where not required for use as fire lanes, may have a
minimum right-of-way width of 25 feet and a minimum cartway
width of 18 feet and shall have a durable and well-drained
§ 210-90 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-90
196:671
surface. The location of such streets is subject to the approval
of the Board.
(b) 202Additional rights-of-way and cartway widths than those
specified by the Board of Township Supervisors in order to
lessen traffic congestion, to secure safety from fire, panic and
other dangers, to facilitate the adequate provision for
transportation and other public requirements or to promote
the general welfare shall be as follows:
Street Type Cartway Width
Collector street 24 feet(excluding shoulder
development as paved bicycle
trail)
Secondary-residential street 22 feet (excluding shoulder
development as paved bicycle
trail)
Drive 20 feet
Shared driveway 16 feet
Double driveway 16 feet
Single driveway 10 feet
(c) Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing street or
inadequate right-of-way width, additional right-of-way width
shall be dedicated to conform to the standards established in
this Subsection F(5). [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
(6) Street alignment.
(a) Except for secondary-residential streets, there shall be a
tangent of at least 100 feet measured at the center line
between curves.
(b) The minimum radius at the center line for curves on collector
streets shall be 300 feet, and for secondary-residential streets
it shall be 150 feet. Proper superelevation shall be provided for
curves less than 600 feet in radius on collector streets.
(7) Street grades.
(a) Streets grades shall not exceed the following:
Street Type Percent Grade
Collector 6%
Secondary-residential 10%
202. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-90 CONCORD CODE § 210-90
196:672
(b) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding 1%
and shall be designed in relation to the extent of grade change
and to provide the following minimum lengths of curves:
[1] For over crests (summits), for each 4% difference in
gradients, 125 feet in length of curve shall be provided.
[2] For under crests (sags), for each 4% difference in
gradients, 100 feet in length of curve.
(c) Where the grade of any street at the approach to an
intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided
having a minimum length of 50 feet measured back from the
street line within which no grade shall exceed a maximum of
5%. Furthermore, the maximum grade within an intersection
shall not exceed 1%.
(d) No street grade shall be less than 0.5%.
(e) All streets shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way.
Maximum side slopes within the right-of-way shall not exceed
one and one-half feet horizontal to one vertical (1.5:1) and shall
be adequately stabilized with appropriate plant materials.
(8) Street names.
(a) No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall
be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(9) Street signs and lighting.
(a) Street name signs conforming to Township specifications shall
be erected and painted in accordance with said specifications
at all street intersections or junctions in all developments at
the expense of the developer.
(b) The developer shall install or cause to be installed, at the
developer's expense, such streetlighting facilities as may be
deemed adequate and as may be prescribed at the time the
development plan is approved, and the developer shall pay the
cost of operating said streetlights until such time as the street
or streets upon which said lights are installed shall be accepted
by resolution of the Board of Township Supervisors and
consented to by the Court of Quarter Sessions, as part of the
public road system of the Township, or until the Board
condemns such street or streets for use as a public street.
(10) Easements.
(a) Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall
be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least
20 feet wide.
§ 210-90 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-90
196:673
(b) Where a development is traversed by a watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such
further width or construction, or both as will be adequate for
the purpose.
(c) The area occupied by required easement shall be provided in
addition to the required net lot area specified herein.
(11)Walkways.
(a) Pedestrian walkways with a minimum right-of-way of 12 feet
and a minimum pavement width of four feet shall be required
where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and
other community facilities.
G. Parking.
(1) Each dwelling unit must have space to park two automobiles off the
street. Spaces must be 10 feet by 20 feet and, in parking areas,
aisles 22 feet wide.
(2) There shall be 300 square feet of off-street parking space, in 10 feet
by 20 feet spaces, for each 100 square feet of commercial space
exclusive of storage areas. In addition, paved truck loading areas
shall be provided such that all loading, unloading and maneuvering
can be accommodated within these areas.
(3) Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent structures, access
roads and traffic arteries by hedges, dense planting, earth berms,
changes in grade or walls. All parking areas shall be a minimum of
50 feet from all structures, access roads and traffic arterials.
(4) Parking areas shall be arranged so as to prevent through traffic to
other parking areas.
(5) No more than 15 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous
row without being interrupted by approved landscaping.
(6) No more than 60 parking spaces shall be accommodated in any
single parking area.
(7) Off-street parking or loading areas shall be surfaced with a
pervious asphaltic pavement, if the Township Engineer finds that
the soil will permit a pervious pavement. Otherwise, an impervious
pavement shall be laid. [Amended 2-5-1989 by Ord. No. 171]
H. Open space.
(1) The open space shall be located so as to be consistent with the
objectives set forth in the application for planned residential
§ 210-90 CONCORD CODE § 210-90
196:674
§ 210-91. Management of open space.
development. Where possible, it shall be designed as a contiguous
area easily accessible to the residents, and preserving and
enhancing natural features.
(2) Areas set aside for open space shall be suitable for the designated
purpose and in any event shall be consistent with the plan policy for
future land use in the Township. Any such area shall contain no
structure other than a structure related to the purposes of open
spaces.
I. Fire lanes and hydrants.
(1) No dwelling unit or part of a unit shall be located more than 200
feet from a duly improved and accessible fire lane, as defined
below, nor more than 600 feet from a private or public street or a
fire hydrant. All fire hydrants and fire lanes shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Fire Chief. [Amended 2-5-1989 by Ord.
No. 171]
(2) Fire lanes shall have a minimum unobstructed right-of-way width of
40 feet; and there shall be constructed within this right-of-way an
all-weather and well-drained surfaced cartway with a minimum
width of 24 feet. Rolled gutters or upright curbs may be required by
the Board. The extension of fire lanes shall begin from one or more
private or public streets. [Amended 2-5-1989 by Ord. No. 171]
(3) Dead-end fire lanes shall be terminated with an unobstructed
vehicular turnaround or cul-de-sac with a minimum right-of-way
radius of 50 feet and shall have a minimum surfaced radius of 40
feet. Dead-end fire lanes shall have a maximum length of 600 feet.
[Amended 2-5-1989 by Ord. No. 171]
(4) The location of fire lanes shall conform to plans for the extension of
streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewer and other
drainage facilities and public utilities as contained in this chapter
and other ordinances of the Township of Concord and shall provide
adequate access to buildings by firemen and other emergency
services.
(5) Fire hydrants must be provided by the developer. The number, type
and location of fire hydrants and the size and rate of flow of feeder
lines shall be subject to the approval of the Township Fire Chief.
(6) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until fire lanes are
constructed and hydrants tested and approved by the Borough Fire
Chief.
A. There shall be provisions which ensure that the open space land shall
continue as such and be properly maintained.
§ 210-90 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-91
196:675
(1) The developer shall either:
(a) Dedicate such land to public use if the Township or another
public agency has indicated it will accept such dedication;
(b) Retain ownership and responsibility for maintenance of such
open space land; or
(c) Provide for and establish one or more organizations for the
ownership and maintenance of all common open space.
(2) In the case of Subsection A(1)(c) above, each organization shall be
a nonprofit homeowners' corporation, unless the developer
demonstrates that a community open space trust is a more
appropriate form of organization.
B. If a homeowners' association or open space trust is formed, it shall be
governed according to the following regulations:
(1) The organization is organized by the developer and operating with
financial subsidization by the developer, if necessary, before the
sale of any lots within the development.
(2) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers of
dwelling units therein and their successors.
(3) The organization shall be responsible for maintenance of and
insurance and taxes on common open space.
(4) The members of the organization shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining and developing common open space, in accordance
with procedures established by them.
(5) The organization shall have or hire adequate staff to administer
common facilities and maintain the common open space.
(6) Maintenance.
(a) In the event that the organization established to own and
maintain a common open space, or any successor organization,
shall at any time after establishment of the planned residential
development fail to maintain the common open space in
reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
development plan, the Township may serve written notice upon
such organization or upon the residents and owners of the
planned residential development setting forth the manner in
which the organization has failed to maintain the common open
space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a
demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within
30 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a hearing
thereon which shall be held within 14 days of the notice. At
such hearing, the Township may modify the terms of the
original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension
§ 210-91 CONCORD CODE § 210-91
196:676
of time within which they shall be cured. If the deficiencies
set forth in the original notice or in the modification thereof
shall not be cured within said 30 days or any extension thereof,
the Township, in order to preserve the taxable values of the
properties within the planned residential development and to
prevent the common open space from becoming a public
nuisance, may enter upon said common open space and
maintain the same for a period of one year. Said entry and
maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use
the common open space except when the same is voluntarily
dedicated to the public by the residents and owners. Before the
expiration of said year the Township shall, upon its initiative
or upon the request of the organization theretofore responsible
for the maintenance of the common open space, call a public
hearing upon notice to such organizations or to the residents
and owners of the planned residential development, who shall
show cause why such maintenance by the Township shall not,
at the election of the Township, continue for a succeeding year.
If the Township shall determine that such organization is ready
and able to maintain said common open space in reasonable
condition, the Township shall cease to maintain said common
open space at the end of said year. If the Township shall
determine such organization is not ready and able to maintain
said common open space in a reasonable condition, the
Township may, in its discretion, continue to maintain said
common open space during the next succeeding year and
subject to a similar hearing and determination in each year
thereafter. The decision of the Township shall be subject to
appeal to court in the same manner, and within the same
time limitations, as is provided for zoning appeals by the
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.203
(b) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be
assessed ratably against the properties within the planned
residential development that have a right of enjoyment of the
common open space and shall become a tax lien on said
properties. Said assessments or charges shall be subordinate
in lien to the lien of any mortgage or mortgages on the
property which is subject to such assessments or charges
regardless of when said mortgage or mortgages were created
or when such assessments or charges accrued, provided that
such subordination shall apply only to assessments or charges
that have become payable prior to the passing of title under
foreclosure of such mortgage or mortgages, and the transferee
shall not be liable for payment of any assessments or charges
accruing prior to said foreclosure, but nothing herein shall be
held to affect the right herein given to enforce the collection of
203. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq. in regard to the Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 210-91 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-91
196:677
§ 210-92. Development in stages.
A developer may construct a planned residential development in stages if
the following criteria are met:
such assessments or charges accruing after sale under
foreclosure of such mortgage or mortgages; and provided,
further, that such charges accruing after sale shall also be
subordinate in lien to the lien of any further mortgage or
mortgages which are placed on property subject to such
assessments or charges, with the intent that no such charges
shall at any time be prior to lien or any mortgage or mortgages
whatsoever on such property. The Township, at the time of
entering upon said common open space for the purpose of
maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of
the Prothonotary of the county, upon the properties affected by
such lien within the planned residential development.
(7) In accordance with Section 706 of Act 247,204 the provisions of the
development plan relating to the use, bulk and location of buildings
and structures, the quantity and location of common open space
and the intensity of use or the density of residential units shall run
in favor of the Township and shall be enforceable in law or in equity
by the Township, without limitation on any powers or regulation
otherwise granted the Township by law. The development plan shall
specify those of its provisions which shall run in favor of and be
enforceable by residents of the planned residential development
and, in addition, the manner in which such residents may modify or
release such rights.
C. The Township will consider floodplain land as particularly suitable for
dedication for public use for such purposes as walking and bridle paths.
While the Township is open to the dedication of land involving historic
sites and properties, it is also agreeable to the consideration of
imaginative use of such historic site and/or property by the developer or
by a homeowners' association.
A. The application for tentative approval covers the entire planned
residential development and shows the location and approximate time
of construction for each stage, in addition to other information required
by this article.
B. At least 15% of the dwelling units in the plan given tentative approval
are included in the first stage.
C. At least 33% of the dwelling units in any stage are rented or sold before
any commercial development shown in that stage shall be completed.
204. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10706.
§ 210-91 CONCORD CODE § 210-92
196:678
§ 210-93. Feasibility review.
§ 210-94. Application for tentative approval.
D. The second and subsequent stages are completed consistent with the
tentatively approved plan and are of such size and location that they
constitute economically sound units of development. In no event shall
such stages contain less than 15% of the dwelling units receiving
tentative approval.
E. Gross residential density may be varied from stage to stage; provided,
however, that final approval shall not be given to any stage if the gross
residential density by type of dwelling of the area which includes stages
already finally approved and the stage for which final approval is being
sought exceeds by more than 10% the gross residential density for each
type of dwelling unit allowed for the entire planned residential
development in the tentatively approved plan. Where it is necessary to
allocate open space to early stages to avoid exceeding maximum gross
residential densities, the developer may be required to grant an open
space easement or covenant to the Township specifying the amount
and, if necessary, the location of open space.
A. Prior to application for tentative approval, the findings of the natural
features analysis and the community impact analysis of the site
explained in § 210-90A(1) and B(1) will be presented to the Board of
Supervisors. The review will not affect the application procedures of the
applicant but is intended to thoroughly familiarize both the applicant
and the review agency with the potential of the site for planned
residential development.
B. Materials illustrating the following information will be presented at the
review:
(1) A site map or maps at one inch equals 100 feet illustrating the
hydrology, geology, soils, topography and vegetation of the site as
explained in § 210-90B(2). The combined impact of the natural
features upon the development potential of each specific area of
the site will be clearly illustrated on the map.
(2) Materials indicating the impact of the completed planned
residential development upon public facilities, utilities and
roadway systems. Projections as to the number of school children
in the PRD and the vehicular traffic generated by the PRD shall be
included. Where connection to public water supply and sewer
systems is contemplated, projections as to the required water
supply capacity and wastewater volumes generated by the PRD
shall also be included.
A. The application for tentative approval shall be executed by or on behalf
of the landowner and filed with the Township Secretary. An initial
deposit in the amount as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
§ 210-92 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-94
196:679
Board of Supervisors shall be paid upon filing of the application to
be applied against such expenses, and additional deposits shall be
made from time to time as requested by the Township to be applied
against the expenses of processing the application, not to exceed actual
expenses incurred by the Township.205
B. The application for tentative approval shall include documentation
illustrating compliance with all of the standards for planned residential
development in § 210-90, and where necessary the Board shall order
such documentation to aid it in its review.
C. Required documentation shall include, but not be limited to, documents
illustrating the following:
(1) The location and size of the area involved and adjoining areas; and
the nature of the landowner's interest in the planned residential
development.
(2) The proposed use areas and the net residential and commercial
density of each proposed land use.
(3) The location, function, size, ownership and manner of maintenance
of the common open space.
(4) The use and the approximate height, bulk and location of buildings
and other structures.
(5) Information showing the feasibility of proposals for sanitary
sewerage, stormwater disposition and adequate water supply.
(6) Utility systems.
(7) The substance of covenants, grant of easement or other restrictions
to be imposed upon the use of land, buildings and structures,
including proposed grants and/or easement for public utilities.
(8) The provision for parking of vehicles and locations, rights-of-way
and cartway widths of proposed streets and public ways.
(9) In the case of plans which call for development in stages, a
schedule showing the time within which applications for final
approval of all parts of the planned residential development are
intended to be filed, and which shall be updated annually on the
anniversary of submission for final approval.
(10) The application shall, insofar as possible, indicate compliance with
the provisions set forth herein, governing the requirements for
final approval.
D. Application for tentative approval shall include but not be limited to the
following documents:
205. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-94 CONCORD CODE § 210-94
196:680
§ 210-95. Public hearings.
(1) Plans at one inch equals 200 feet of existing natural features of the
land, including topography, vegetation, drainage and soils.
(2) A site plan showing approximate locations of buildings, road and
parking areas at one inch equals 100 feet.
(3) A plan at one inch equals 100 feet delineating common open space
indicating size, nature of facilities, structures, if any, and uses.
(4) A plan at one inch equals 100 feet delineating approximate
locations, street types, right-of-way and cartway widths.
(5) Site plan illustrating phasing, including a time schedule for all onsite
and off-site improvements to be dedicated for public use, which
may be modified from time to time by the Board.
(6) A plan illustrating connection to public utilities, streets and rightsof-
way accompanied by documentation as to the impact of the
proposed development on said public utilities, streets and rights-ofway.
(7) A plan illustrating the relation of the proposed planned residential
development to the Township.
E. Said application shall also include a written statement by the landowner
setting forth the reasons why, in his opinion, the planned residential
development would be in the public interest and would be consistent
with the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
F. One copy of every application for tentative approval received by the
Township Secretary shall be promptly forwarded to the Township
Planning Commission and to the Delaware County Planning
Commission for study and recommendation as required by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.206 The Township Planning
Commission and the Delaware County Planning Commission shall
review and report upon the application to the Board within 30 days of
such referral. One copy of the reports of the respective Planning
Commissions shall be furnished to the landowner not less than five days
before appointed time of this public hearing provided for in § 210-95 of
this article.
G. The landowner, the Board of Supervisors, the Township Planning
Commission and the Delaware County Planning Commission may
consult informally concerning the proposed planned residential
development prior to the filing of an application for tentative approval,
provided that no statement or representation by a member of the Board
or the planning agencies shall be binding upon the Township.
206. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-94 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-95
196:681
§ 210-96. The findings.
A. Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative approval of
a planned residential development pursuant to this article, a public
hearing pursuant to public notice on said application shall be held by
the Board of Supervisors in the manner prescribed in the Concord
Township Zoning Ordinance for the enactment of an amendment.207 The
Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors or its designated agency may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing
shall be given under oath and every party of record at a hearing shall
have the right to cross-examine adverse witnesses.
B. A verbatim record of the hearing shall be caused to be made by the
Board of Supervisors whenever such records are requested by any
party to the proceedings; but the cost of making and transcribing such a
record shall be borne by the party requesting it and the expense of
copies of such record shall be borne by those who wish to obtain such
copies. All exhibits accepted in evidence shall be identified and duly
preserved or, if not accepted in evidence, shall be properly identified
and the reason for the exclusion clearly noted in the record.
A. 208The Board of Supervisors within 60 days following the conclusion of
the public hearing provided for in this article shall, by official written
communication to the landowner, either grant tentative approval of the
development plan as submitted, grant tentative approval subject to
specified conditions not included in the development plan as submitted
or deny tentative approval to the development plan. Failure to so act
within said period shall be a grant of tentative approval of the
development plan as submitted. In the event, however, that tentative
approval is granted subject to conditions, the landowner may, within 30
days after receiving a copy of the official written communication of the
Board of Supervisors, notify such Board of Supervisors of his refusal to
accept all said conditions, in which case, the Board of Supervisors shall
be deemed to have denied tentative approval of the development plan.
In the event that the landowner does not, within said period, notify the
Board of Supervisors of his refusal to accept all said conditions,
tentative approval of the development plan, with all said conditions,
shall stand as granted.
B. The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings of
fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for
the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial, and said
communication shall set forth with particularity in what respects the
development plan would or would not be in the public interest,
207. Editor's Note: See Article XXIX, Amendments.
208. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-95 CONCORD CODE § 210-96
196:682
§ 210-97. Status of plan after tentative approval.
including but not limited to findings of fact and conclusions on the
following:
(1) Those respects in which the development plan is or is not
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
municipality.
(2) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including but not limited to density, bulk and use and the
reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the
public interest.
(3) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the
planned residential development, the reliability of the proposals for
maintenance and conservation of the common open space and the
adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common
open space as related to the proposed density and type of
residential development.
(4) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which said design does or does not make adequate provision for
public services, provide adequate control over vehicular traffic and
further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment.
(5) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed residential
development to the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be
established.
(6) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents
of the planned residential development in the integrity of the
development plan.
C. In the event that a development plan is granted tentative approval, with
or without conditions, the Board of Supervisors may set forth in the
official written communication the time within which an application for
final approval of the development plan shall be filed or, in the case of a
development plan which provides for development over a period of
years, the periods of time within which applications for final approval of
each part thereof shall be filed. Except upon the consent of the
landowner, the time so established between grant of tentative approval
and application for final approval shall not be less than three months
and, in case of development over a period of years, the time between
applications for final approval of each part of a plan shall be not less
than 12 months.
§ 210-96 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-97
196:683
§ 210-98. Application for final approval.
A. The official written communication provided for in § 210-96 of this
article shall be certified by the Township Secretary and shall be filed in
his or her office, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the landowner.
Where tentative approval has been granted, the same shall be noted on
the Zoning Map.209
B. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of the
planned residential development for recording nor authorize
development or the issuance of any building permits. A development
plan which has been given tentative approval as submitted or which has
been given tentative approval with conditions which have been
accepted by the landowner (and provided that the landowner has not
defaulted nor violated any of the conditions of the tentative approval)
shall not be modified or revoked nor otherwise impaired by action of the
Township pending an application or applications for final approval,
without consent of the landowner, provided that an application for final
approval is filed or, in the case of development over a period of years,
provided that applications are filed within the periods of time specified
in the official written communication granting tentative approval.
C. In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and
thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to
abandon said development plan and shall so notify the Board of
Supervisors in writing, or in the event the landowner shall fail to file
application or applications for final approval within the required period
of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative approval shall be
deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area included in the
development plan for which final approval has not been given shall be
subject to those local ordinances otherwise applicable thereto as they
may be amended from time to time and the same shall be noted on the
Zoning Map and in the records of the Secretary of the Township.
A. An application for final approval may be for all the land included in a
development plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative approval, a
section thereof. Said application shall be made to the Township
Supervisors and within the time or times specified by the official written
communication granting tentative approval. If the application for final
approval is in compliance with the tentatively approved development
plan, a public hearing need not be held.
B. The application for final approval shall consist of a plan or plans and
accompanying documents which shall show and shall include the
following information:
(1) 210 The plan. The final plan shall be at a scale of one inch to 40 feet.
The original drawing and all submitted prints thereof shall be made
209. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
210. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-97 CONCORD CODE § 210-98
196:684
on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches. Where necessary to avoid sheets
longer than the maximum size prescribed herein, final plans shall
be drawn in two or more sections accompanied by a key diagram
showing relative location of the sections. All plans shall be clear
and legible white prints of an ink drawing and shall include the
following information:
(a) Development name or identifying title.
(b) Municipality in which the development is located.
(c) North point, scale and date.
(d) Name of record owner and developer.
(e) Name and seal of the registered professional engineer or
surveyor responsible for the plan.
(f) Boundaries of the tract determined by accurate survey in the
field which shall be balanced and closed with an error of
closure not to exceed one foot in 10,000 feet.
(g) Property lines (if any) within the development.
(h) Lot areas (if any) to 1/1,000 of an acre.
(i) Street lines, lot lines, rights-of-way, easements and areas
dedicated to or proposed to be dedicated to public use. Profiles
for all streets and for proposed sanitary storm sewer mains,
inlets and manholes.
(j) The length of all straight lines, radii, lengths of curves and
tangent bearings for each street.
(k) All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot
and of each area proposed to be dedicated to public use.
(l) The setback line for each building.
(m) Location and width of all private driveways.
(n) Names proposed to be given to all streets.
(o) Location of all structures.
(p) Number of lots.
(q) Number of dwelling units by type and, where applicable, the
number, location and square footage of areas to be devoted to
nonresidential use.
(r) Architectural drawings to scale of all buildings.
(s) A key map showing the relationship of the property being
developed to surrounding properties, such map to be drawn at
§ 210-98 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-98
196:685
a scale of one inch equals 800 feet and showing all streets,
roads, municipal boundaries, subdivisions and adjoining
properties within 1,000 feet of any part of the property. In the
case of development of a section of the entire tract, the key
map shall show the relationship of the section to the entire
tract.
(t) Total property area of the entire development tract and, in the
case of development in sections, the size of the section for
which plans are submitted.
(u) All permanent monuments, streetlights and other lighting.
(v) Finished contours at vertical intervals of five feet.
(w) All existing watercourses, tree masses and other significant
natural features and proposed plantings.
(2) The documentation. The application for final approval shall also be
accompanied by:
(a) Copies of deed restrictions and/or easements, if any.
(b) Information of water supply and sewage disposal, including
copies of permits obtained under authority of statutes of the
commonwealth.
(c) An affidavit that the applicant is the owner of the land
proposed to be developed.
(d) Offers of dedication and covenants governing the reservation
and maintenance of undedicated open space, provided that all
such offers of dedication and covenants shall bear the
certificate of approval of the Township Solicitor as to their
legal sufficiency.
(e) A statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the owner or
owners of the property to the effect that the development as
shown on the application for final approval is made with his or
their free consent and that it is desired to record the
application and accompanying documents upon their approval.
(f) Whenever a developer proposes to establish a street which is
not offered for dedication and not required to be offered for
dedication, he shall submit a copy of statements cosigned by
the Township Solicitor that he has made an agreement on
behalf of his heirs and assigns with the Township. Said
agreement shall be subject to the Township Solicitor's approval
and shall be recorded with the plan. Said agreement shall
establish the conditions under which the streets may later be
offered for dedication and stipulate, among other things, that:
§ 210-98 CONCORD CODE § 210-98
196:686
[1] The street shall be in a good state of repair as certified by
the Township Engineer, or that the owners of the lots along
it agree to include with the offer of dedication sufficient
money, as estimated by the Township Engineer, to restore
the street to conform with Township specifications.
[2] An offer to dedicate the street shall be made only for the
street as a whole.
[3] The method of assessing repair costs shall be as
stipulated.
[4] Agreement to offer the street for dedication by the owners
of 60% of the lots shall be binding on owners of the
remaining lots.
C. In the event that the application for final approval has been filed,
together with all drawings, specifications and other documents in
support thereof, and as required by this article and the official written
communication of tentative approval, the Township shall, within 45
days of such filing, grant such development plan final approval.211
D. 212In the event that the development plan an submitted contains
variations from the development plan given tentative approval, the
Board of Supervisors may refuse to grant final approval and shall,
within 45 days from the filing of the application for final approval, so
advise the landowner, in writing, of said refusal, setting forth in said
notice the reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the
public interest.
(1) In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
(a) Refile his application for final approval without the variations
objected; or
(b) File a written request with the Board of Supervisors that it hold
a public hearing on his application for final approval.
(2) If the landowner wishes to take either such alternate action, he
may do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for
final approval, or within 30 additional days if the time for applying
for final approval shall have already passed at the time when the
landowner was advised that the development plan was not in
substantial compliance.
(3) In the event that the landowner shall fail to take either of these
alternate actions within said time, he shall be deemed to have
abandoned the development plan.
211. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-98 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-98
196:687
§ 210-99. General requirements prerequisite to approval plans.
(4) Any such public hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice
within 30 days after request for the hearing is made by the
landowner, and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner
prescribed in this ordinance for public hearings on applications for
tentative approval. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the
hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall by official written
communication either grant final approval to the development plan
or deny final approval. The grant or denial of final approval of the
development plan shall, in cases arising under this section, be in
the form and contain the findings required for an application for
tentative approval set forth in this article.
E. A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final
approval shall be so certified without delay by the Board of Supervisors
and shall be filed of record forthwith in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds before any development shall take place in accordance
therewith. Upon the filing of record of the development plan, the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in
such plan shall cease to apply thereto. Pending completion within a
reasonable time of said planned residential development or of that part
thereof, as the case may be, that has been finally approved, no
modification of the provisions of said development plan, or part thereof,
as finally approved, shall be made except with the consent of the
landowner.
A. Improvements or guaranty thereof. Before approving any development
plan for recording, the Board of Township Supervisors shall either
require that the necessary grading, paving and other street
improvements as required in § 210-90F hereof all have been installed in
strict accordance with the standards and specifications of the Township
or that the Township be assured by means of proper contract and
completion guaranty, as set forth in Subsection B hereof, that the
improvements will subsequently be installed by the developer. Where
the development plan has been approved and recorded, either after the
specified improvements have been completed and approved by the
Board of Township Supervisors or, if prior to completion, upon proper
completion guaranty as aforesaid, purchasers and mortgagees of lots in
the development with or without buildings thereon or on any of them
shall be relieved of any and all liability for any deficiency in lack of or
failure to complete the improvements above mentioned as set out in
said plan or required as a condition precedent to the approval of the
plan of development, and any failure to complete or properly complete
said improvements shall not encumber any or all of the lots in the
development.
B. Agreement to complete improvements. In all cases where the necessary
grading, paving and other street improvements required herein shall
not have been installed in strict accordance with the standards and
§ 210-98 CONCORD CODE § 210-99
196:688
specifications of the Township, the developer shall enter into a written
agreement with the Township in the manner and form approved by the
Township Solicitor, wherein the developer shall agree, to the extent
applicable:
(1) To construct or cause to be constructed, at his own expense, all
streets, bridges, culverts, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks,
water systems, drainage facilities, streetlighting facilities, street
signs, monuments, sanitary sewerage, street shade trees and parks
and other improvements shown on said development plan, all in
strict accordance with standards and specifications of the
Township and within the time specified in said agreement.
(2) To make adequate provision with the Township Engineer for the
inspection of the construction of the aforesaid improvements to
assure compliance with Township standards and specifications.
(3) To maintain at his own cost said streets, bridges, culverts, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water systems, drainage facilities,
streetlighting facilities, street signs, monuments, sanitary
sewerage, street shade trees, parks and other improvements until
the same are accepted or condemned by the Township for public
use and for a period of two years thereafter to repair and
reconstruct the same or any part of one of them when such repair
or reconstruction shall be specified by the Board of Supervisors as
necessary by reasons of faulty construction, workmanship or
materials.
(4) To pay all costs, charges or rates of the utility furnishing electric
service for the streetlighting facilities installed by the developer
until such time as the streets shown on the development plans shall
have been accepted or condemned by the Township for public use
and to indemnify and save harmless the Township from and against
all suits, actions, claims and demands for electric service as
aforesaid, or any part thereof, to the time that said streets shall be
accepted or condemned as public streets in the manner
hereinabove set forth.
(5) To post contemporaneous with the execution of such agreement a
bond, with corporate surety approved by the Township Supervisors,
in such amount not less than 110% of the cost of all improvements,
and in a form approved by the Township Solicitor, for the use of the
Township (or in lieu of a bond, cash or negotiable securities in
escrow deposited in a bank approved by the Township Supervisors
pursuant to an escrow agreement in a form approved by the
Township Solicitor), conditioned upon the developer's proper
completion of the improvements as set forth in Subsection A hereof
and the developer's maintenance and repair of the same for the
period of 18 months following completion.213
213. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-99 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-99
196:689
(6) At or before the acceptance or condemnation of the improvements
by the Township for public use, to post a bond with corporate
surety approved by the Township Supervisors in an amount not less
than 15% of the guaranty set by Subsection B(5) thereof and in a
form approved by the Township Solicitor (or in lieu of a bond, cash
or negotiable securities in escrow deposited in a bank approved by
the Township Supervisors pursuant to an escrow agreement in a
form approved by the Township Solicitor), conditioned upon the
developer's repair or reconstruction of the improvements for the
period of 18 months following the acceptance or condemnation of
the same by the Township for public use where specified by the
Township as necessary by reason of faulty construction,
workmanship or materials.214
(7) To reimburse the Township promptly for reasonable attorney's,
engineers' and inspection fees and to obtain and pay for the
easements and deeds of dedication and leases required above.
(8) To file two copies of a final plan with the Board of Supervisors
accurately showing the location of all buried utility lines,
underground drains, spring heads, storm drainage lines and
permanent development monuments, as a condition precedent to
acceptance of the streets and other required improvements.
(9) The provisions of this Subsection B shall not relieve the developer
from the penalties provided for in the Second Class Township
Code215 for violation of the resolution.
C. Security for completion of improvements. In all cases where the
necessary grading, paving and other street improvements required
herein shall not have been installed in strict accordance with the
standards and specifications of the Township, no development plan
shall be approved unless and until a bond shall have been posted or
escrow funds deposited as set forth in Subsection B(5) hereof,
conditioned upon the developer's proper completion of the
improvements and his maintenance and repair thereof for the period of
18 months following completion. No improvements shall be accepted or
condemned by the Township for public use unless and until a bond shall
have been posted or escrow funds deposited as set forth in Subsection
B(6) hereof, conditioned upon the developer's repair or construction of
the improvements for the period of 18 months following the acceptance
or condemnation of the same by the Township for the public use where
specified by the Township as necessary by reason of faulty construction,
workmanship or materials.216
214. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
215. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
216. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-99 CONCORD CODE § 210-99
196:690
ARTICLE XII
R-PRD-3 Residence — Planned Active Adult Community District
[Added 2-5-1991 by Ord. No. 176]
§ 210-100. Purposes.
The purposes are:
§ 210-101. (Reserved)217
A. To recognize the need for rational direction for increasing land
development and to meet the growing need for housing of all types,
while at the same time to minimize the loss of open countryside, to
preserve the atmosphere of the Township, to forestall inadequacies in
community services and facilities and to protect property values in
existing residential areas.
B. To encourage innovations in residential development and renewal so
that the growing demand for housing may be met by greater variety in
type, design and layout of dwellings and by conservation and more
efficient use of open space ancillary to said dwellings.
C. To provide greater opportunities for better housing and recreation for
all who are or will be residents of the Township, including a planned
adult community for active adult citizens that is in keeping with the
residential character of the Township with concern for dwelling design
and open space conservation and attractiveness.
D. To encourage a more efficient use of land and public services and to
reflect changes in the technology of land development so that the
economies so secured may enure to the benefit of those who need
homes.
E. To encourage more flexible land development which will respect and
conserve natural resources such as streams, lakes, floodplains,
groundwater, wooded areas, steeply sloped areas and areas of unusual
beauty or importance to the natural ecosystem.
F. In aid of these purposes, to provide a procedure which can relate the
type, design and layout of residential development to the particular site
and the particular demand for housing existing at the time of
development in a manner consistent with the preservation of the
property values within existing residential areas, and to assure that the
increased flexibility of regulations over land development established
hereby is carried out pursuant to sound, expeditious and fair
administrative standards and procedures and to design the abovementioned
procedure so that it permits higher densities in the areas
recognized in the Comprehensive Plan as most capable of receiving and
supporting such densities.
§ 210-100 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-102
196:691
§ 210-102. Approving body.
The Board of Supervisors shall administer the provisions of this Article XII,
which administration shall include the approval, modification or disapproval
of any development plan; provided, however, that subject to any
inconsistent provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,218
the Board of Supervisors may by resolution from time to time designate
the Township Planning Commission as the official agency of the Board
of Supervisors for any or all of such purposes, either generally or with
respect to one or more specific developments, and may from time to time by
resolution revoke or amend any such designations.
§ 210-103. Eligibility.
No application for tentative approval of a planned active adult community
shall be considered or approved unless the following conditions are met:
§ 210-104. Permitted uses.
A. The proposed planned active adult community consists of one or more
contiguous parcels of land under one ownership containing 50 or more
acres of land, located in a R-PRD-3 Residence — Planned Active Adult
Community District of the Township.
B. The proposed planned active adult community will be connected to
public water and a public sanitary sewer system.
C. Both water supply and sewage disposal system shall be operational at
the time of occupancy of the first completed structure.
D. The proposed development is found to be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for Concord Township.
A. Uses by right.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Semidetached single-family dwellings attached by a nonstructural
element such as a decorative wall.
(3) Attached single-family dwellings (town homes).
(4) The following accessory uses in a planned active adult community:
(a) Recreational, community and social facilities for residents and
their guests.
(b) Administrative offices and operating facilities for management
of the community.
217. Editor's Note: Former § 210-101, Definitions, as amended, was repealed 12-15-1998 by
Ord. No. 231. See now § 210-4.
218. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-102 CONCORD CODE § 210-104
196:692
§ 210-105. Density.
§ 210-106. Design standards.
B. Uses by special exception. [Added 11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 325]
(1) A cellular telecommunications facility with antennas attached to a
nonresidential building or a structure of a permitted church,
municipal or governmental building or facility and a building or
structure owned by a public utility regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, subject to the applicable provisions of
Articles XXA and XXVIII.
A. The maximum possible average gross density, computed over the entire
planned active adult community, shall be 2.97 dwelling units per acre.
B. Not less than 35% of the total area of the planned active adult
community shall be designated as and devoted to common open space.
A. General.
(1) Community impact analysis. An analysis of the impact of
development of the site upon traffic, public facilities, utilities and
roadway systems may be required, at the discretion and option of
the Township, in accordance with the procedures of § 210-109A and
B.
B. Landscaping.
(1) Landscaping shall be regarded as an essential feature of every
planned active adult community. In addition to the preservation of
natural features, trees and slopes of the site, careful attention shall
be given to landscaping of parking areas, recreational areas and
provisions of street trees, if required.
(2) In order to determine the suitability of specific areas of the total
site for specific land uses and land use intensities, a thorough
analysis of the natural features of the site will be required in
accordance with § 210-109. The following subject categories must
be included in such an analysis:
(a) Hydrology. Analysis of natural drainage patterns in site area,
including denoting surface water, marsh, wetlands, floodplain,
permanent high-water table and seasonal high-water table
areas throughout the site.
(b) Geological. Analysis of characteristics of rock formations
underlying the site, including defining aquifers (particularly
those subject to pollution), shallow bedrock areas and areas in
which formations are unstable.
§ 210-104 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-106
196:693
(c) Soils. Analysis of types of soils present in the site area,
including defining of prime agricultural soils, aquifer recharge
soils areas, unstable soils and soils susceptible to erosion.
(d) Topography. Analysis of terrain of site, including designation of
slope areas over 25% and between 15% and 25%.
(e) Vegetation. Analysis of land cover of site, including
designations of forest and woodland areas, meadowland areas
and areas with little or no land cover.
(3) Landscaping shall be planned and effectuated in the planned active
adult community so as to integrate buildings with their
surrounding lands and to present a total pattern throughout the
site. The use of berms is encouraged and is required on land
adjacent to Smithbridge Road. In the planning and effectuation of
such landscaping, as well as in the effectuation of Subsection B(4)
and (5) of this section, the developer shall be guided by the
following criteria for plant material, including both deciduous and
evergreen trees and shrubs:
(a) Aesthetic values such as autumn coloration, flowers, fruit, bark
and crown characteristics and dieback.
(b) Susceptibility to insect and disease infestation and air
pollution.
(c) Species longevity.
(d) Wind firmness and suitability of plant material to soil types.
(e) Wildlife values (ability of plant material such as oak, hickory,
dogwood and walnut to provide food for bird and animal life).
(f) Trees and shrubs which are prone to cause pavement heaving
or whose roots have a tendency to invade water and sewer
lines (i.e., poplar, willow, silver and Norway maple, beech) shall
not be planted where their presence will result in pavement
heaving or the clogging of mains and drains.
(g) Where land is open or barren, the planting of trees is
encouraged.
(4) The protection of trees of eight-inch caliper or over measured 4.5
feet off the ground shall be a factor in determining the location of
open space, buildings, underground services, walks, paved areas,
playgrounds, parking areas and finished grade levels.
(5) The development shall be designed and programmed so as to
minimize earthmoving, erosion, tree clearance and the destruction
of natural amenities. Natural features, such as lakes, streams and
wooded slopes, shall be preserved and incorporated into the final
landscaping of the development wherever possible and desirable.
§ 210-106 CONCORD CODE § 210-106
196:694
The applicant shall demonstrate the means whereby trees and
other natural features shall be protected during construction.
Wherever possible, scenic points, historic spots and other
community assets and landmarks shall be preserved.
(6) Seeding, sodding and other planting shall be applied to stabilize
topsoil on steep slopes and to enhance the appearance of open
space. This program must be in accordance with the requirements
of and approved by the Soil Conservation District of the Federal
Soil Conservation Service. Excessive cuts and fills shall be avoided.
Topsoil shall not be stripped, covered or removed from the
development site.
(7) Erosion control measures, such as minimizing the areas of exposed
soil, mulching, building silt catchment basins and planting
temporary ground cover, shall be instituted as necessary. All
construction, including grading and regrading, shall be
accomplished under and in accordance with the conservation plan
required by § 210-109A of this Article XII. Where adequate surface
drainage is not possible by grading alone, a supplementary
drainage system, in accordance with sound engineering principles
and approved by the Township Engineer, will be required.
(8) All parking areas shall be landscaped. The interior of each lot shall
have one two-inch-caliper shade tree for every four parking spaces.
As an alternative, the Township may permit substitutes upon land
in close proximity to a lot.
(9) Wherever the site is not proposed to remain naturally wooded,
shade trees shall be provided along all streets. No less than two
two-inch-caliper trees measured 4.5 feet off the ground shall be
planted for each forty-foot section of collector streets. For the
purpose of these regulations, street trees are limited to the
following: honey locust, red oak, columnar-type maples, sugar
maple and sweet gum, or others upon approval of the Township.
(10) Curb and sidewalk along street areas shall not be required.
Walkways shall be required throughout the community, preferably
through common open space, to accommodate, as appropriate,
travel on foot to and from dwelling units to recreational,
community and social facilities and to and from one section of the
community to another. Said walkways may be constructed of
asphalt, crushed rock, wood chips or like material as appropriate,
considering the location and projected use of the particular portion
of walkway involved.
C. Buildings.
(1) All housing shall be designed with regard to the topography and
natural features of the site. The effects of prevailing winds,
seasonal temperatures and hours of sunlight on the physical layout
and form of the proposed buildings shall be taken into account.
§ 210-106 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-106
196:695
(2) The approximate location and arrangement of buildings and open
spaces must be shown to the Board on tentative plans so that it may
review the intensity of land use and serve the public interest by
protecting neighboring land uses.
(3) Good quality development is encouraged by taking into
consideration the appearance of all elevations and layouts of
buildings and external spaces and materials used therein.
(4) Variation of conventional siting practices such as building setbacks
from streets and minimum distances between buildings may be
required by the Board in order to produce a more attractive and
interesting arrangement of buildings.
(5) All housing shall be sited so as to ensure natural light for all
principal rooms and to enhance privacy within and adjacent to the
planned active adult community.
(6) Housing and other facilities near the periphery of the planned
active adult community shall be designed so as to be harmonious
with neighboring areas.
(7) Housing shall be arranged in groups or clusters and not in long
rows parallel to street lines.
(8) Single-family detached, attached and semidetached dwelling units
may be arranged so as to provide for individual lots for each unit or
may be arranged as rental units or condominiums.
(9) No building envelope shall be less than 135 feet from the ultimate
right-of-way of an adjacent collector street, i.e., Smithbridge Road
and Temple Road, nor 50 feet from the property lines of the
development, i.e. the perimeter of the planned active adult
community, and a berm 4 1/2 feet high shall be placed along
Smithbridge Road upon which shall be planted trees having a
minimum height when planted of four feet.
(10) The location of structures in relation to access roads, parking areas
and other structures shall be in accordance with good design of
dwellings and structures and in accordance with the following
minimum standards:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings, not exceeding three dwelling
units per acre.
[1] Setbacks:
[a] Front: 30 feet.
[b] Rear: 25 feet.
[c] Side yard, minimum: 15 feet.
[d] Side yard, aggregate: 35 feet.
§ 210-106 CONCORD CODE § 210-106
196:696
[e] Driveway: five feet.
[2] Width at the street line: 50 feet.
[3] Width at the building line: 75 feet.
(b) Semidetached units.
[1] Maximum number of units grouped together shall not
exceed six. Decks not included in envelope.
[2] Unless attached, no unit shall be closer than four feet to
any other unit within a grouping.
[3] Minimum distance from unit to:
[a] Collector street: 25 feet.
[b] Secondary street: 15 feet.
[c] A parking area from garage of unit: 10 feet.
[d] Parking from unit part other than garage: 15 feet.
[e] Another unit within a different grouping: 30 feet;
unless orientation of unit is a ninety-degree angle or
its mirror image, in which case the minimum distance
shall be 20 feet.
[f] Another unit's driveway: five feet.
[4] Minimum distance of parking to:
[a] Collector street: 20 feet.
[b] Driveway: five feet.
[c] Size of parking stalls: nine feet by 18 feet.
(c) Attached units.
[1] Maximum number of units grouped together in a single
building shall not exceed six. Decks not included in
envelope.
[2] Minimum distance from a unit to:
[a] Collector street: 25 feet.
[b] Secondary street: 15 feet.
[c] Driveway: 10 feet.
[d] Parking: 10 feet.
[e] Another unit within a different grouping: 20 feet.
§ 210-106 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-106
196:697
[3] Minimum distance of parking to:
[a] Collector street: 20 feet.
[b] Secondary street: 15 feet.
[c] Driveway: five feet.
[d] Size of parking stalls: nine feet by 18 feet.
(11) Each single, attached and semidetached dwelling unit shall be
provided with no less than the following space standards:
(a) Heights and area requirements.
[1] Maximum heights. The maximum height of any dwelling
unit shall be measured from the mean level of the ground
surrounding the building to a point midway between the
highest and lowest points of the roof and shall not exceed
35 feet and not more than 2 1/2 stories or floors, exclusive
of the basement level, above ground level for human
habitation. No accessory building, except for accessory
uses provided for in § 210-104A(4) above, shall exceed 20
feet in height.
[2] Maximum length. In no case shall the combined length of
attached dwelling units exceed 200 feet in length or six
dwelling units, whichever is less in length. In no case shall
the combined length of a semidetached dwelling exceed
400 feet in length or six dwelling units, whichever is less in
length.
[3] Minimum dwelling unit size. No dwelling unit shall be less
than 1,000 square feet in net usable floor area, including
partitions and walls and excluding areas of joint use with
other occupants. Units with three bedrooms shall be no
less than 1,200 square feet in net usable floor area,
including partitions and walls and excluding areas of joint
use with other occupants.
[4] Floor use restrictions. Dwelling units shall be permitted
only on any floor where the building floor is completely
above grade at one exterior wall.
(12) Decks and patios.
(a) Z-lot housing. Decks, patios and steps thereto may only extend
in a perpendicular direction a maximum of 14 feet or to the
wall of an adjacent building, whichever is greater, from the
face of the building along which living, dining, kitchen/family
and master bedrooms are located from the frontmost part of
the rear access door to the garage for the extent of the building
length, but not beyond the rear plane of the building.
§ 210-106 CONCORD CODE § 210-106
196:698
(b) Town homes. Decks, patios and steps thereto may only extend
out in a perpendicular direction a maximum of 10 feet from a
wall within which is located an access door to said deck, patio
or steps. In no case may the deck, patio or steps extend beyond
the plane of any wall perpendicular to the wall within which
such access door is located, exclusive of chimneys and other
like projections less than 2 1/2 feet, situated on the access
wall.
(13) Dwelling unit structures shall be located and sited so as to promote
pedestrian and visual access to common open space wherever
possible.
D. Nonresidential uses.
(1) All community recreational areas, including swimming pools,
outdoor tennis courts and parking areas, shall be located so as not
to interfere with the residential character of adjacent dwelling
units and shall conform with Township ordinances and regulations.
E. Utilities.
(1) All streets, off-street parking areas and areas of high pedestrian
use shall be adequately lighted. All such lighting shall be designed
and located so as to direct light away from adjacent residences.
Adequate lighting shall be provided after dark. Appropriate
lighting fixtures shall be provided for walkways and to identify
steps, ramps and signs. Such lighting shall be designed and located
so as to direct light away from adjacent residences.
(2) The requirements for lighting may be waived by the Board, where
density of development may not justify its use.
(3) Electric, telephone and all other utility facilities shall be installed
underground by the developer unless, in the opinion of the Board of
Township Supervisors, special conditions require otherwise. In
such event, such installations shall be as directed by the Board.
(4) Where telephone and electric service lines are placed
underground, conduits or cables, except service connections to
dwelling units, shall be placed within easement or dedicated public
ways or in a common open space in a manner which will not conflict
with other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes
shall be located so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
(5) Easements shall be provided to account for the distribution of unit
substations to service the area. The design of the utility structures
should be architecturally compatible with the surrounding
structures.
(6) The storm sewage for a planned active adult community shall be
designed and constructed subject to the determinations of the site
§ 210-106 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-106
196:699
analysis of the natural features and so as to minimize erosion,
flooding and runoff, using, as necessary, drainage channels, swales,
catchment basins, silt traps and design of cartways so as to
minimize runoff. Design is to be based upon the Rational method
for a ten-year-storm frequency, except in sump areas in which areas
a twenty-five-year-storm frequency shall be used, all in accordance
with the Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.219
(7) Drainage facilities shall be provided to:
(a) Permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses.
(b) Ensure adequate drainage of all points along the line of streets.
(c) Intercept stormwater runoff along streets, at intervals
reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
(8) In the design of drainage facilities, special consideration shall be
given to problems that may arise from concentration of stormwater
runoff over adjacent properties and roads.
(9) Storm sewer, as required, may be placed on or off the cartway
when located along a street, and storm sewers may cross a street.
Open ditches shall be limited in length as required.
(10) In some cases, stormwater must travel in original stream beds or in
open channels. Concreted or riprapped channels shall be required.
Open channels, whether concreted or not, shall generally be
straightened, widened or otherwise adjusted to conform to
hydraulic requirements.
(11) Collector storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches
and a minimum grade of 0.5%. Changes in alignment shall be by
straight sections connected by inlets or manholes, all in accordance
with the Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.220
(12) Where storm sewer passes between dwelling units, sufficient width
shall be allowed between dwelling units to accommodate said
sewer. The ground shall drain in the same direction as the sewer,
wherever possible. No pockets or craters shall be left in the road or
on the ground.
(13) Manholes shall be not more than 300 feet apart on sizes up to 24
inches and not more than 450 feet apart on greater sizes. Inlets
may be substituted for manholes on approval by the Township.
(14) Inlets and manhole covers and frames shall conform to Township
standards. At street intersections, inlets shall be placed in the
tangent and not in the curved portion of the street. Inlets shall
generally be Pennsylvania Standard Combination Special Inlets.
219. Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Stormwater Management.
220. Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Stormwater Management.
§ 210-106 CONCORD CODE § 210-106
196:700
They shall be located at intersections and, as needed, between
intersections. Inlets shall be required when the design flow along
the side of any road exceeds seven cubic feet per second. Design
is to be based upon the Rational method for a ten-year-storm
frequency, except in sump areas in which areas a twenty-five-yearstorm
frequency shall be used, and all in accordance with the
Township Stormwater Management Ordinance.221 Inlets shall be so
placed in an intersection that rainwater shall not have to cross any
collector street before entering.
(15) Vehicular bridges and culverts shall have ample water way to carry
expected flows and capable of supporting 20 tons of vehicular
weight. Culverts shall be provided with wing walls and constructed
for the full width of the right-of-way. Vehicular bridges shall be
provided with a paved flow line and with deep aprons and wing
walls at each end. Vehicular bridges shall be constructed no
narrower than the cartway of the road they serve; and, in addition,
pedestrian walkways on one side shall be required.
(16) Land subject to flooding.
(a) Land subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health or
property and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable
shall not be platted for residential occupancy or for such other
uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or
aggravate erosion or flood hazard.
(b) Such land within the subdivision/land development shall be set
aside on the plat for uses as shall not be endangered by
periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce
unsatisfactory living conditions.
(c) Where flooding is known to have occurred within an area
shown on the plat, such area shall be clearly marked "subject
to periodic flooding" and shall not be platted in streets and lots.
(17) Planned active adult community shall be provided with a public
water supply system. If water is to be provided by means other than
by private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of
lots within the proposed development, applicants shall present
evidence to the Board of Supervisors or the Planning Commission,
as the case may be, that the proposed development is to be
supplied by a certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative
association of lot owners or by a municipal corporation, authority
or utility. A copy of a Certificate of Public Convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such
certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or
agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate,
221. Editor's Note: See Ch. 148, Stormwater Management.
§ 210-106 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-106
196:701
shall be acceptable evidence. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No.
221]
(18) Planned active adult community shall be provided with a sanitary
sewer system through the following method:
(a) Connection to a public sewer system is required.
(19) Refuse stations to serve residential or recreational areas shall be
verminproof and shall be designed with suitable screening and
located so as to be convenient for trash removal and not offensive
to nearby residential areas and located a minimum of 20 feet from
any building. Each station shall be supplied with appropriate trash
containers which shall be noncombustible and verminproof.
F. Streets.
(1) The street system of the planned active adult community shall be
designed so as to:
(a) Create a separation of automobile and pedestrian circulation
through a hierarchy of roadway functions and design and
pedestrian walkways.
(b) Relate harmoniously with land uses within and adjacent to the
development.
(c) Create efficient and safer connections with the existing road
systems of the municipality in order to ensure proper ingress
and egress to and from the development.
(d) Minimize through traffic in residential areas.
(2) Location and arrangement of streets.
(a) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location
of all streets shall be considered in their relation to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety and
in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to
be served by such streets.
(b) The arrangement of streets in the development shall conform
to a plan approved by the Board of Township Supervisors to
adequately and conveniently serve the planned active adult
community.
(c) Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
(d) To facilitate snow removal and to permit easy access for firefighting
equipment and delivery trucks, dead-end streets (culsde-
sac), designed to be so permanently, shall be provided at the
closed end with a turnaround having an outside cartway radius
of at least 40 feet. Such streets shall be not longer than 600
§ 210-106 CONCORD CODE § 210-106
196:702
feet, measured from their intersecting center lines to the
center of the turnarounds, except where topographical or
other conditions make this limitation impracticable as
determined by the Board.
(e) Streets shall be constructed in accordance with Township
street specifications.
(3) Access to streets.
(a) Except as specifically permitted by the Board, no dwelling unit
shall have direct access to an arterial or collector street.
(b) Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where control thereof is vested in the Township under
conditions approved by the Board of Township Supervisors.
(4) Street intersections.
(a) Collector street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 150
feet shall be avoided.
(b) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at
less than 60°.
(c) Cartways at street intersections shall be designed to comply
with fire lane requirements and to accommodate a fire or
emergency vehicle with a turning radius requirement of 35
feet, where collector streets intersect other collector streets or
a cul-de-sac.
(d) To the fullest extent possible, intersections with Smithbridge
Road and Temple Road shall not be located less than 800 feet
apart, measured from center line to center line.
(e) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets shall be avoided, and where such avoidance is
impossible, such intersections shall be designed with extreme
care for both vehicular and pedestrian safety.
(f) Grades at intersections shall be in conformance with
Subsection F(7)(c) below.
(g) Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections of
streets. There shall be a clear sight triangle measuring 60 feet
along the intersecting street lines from the point of
intersection indicated on the plan that is maintained free and
clear of shrubs, structures, signs and other visual obstructions,
excluding excess parking.
(h) The intersection should be designed and graded to allow for
proper drainage.
§ 210-106 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-106
196:703
(5) Street widths.
(a) 222Street cartway widths shall be as follows, as a minimum:
Street Type Cartway Width
Collector street 24 feet(excluding shoulder
development as paved bicycle
trail)
Secondary-residential street 22 feet (excluding shoulder
development as paved bicycle
trail)
Drive 20 feet
Shared driveway 16 feet
Double driveway 16 feet
Single driveway 10 feet
(b) Where a subdivision/land development abuts or contains an
existing street of inadequate right-of-way width, additional
right-of-way width shall be dedicated to conform to the
standards established in this Subsection F(5).
(6) Street alignment.
(a) The minimum radius at the center line for curves on collector
and secondary residential streets shall be 150 feet.
(7) Street grades.
(a) Street grades shall not exceed the following:
Street Type Percent Grade
Collector 8%
Secondary-residential 10%
(b) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding 1%
and shall be designed to be in compliance with American
Association of State Highway Transportation Officials design
charts for twenty-five-miles-per-hour speeds.
(c) Where the grade of any street at the approach to an
intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided
having a minimum length of 50 feet measured back from the
street line within which no grade shall exceed a maximum of
5%. Furthermore, the maximum grade within an intersection
shall not exceed 1% percent.
(d) No street grade shall be less than 0.5%.
222. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-106 CONCORD CODE § 210-106
196:704
(e) All streets shall be graded to the full width of the cartway.
Maximum side slopes immediately adjacent to the cartway
shall not exceed one and one-half feet horizontal to one vertical
(1.5 to 1) and shall be adequately stabilized with appropriate
plant materials.
(8) Street names.
(a) No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be
confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall
be subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
(9) Street signs and lighting.
(a) Street name signs conforming to Township specifications shall
be erected and painted in accordance with said specifications
at all street intersections or junctions in the development at
the expense of the developer.
(b) The developer shall install or cause to be installed at the
developer's expense such streetlighting facilities as may be
deemed adequate and as may be prescribed at the time the
development plan is approved, and the developer or its
successor in title shall pay the cost of operating said
streetlights.
(10) Easements shall be granted to public or private utilities providing
service to the community at locations and upon such terms,
provisions and conditions as developer and such utilities shall
agree.
(11)Walkways.
(a) Pedestrian walkways with a minimum improved width of four
feet and of materials appropriate to the use thereof shall be
required where deemed essential to provide circulation or
access to recreational, social and community facilities and to
other parts of the development.
G. Parking.
(1) Each dwelling unit must have space to park two automobiles off the
street. Spaces must be nine feet by 18 feet, and, in parking areas,
aisles 22 feet wide.
(2) There shall be one off-street parking space for each 100 square feet
of recreation and social facility, excluding tennis courts, and two
off-street parking spaces for each 100 square feet of swimming
pool, exclusive of patios and storage areas. In addition, paved truck
loading areas shall be provided such that all loading, unloading and
maneuvering can be accommodated within these areas.
§ 210-106 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-106
196:705
(3) Parking areas for 20 or more automobiles shall be screened from
adjacent structures, access roads and traffic arteries by hedges,
dense planting, earth berms, changes in grade or walls. All parking
areas shall be located in accordance with the criteria set forth in
§ 210-106C(10).
(4) Parking areas shall be arranged so as to prevent through traffic to
other parking areas.
(5) No more than 15 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous
row without being interrupted by approved landscaping.
(6) No more than 60 parking spaces shall be accommodated in any
single parking area, except a parking area serving a recreational,
social or community facility.
(7) Off-street parking or loading areas shall be surfaced with an
impervious asphaltic pavement.
H. Common open space.
(1) The common open space shall be located so as to be consistent with
the objectives set forth in the application for planned active adult
community. Where possible, it shall be designed as a contiguous
area easily accessible to the residents and preserving and
enhancing natural features.
(2) Areas set aside for common open space shall be suitable for the
designated purpose and in any event shall be consistent with the
plan policy for open space land use in the Township. Any such area
shall contain no structure other than a structure related to the
purposes of open spaces, provided that utilities and stormwater
management facilities may be located in common open space
areas.
I. Fire lanes and hydrants.223
(1) No dwelling unit or part of a unit shall be located more than 150
feet from a duly improved and accessible fire lane, nor more than
600 feet from a private or public street or a fire hydrant. All fire
hydrants and fire lanes shall be subject to the approval of the
Township Fire Marshal.
(2) Fire lanes shall have a minimum unobstructed right-of-way-width of
30 feet; and there shall be constructed within this right-of-way an
all-weather and well-drained surfaced cartway with a minimum
width of 24 feet. The extension of fire lanes shall begin from one or
more private or public streets.
(3) Dead-end fire lanes shall be terminated with an unobstructed
vehicular turnaround or cul-de-sac with a minimum surfaced radius
223. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-106 CONCORD CODE § 210-106
196:706
§ 210-107. Management of open space.
of 40 feet. Dead-end fire lanes shall have a maximum length of 600
feet.
(4) The location of fire lanes shall conform to plans for the extension of
streets, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewer and other
drainage facilities and public utilities as contained in this chapter
and other ordinances of the Township of Concord and shall provide
adequate access to buildings by emergency services.
(5) Fire hydrants must be provided by the developer. The number, type,
location and rate of flow of fire hydrants shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Fire Marshal.
(6) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until fire lanes are
constructed and hydrants tested and approved by the Township
Fire Marshal.
A. There shall be provisions which ensure that the common open space
land shall continue as such and be properly maintained.
(1) The developer shall either:
(a) Retain ownership and responsibility for maintenance of such
open space land; or
(b) Provide for and establish one or more organizations for the
ownership and maintenance of all common open space.
(2) In the case of Subsection A(1)(b) above, each organization shall be
a nonprofit homeowners' corporation, condominium or cooperative,
unless the developer demonstrates that a community open space
trust is a more appropriate form of organization.
B. If a homeowners' association, condominium or cooperative or open
space trust is formed, it shall be governed according to the following
regulations:
(1) The organization is organized by the developer and operating with
financial subsidization by the developer, if necessary, before the
sale of any dwelling units within the development.
(2) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers of
dwelling units therein and their successors.
(3) The organization shall be responsible for maintenance of and
insurance and taxes on common open space.
(4) The members of the organization shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining and developing common open space, in accordance
with procedures established by them.
§ 210-106 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-107
196:707
(5) The organization shall have or hire adequate staff to administer
common facilities and maintain the common open space.
(6) Maintenance.
(a) In the event that the organization established to own and
maintain a common open space, or any successor organization,
shall at any time after establishment of the planned active
adult community fail to maintain the common open space in
reasonable order and condition in accordance with the
development plan, the Township may serve written notice upon
such organization or upon the residents and owners of the
planned active adult community setting forth the manner in
which the organization has failed to maintain the common open
space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall include a
demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within
30 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a hearing
thereon which shall be held within 14 days of the notice. At
such hearing, the Township may modify the terms of the
original notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension
of time within which they shall be cured. If the deficiencies set
forth in the original notice or in the modification thereof shall
not be cured within said 30 days or any extension thereof, the
Township, in order to preserve the taxable values of the
properties within the planned active adult community and to
prevent the common open space from becoming a public
nuisance, may enter upon said common open space and
maintain the same for a period of one year. Said entry and
maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the
common open space except when the same is voluntarily
dedicated to the public by the residents and owners. Before the
expiration of said year the Township shall, upon its initiative or
upon the request of the organization theretofore responsible
for the maintenance of the common open space, call a public
hearing upon notice to such organizations or to the residents
and owners of the planned active adult community, who shall
show cause why such maintenance by the Township shall not,
at the election of the Township, continue for a succeeding year.
If the Township shall determine that such organization is ready
and able to maintain said common open space in reasonable
conditions, the Township shall cease to maintain said common
open space at the end of said year. If the Township shall
determine such organization is not ready and able to maintain
said common open space in a reasonable condition, the
Township may, in its discretion, continue to maintain said
common open space during the next succeeding year and
subject to a similar hearing and determination in each year
thereafter. The decision of the Township shall be subject to
appeal to court in the same manner and within the same time
§ 210-107 CONCORD CODE § 210-107
196:708
limitations as is provided for zoning appeals by the
Municipalities Planning Code.224 225
(b) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be
assessed ratably against the properties within the planned
active adult community that have a right of enjoyment of the
common open space and shall become a tax lien on said
properties. Said assessments or charges shall be subordinate
in lien to the lien of any mortgage or mortgages on the
property which is subject to such assessments or charges
regardless of when said mortgage or mortgages were created
or when such assessments or charges accrued, provided that
such subordination shall apply only to assessments or charges
that have become payable prior to the passing of title under
foreclosure of such mortgage or mortgages, and the transferee
shall not be liable for payment of any assessments or charges
accruing prior to said foreclosure, but nothing herein shall be
held to affect the right herein given to enforce the collection of
such assessments or charges accruing after sale under
foreclosure of such mortgage or mortgages; and provided,
further, that such charges accruing after sale shall also be
subordinate in lien to the lien of any further mortgage or
mortgages which are placed on property subject to such
assessments or charges, with the intent that no such charges
shall at any time be prior to lien of any mortgage or mortgages
whatsoever on such property. The Township, at the time of
entering upon said common open space for the purpose of
maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the
Prothonotary of the county upon the properties affected by
such lien within the planned active adult community.
(7) In accordance with Section 706 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended,226 the
provisions of the development plan relating to the use, bulk and
location of buildings and structures, the quantity and location of
common open space and the intensity of use or the density of
residential units shall run in favor of the Township and shall be
enforceable in law or in equity by the Township, without limitation
on any powers or regulation otherwise granted the Township by
law. The development plan shall specify those of its provisions
which shall run in favor of and be enforceable by residents of the
planned active adult community and, in addition, the manner in
which such residents may modify or release such rights.
224. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
226. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10706.
§ 210-107 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-108
196:709
§ 210-108. Development in stages.
A developer may construct a planned active adult community in stages if the
following criteria are met:
§ 210-109. Feasibility review.
A. The application for tentative approval covers the entire planned active
adult community and shows the location and approximate time of
construction for each stage, in addition to other information required
by this Article XII.
B. At least 15% of the dwelling units in the plan given tentative approval
are included in the first stage, as well as all recreation facilities,
landscaping, roads and water retention areas reasonably necessary to
accommodate that stage.
C. The second and subsequent stages are completed consistent with the
tentatively approved plan and are of such size and location that they
constitute economically sound units of development. In no event shall
such stages contain less than 15% of the dwelling units receiving
tentative approval. In the case of development plans which call for
development over a period of years, a schedule showing the proposed
times within which applications for final approval of all sections of the
planned active adult community are intended to be filed, and this
schedule must be updated annually, on the anniversary of its approval,
until the development is completed and accepted.
D. Gross residential density may be varied from stage to stage; provided,
however, that final approval shall not be given to any stage if the gross
residential density by type of dwelling of the area which includes stages
already finally approved and the stage for which final approval is being
sought exceeds by more than 10% the gross residential density for each
type of dwelling unit allowed for the entire planned active adult
community in the tentatively approved plan. Where it is necessary to
allocate open space to early stages to avoid exceeding maximum gross
residential densities, the developer may be required to grant an open
space easement or covenant to the Township specifying the amount,
and if necessary, the location of open space.
A. Prior to application for tentative approval, the findings of the natural
features analysis and the community impact analysis of the site
explained in § 210-106A and B will be presented to the Board of
Supervisors. The review will not affect the application procedures of the
applicant but is intended to thoroughly familiarize both the applicant
and the review agency with the potential of the site for planned active
adult community.
B. Materials illustrating the following information will be presented at the
review:
§ 210-108 CONCORD CODE § 210-109
196:710
§ 210-110. Application for tentative approval.
(1) A site map or maps at one inch equals 100 feet illustrating the
hydrology, geology, soils, topography and vegetation of the site as
explained in § 210-106B(2). The combined impact of the natural
features upon the development potential of each specific area of
the site will be clearly illustrated on the map.
(2) Materials indicating the impact of the completed planned active
adult community upon public facilities, utilities and roadway
systems. Projections as to the number of school children in the
development and the vehicular traffic generated by the
development shall be included. Where connection to public water
supply and sewer systems is contemplated, projections as to the
required water supply capacity and wastewater volumes generated
by the development shall also be included.
A. The application for tentative approval shall be executed by or on behalf
of the landowner and filed with the Township Secretary. An initial
deposit in the amount as set forth from time to time by resolution of the
Board of Supervisors shall be paid upon filing of the application to be
applied against such expenses, and additional deposits shall be made
from time to time as requested by the Township to be applied against
the expenses of processing the application, not to exceed actual
expenses incurred by the Township.227
B. The application for tentative approval shall include documentation
illustrating compliance with all of the standards for a planned active
adult community in § 210-106, and, where necessary, the Board shall
order such documentation to aid it in its review.
C. Required documentation shall include but not be limited to documents
illustrating the following:
(1) The location and size of the area involved and adjoining areas and
the nature of the landowner's interest in the planned active adult
community.
(2) The proposed use areas and the residential density of each
proposed land use.
(3) The location, function, size, ownership and manner of maintenance
of the common open space.
(4) The use and the approximate height, bulk and location of buildings
and other structures.
(5) Information showing the feasibility of proposals for sanitary
sewerage, stormwater disposition and adequate water supply.
227. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-109 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-110
196:711
(6) Utility systems.
(7) The substance of covenants, grant of easement or other restrictions
to be imposed upon the use of land, buildings and structures,
including proposed grants and/or easement for public utilities.
(8) The provision for parking of vehicles and locations and cartway
widths of proposed streets and public ways.
(9) In the case of plans which call for development in stages, a
schedule showing the time within which applications for final
approval of all parts of the planned active adult community are
intended to be filed, and which shall be updated annually, on the
anniversary of submission, for final approval.
(10) The application shall, insofar as possible, indicate compliance with
the provisions set forth herein, governing the requirements for
final approval.
D. Application for tentative approval shall include but not be limited to the
following documents:
(1) Plans at one inch equals 100 feet of existing natural features of the
land, including topography, vegetation, drainage and soils.
(2) A site plan showing approximate locations of buildings, road and
parking areas at one inch equals 100 feet.
(3) A plan at one inch equals 100 feet delineating common open space,
indicating size, nature of facilities, structures, if any, and uses.
(4) A plan at one inch equals 100 feet delineating approximate
locations of streets, street types and cartway widths.
(5) Site plan illustrating phasing, including a time schedule for all onsite
and off-site improvements, if any, to be dedicated for public
use, which may be modified from time to time by the Board.
(6) A plan illustrating connection to public utilities, streets and rightsof-
way accompanied by documentation as to the impact of the
proposed development on said public utilities, streets and right-ofway.
(7) A plan illustrating the relation of the proposed planned active adult
community to the Township.
E. Said application shall also include a written statement by the landowner
setting forth the reasons why, in his opinion, the planned active adult
community would be in the public interest and would be consistent with
the Township's Comprehensive Plan.
F. One copy of every application for tentative approval received by the
Township Secretary shall be promptly forwarded to the Township
Planning Commission and to the Delaware County Planning
§ 210-110 CONCORD CODE § 210-110
196:712
§ 210-111. Public hearings.
§ 210-112. The findings.
Commission for study and recommendation as required by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.228 The Township Planning
Commission and the Delaware County Planning Commission shall
review and report upon the application to the Board within 30 days
of such referral. One copy of the reports of the respective Planning
Commissions shall be furnished to the landowner not less than five days
before appointed time of the public hearing provided for in § 210-111 of
this Article XII.
G. The landowner, the Board of Supervisors, the Township Planning
Commission and the Delaware County Planning Commission may
consult informally concerning the proposed planned active adult
community prior to the filing of an application for tentative approval,
provided that no statement or representation by a member of the Board
or the planning agencies shall be binding upon the Township.
A. Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative approval of
a planned active adult community pursuant to this Article XII, a public
hearing pursuant to public notice on said application shall be held by
the Board of Supervisors in the manner prescribed in Concord
Township Zoning Ordinance for the enactment of an amendment.229 The
Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman of the Board of
Supervisors or its designated agency may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing
shall be given under oath, and every party of record at a hearing shall
have the right to cross-examine adverse witnesses.
B. A verbatim record of the hearing shall be caused to be made by the
Board of Supervisors whenever such records are requested by any
party to the proceedings; but the cost of making and transcribing such a
record shall be borne by the party requesting it and the expense of
copies of such record shall be borne by those who wish to obtain such
copies. All exhibits accepted in evidence shall be identified and duly
preserved or, if not accepted in evidence, shall be properly identified
and the reason for the exclusion clearly noted in the record.
A. 230The Board of Supervisors within 60 days following the conclusion of
the public hearing provided for in this Article XII shall, by official
written communication to the landowner, either grant tentative
approval of the development plan as submitted, grant tentative
approval subject to specified conditions not included in the
development plan as submitted or deny tentative approval to the
development plan. Failure to so act within said period shall be a grant of
228. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
229. Editor's Note: See Article XXIX, Amendments.
230. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-110 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-112
196:713
tentative approval of the development plan as submitted. In the event,
however, that tentative approval is granted subject to conditions, the
landowner may, within 30 days after receiving a copy of the official
written communication of the Board of Supervisors, notify such Board
of Supervisors of his refusal to accept all said conditions, in which
case, the Board of Supervisors shall be deemed to have denied tentative
approval of the development plan. In the event that the landowner does
not, within said period, notify the Board of Supervisors of his refusal to
accept all said conditions, tentative approval of the development plan,
with all said conditions, shall stand as granted.
B. The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings of
fact related to the specific proposal and shall set forth the reasons for
the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial, and said
communication shall set forth with particularity in what respects the
development plan would or would not be in the public interest,
including but not limited to findings of fact and conclusions on the
following:
(1) Those respects in which the development plan is or is not
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the
municipality.
(2) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including but not limited to density, bulk and use and the
reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the
public interest.
(3) The purpose, location and amount of the common open space in the
planned active adult community, the reliability of the proposals for
maintenance and conservation of the common open space and the
adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the common
open space as related to the proposed density and type of
residential development.
(4) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which said design does or does not make adequate provision for
public services, provide adequate control over vehicular traffic and
further the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual
enjoyment.
(5) The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed active adult
community to the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be
established.
(6) In the case of a development plan which proposes development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents
of the planned active adult community in the integrity of the
development plan.
§ 210-112 CONCORD CODE § 210-112
196:714
§ 210-113. Status of plan after tentative approval.
§ 210-114. Application for final approval.
C. In the event that a development plan is granted tentative approval, with
or without conditions, the Board of Supervisors may set forth in the
official written communication the time within which an application for
final approval of the development plan shall be filed or, in the case of a
development plan which provides for development over a period of
years, the periods of time within which applications for final approval of
each part thereof shall be filed. Except upon the consent of the
landowner, the time so established between grant of tentative approval
and application for final approval shall not be less than three months
and, in case of development over a period of years, the time between
applications for final approval of each part of a plan shall be not less
than 12 months.
A. The official written communication provided for in § 210-112 of this
Article XII shall be certified by the Township Secretary and shall be
filed in his or her office, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the
landowner. Where tentative approval has been granted, the same shall
be noted on the Zoning Map.231
B. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of the
planned active adult community for recording nor authorize
development or the issuance of any building permits. A development
plan which has been given tentative approval as submitted or which has
been given tentative approval with conditions which have been
accepted by the landowner (and provided that the landowner has not
defaulted nor violated any of the conditions of the tentative approval)
shall not be modified or revoked nor otherwise impaired by action of the
Township pending an application or applications for final approval,
without consent of the landowner, provided that an application for final
approval is filed or, in the case of development over a period of years,
provided that applications are filed within the periods of time specified
in the official written communication granting tentative approval.
C. In the event that a development plan is given tentative approval and
thereafter, but prior to final approval, the landowner shall elect to
abandon said development plan and shall so notify the Board of
Supervisors in writing, or in the event that the landowner shall fail to
file application or applications for final approval within the required
period of time or times, as the case may be, the tentative approval shall
be deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area included in the
development plan for which final approval has not been given shall be
subject to those local ordinances otherwise applicable thereto as they
may be amended from time to time, and the same shall be noted on the
Zoning Map and in the records of the Secretary of the Township.
231. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-112 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-114
196:715
A. An application for final approval may be for all the land included in a
development plan or, to the extent set forth in the tentative approval, a
section thereof. Said application shall be made to the Township
Supervisors and within the time or times specified by the official written
communication granting tentative approval. If the application for final
approval is in compliance with the tentatively approved development
plan, a public hearing need not be held.
B. The application for final approval shall consist of a plan or plans and
accompanying documents which shall show and shall include the
following information:
(1) The plan. The final plan shall be at a scale of one inch to 50 feet.
The original drawing and all submitted prints thereof shall be made
on sheets 18 inches by 24 inches or 36 inches by 48 inches. Where
necessary to avoid sheets longer than the maximum size prescribed
herein, final plans shall be drawn in two or more sections
accompanied by a key diagram showing relative location of the
sections. All plans shall be clear and legible white prints of an ink
drawing and shall include the following information:
(a) Development name or identifying title.
(b) Municipality in which the development is located.
(c) North point, scale and date.
(d) Name of record owner and developer.
(e) Name and seal of the registered professional engineer or
surveyor responsible for the plan.
(f) Boundaries of the tract determined by accurate survey in the
field which shall be balanced and closed with an error of
closure not to exceed one foot in 10,000 feet.
(g) Property lines (if any) within the development.
(h) Lot areas (if any) to 1/1,000 of an acre.
(i) Street lines, lot lines, if any, rights-of-way, if any, easements, if
any, and areas dedicated to or proposed to be dedicated to
public use; profiles for all streets and for proposed sanitary
storm sewer mains, inlets and manholes.
(j) The length of all straight lines, radii, lengths of curves and
tangent bearings for each street.
(k) All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot, if
any, and of each area proposed to be dedicated to public use, if
any.
(l) The setback line for each building.
§ 210-114 CONCORD CODE § 210-114
196:716
(m) Location and width of all private driveways.
(n) Names proposed to be given to all streets.
(o) Location of all structures and the building envelope for all
dwelling units.
(p) Number of lots, if any.
(q) Number of dwelling units by type and, where applicable, the
number, location and square footage of areas to be devoted to
nonresidential use.
(r) Architectural drawings to scale of all building types.
(s) A key map showing the relationship of the property being
developed to surrounding properties, such map to be drawn at
a scale of one inch equals 600 feet and showing all streets,
roads, municipal boundaries, subdivisions and adjoining
properties within 1,000 feet of any part of the property. In the
case of development of a section of the entire tract, the key
map shall show the relationship of the section to the entire
tract.
(t) Total property area of the entire development tract and, in the
case of development in sections, the size of the section for
which plans are submitted.
(u) All permanent monuments, streetlights, if any, and other
lighting.
(v) Finished contours at vertical intervals of two feet.
(w) All existing watercourses, tree masses and other significant
natural features and proposed plantings.
(2) The documentation. The application for final approval shall also be
accompanied by:
(a) Copies of deed restrictions and/or easements, if any.
(b) Information of water supply and sewage disposal, including
copies of permits obtained under authority of statutes of the
commonwealth.
(c) An affidavit that the applicant is the owner of the land
proposed to be developed.
(d) Offers of dedication, if any, and covenants governing the
reservation and maintenance of undedicated common open
space, provided that all such offers of dedication and covenants
shall bear the certificate of approval of the Township Solicitor
as to their legal sufficiency.
§ 210-114 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-114
196:717
(e) A statement duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the owner or
owners of the property to the effect that the development as
shown on the application for final approval is made with his or
their free consent and that it is desired to record the
application and accompanying documents upon their approval.
C. In the event that the application for final approval has been filed,
together with all drawings, specifications and other documents in
support thereof and as required by this Article XII and the official
written communication of tentative approval, the Township shall, within
45 days of such filing, grant such development plan final approval.
[Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
D. In the event that the development plan as submitted contains variations
from the development plan given tentative approval, the Board of
Supervisors may refuse to grant final approval and shall, within 45 days
from the filing of the application for final approval, so advise the
landowner, in writing, of said refusal, setting forth in said notice the
reasons why one or more of said variations are not in the public
interest.
(1) In the event of such refusal, the landowner may either:
(a) Refile his application for final approval without the variations
objected; or
(b) File a written request with the Board of Supervisors that it hold
a public hearing on his application for final approval.
(2) If the landowner wishes to take either such alternate action, he
may do so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for
final approval, or within 30 additional days if the time for applying
for final approval shall have already passed at the time when the
landowner was advised that the development plan was not in
substantial compliance.
(3) In the event that the landowner shall fail to take either of these
alternate actions within said time, he shall be deemed to have
abandoned the development plan.
(4) Any such public hearing shall be held pursuant to public notice
within 30 days after request for the hearing is made by the
landowner, and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner
prescribed in this Article XII for public hearings on applications for
tentative approval. Within 30 days after the conclusion of the
hearing, the Board of Supervisors shall by official written
communication either grant final approval to the development plan
or deny final approval. The grant or denial of final approval of the
development plan shall, in cases arising under this section, be in
the form and contain the findings required for an application for
tentative approval set forth in this Article XII.
§ 210-114 CONCORD CODE § 210-114
196:718
§ 210-115. General requirements prerequisite to approval plans.
E. A development plan or any part thereof which has been given final
approval shall be so certified without delay by the Board of Supervisors
and shall be filed of record forthwith in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds before any development shall take place in accordance
therewith. Upon the filing of record of the development plan, the zoning
and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in
such plan shall cease to apply thereto. Pending completion within a
reasonable time of said planned active adult community or of that part
thereof, as the case may be, that has been finally approved, no
modification of the provisions of said development plan, or part thereof,
as finally approved, shall be made except with the consent of the
landowner.
A. Improvements or guaranty thereof. Before approving any development
plan for recording, the Board of Township Supervisors shall either
require that the necessary grading, paving and other street
improvements as required in § 210-106F hereof all have been installed
in strict accordance with the standards and specifications of the
Township or that the Township be assured by means of proper contract
and completion guaranty, as set forth in Subsection B hereof, that the
improvements will subsequently be installed by the developer. Where
the development plan has been approved and recorded, either after the
specified improvements have been completed and approved by the
Board of Township Supervisors or, if prior to completion, upon proper
completion guaranty as aforesaid, purchasers and mortgagees of lots, if
any, in the development with or without buildings thereon or on any of
them shall be relieved of any and all liability for any deficiency in lack of
or failure to complete the improvements above mentioned as set out in
said plan or required as a condition precedent to the approval of the
plan of development, and any failure to complete or properly complete
said improvements shall not encumber any or all of the lots, if any, in
the development.
B. Agreement to complete improvements. In all cases where the necessary
grading, paving and other street improvements required herein shall
not have been installed in strict accordance with the standards and
specifications of the Township, the developer shall enter into a written
agreement with the Township in the manner and form approved by the
Township Solicitor, wherein the developer shall agree, to the extent
applicable:
(1) To construct or cause to be constructed, at his own expense, all
streets, bridges, culverts, gutters, crosswalks, water systems,
drainage facilities, streetlighting facilities, street signs,
monuments, sanitary sewerage, street shade trees and parks and
other improvements shown on said development plan, all in strict
accordance with standards and specifications of the Township and
within the time specified in said agreement.
§ 210-114 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-115
196:719
(2) To make adequate provision with the Township Engineer for the
inspection of the construction of the aforesaid improvements to
assure compliance with Township standards and specifications.
(3) To maintain at his own cost said streets, bridges, culverts, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water systems, drainage facilities,
streetlighting facilities, street signs, monuments, sanitary
sewerage, street shade trees, parks and other improvements until
the same are completed to Township's satisfaction or accepted by
the Township for public use, where appropriate, and for a period of
18 months thereafter to repair and reconstruct the same or any
part of one of them when such repair or reconstruction shall be
specified by the Board of Supervisors as necessary by reasons of
faulty construction, workmanship or materials.
(4) To pay all costs, charges or rates of the utility furnishing electric
service for the streetlighting facilities installed by the developer
until such time as the streets shown on the development plans shall
have been completed to the Township's satisfaction or accepted by
the Township for public use, where appropriate, and to indemnify
and save harmless the Township from and against all suits, actions,
claims and demands for electric service as aforesaid, or any part
thereof, to the time that said streets shall be accepted or
condemned as public streets in the manner set forth.
(5) To post contemporaneous with the execution of such agreement a
bond, with corporate surety approved by the Township Supervisors,
in such amount not less than 110% percent of the cost of all
improvements, and in a form approved by the Township Solicitor,
for the use of the Township (or in lieu of a bond, cash or negotiable
securities in escrow deposited in a bank approved by the Township
Supervisors pursuant to an escrow agreement in a form approved
by the Township Solicitor), conditioned upon the developer's
proper completion of the improvements as set forth in Subsection A
hereof and the developer's maintenance and repair of the same for
the period of 18 months following completion.
(6) When the developer has completed all of the necessary and
appropriate improvements, the developer shall be entitled to all the
rights and remedies of Section 510 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.232
(7) Upon completion to the Township's satisfaction or at or before the
acceptance of the improvements by the Township, where
appropriate, for public use, to post a bond with corporate surety
approved by the Township Supervisors in an amount not less than
15% of the guaranty set by Subsection B(5) thereof and in a form
approved by the Township Solicitor (or in lieu of a bond, cash or
negotiable securities in escrow, deposit in a bank approved by the
232. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10510.
§ 210-115 CONCORD CODE § 210-115
196:720
§ 210-116. Fees.
The applicant shall be required to pay to the Township review fees in
accordance with the provisions of Section 503 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.235
Township Supervisors pursuant to an escrow agreement in a form
approved by the Township Solicitor), conditioned upon the
developer's repair or reconstruction of the improvements for the
period of 18 months following the acceptance or condemnation
of the same by the Township for public use where specified by
the Township as necessary by reason of faulty construction,
workmanship or materials.
(8) To reimburse the Township promptly for reasonable attorney's,
engineers' and inspection fees and to obtain and pay for the
easements and deeds of dedication and leases required above.
(9) To file two copies of a final plan with the Board of Supervisors
accurately showing the location of all buried utility lines,
underground drains, spring heads, storm drainage lines and
permanent development monuments, as a condition precedent to
acceptance of the streets and other required improvements.
(10) The provisions of this Subsection B shall not relieve the developer
from the penalties provided for in the Second Class Township
Code233 for violation of the agreement and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.234
C. Security for completion of improvements. In all cases where the
necessary grading, paving and other street improvements required
herein shall not have been installed in strict accordance with the
standards and specifications of the Township, no development plan
shall be approved unless and until a bond shall have been posted or
escrow funds deposited as set forth in Subsection B(5) hereof,
conditioned upon the developer's proper completion of the
improvements and his maintenance and repair thereof for the period of
18 months following completion. No improvements shall be accepted by
the Township for public use unless and until a bond shall have been
posted or escrow funds deposited as set forth in Subsection B(5) hereof,
conditioned upon the developer's repair or construction of the
improvements for the period of 18 months following the completion to
Township's satisfaction or acceptance of the same by the Township,
where appropriate for the public use where specified by the Township
as necessary by reason of faulty construction, workmanship or
materials.
233. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 65101 et seq.
234. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
235. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503.
§ 210-115 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-117
196:721
§ 210-117. Enforcement remedies.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which violates any provision
of this Article XII shall be subject to the enforcement remedies provided for
in Section 712.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.236
236. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10712.2.
§ 210-117 CONCORD CODE § 210-117
196:722
ARTICLE XIII
C-1 Local Commercial District
[Amended 10-7-1986 by Ord. No. 152; 11-7-1995 by Ord. No. 200;
8-5-1977 by Ord. No. 217; 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 218; 12-15-1998 by
Ord. No. 231; 10-5-1999 by Ord. No. 244; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255;
7-3-2001 by Ord. No. 260; 6-7-2005 by Ord. No. 293; 1-2-2007 by
Ord. No. 309; 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 310]
§ 210-118. Purpose.
C-1 Local Commercial Districts are designed to provide for special
requirements of retail convenience-type commercial establishments and
encourage attractive, compact retail commercial development. In
Concordville, the C-1 District is also designed to provide for a Concordville
Village Overlay District consistent with § 210-2C(4) of the overall objectives
of the Zoning Ordinance by creating a Concordville Village District that
would include historic structures along Concord Road and Route 1 as
significant elements of its identity.
§ 210-119. Use regulations.
A building may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied for
any one or combination of the following uses and no other, and subject
to § 210-224 dealing with prohibited uses and performance standards,
provided that the use and conversion of any existing dwelling shall comply
with the provisions of Article XXVI, Chapter 210, and § 210-225, and
provided that the demolition of, or special exception or conditional use for a
historic resource shown on the Historic Resources Map, or any subdivision,
land development or construction activity within 300 feet of a historic
resource shall be subject to the provisions of Township Code, Article XIXA,
Historic Preservation, of Chapter 210, Zoning, relating to historic
preservation, and further provided that the use shall comply with the
provisions of Article XX, Floodplain Conservation District, of Chapter 210,
and further provided that the use shall comply with the provisions of
§ 210-125.1, Concordville Village Overlay District, in particular
§ 210-125.1D.
A. Uses by right (permitted principal uses). Except as set forth in
§ 210-125.1 for the Concordville Village Overlay District, the following
shall apply for properties within the C-1 District located outside of the
Concordville Village Overlay District:
(1) Retail store or shop and with a gross floor area of less than 30,000
square feet.
(2) Retail service and repair, or personal service, provided that:
(a) Any repair or service activity, if located on the ground floor,
shall be not less than 10 feet from the front of the building and
shall be screened by a wall or partition from the front portion
of the building used by customers.
§ 210-118 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-119
196:723
(b) The area devoted to retail service and/or repair shall constitute
not more than 80% of the gross floor area.
(c) Any materials employed will not involve danger of fire or
explosion.
(3) Office, utility office, professional office.
(4) Studio, broadcasting studio.
(5) Bank or financial institution.
(6) Automatic self-service laundry, when served by public sewer.
(7) Club, social.
(8) Health center; health spa and physical fitness club.
(9) Commercial greenhouse.
(10) Contractor's shop, including carpenter, cabinetmaking, furniture
repair, light metal working, tinsmith, plumbing, or similar shop,
provided that the gross floor area devoted to such use shall not
exceed 8,000 square feet.
(11) Shops of craftsmen, provided that the gross floor area devoted to
such use shall not exceed 8,000 square feet.
(12) Library.
(13) Restaurant.
(14) Tourist house/home.
(15) Antique shop.
(16) (Reserved)
(17) Day-care center.
(18) Automated teller machine (ATM).
(19) Commercial drop-off and pick-up boxes.
(20) Motor vehicle parts and accessories store.
(21) Museum.
(22) Convenience store or mini-market of up to 4,000 square feet of
building area, and without the sale of gasoline. Whenever such
store or market involves the sale of gasoline as an accessory use, it
shall be governed by § 210-119D(2).
(23) Agricultural use.
§ 210-119 CONCORD CODE § 210-119
196:724
B. Accessory uses. Except as set forth in § 210-125.1 for the Concordville
Village Overlay District, the following shall apply for properties within
the C-1 District located outside of the Concordville Village Overlay
District:
(1) Vehicle parking lot as an accessory use to the principal permitted
commercial uses.
(2) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses, which use may include:
(a) Storage within a completely enclosed building in conjunction
with a permitted use.
(b) Living accommodation for the proprietor of a store or business
establishment, or for a watchman or caretaker or live-work
units, provided that no such dwelling accommodation should
be located on the first floor.
(c) Signs as permitted in Article XXIII of Chapter 210, Zoning.
C. Uses by special exception. Except as set forth in § 210-125.1 for the
Concordville Village Overlay District, the following shall apply for
properties within the C-1 District located outside of the Concordville
Village Overlay District:
(1) When authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, any use of the same
general character as those permitted by right (principal permitted
uses) and not provided for in any other commercial district.
(2) Roadside stand (temporary) for the sale of farm products grown on
site.
(3) Veterinary office, consisting of a facility for the practice of
veterinary medicine by a licensed veterinary doctor, provided that:
(a) The keeping or kenneling of all animals shall be inside the
veterinary medicine building facility.
(b) All kennels shall be constructed of such sound-absorbing
material as specified by the Concord Township Building
Inspector.
(c) All animals shall be housed indoors.
(4) Car wash.
(5) Flex space.
(6) Motor vehicle service station (not to include a repair shop or car
wash establishment as a principal use), provided that:
(a) A minimum lot width of not less than 200 feet shall be provided
along each street on which the lot fronts.
§ 210-119 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-119
196:725
(b) Access to roads shall be at least 50 feet from any intersection.
(c) All activities except those performed at the fuel pumps shall be
in accordance with the Concord Township Building Code and
Fire Code, and shall be fenced.
(d) Fuel pumps shall be at least 40 feet from any ultimate street
right-of-way.
(e) All storage of materials, parts, equipment, and refuse shall be
within a completely fenced area.
(7) Motor vehicle repair shop and/or body shop, provided that:
(a) All repair work, including paint spraying, is done within an
enclosed building.
(b) All storage materials, parts, and refuse is within an enclosed
building.
(c) All vehicles awaiting repair are stored in an enclosed area
screened from adjacent streets and properties by a wall or
solid fence at least six feet high constructed of concrete,
concrete blocks, wooden planks, or bricks, with access only
through solid gates.
(8) Funeral home.
(9) Emergency service facility.237
D. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article XXVII of Chapter
210. The following shall apply to C-1 District properties located outside
of the Concordville Village Overlay District. None of the conditional
uses listed below shall apply to the Concordville Village Overlay
District.
(1) Retail store or shop with a gross floor area of 30,000 square feet
and greater, subject to § 210-121.
(2) Convenience store or mini-market of 4,000 square feet or more,
and/or including the sale of gasoline as an accessory use, provided:
(a) Said use is designed for commercial goods and hours of
operation which encourage short stops for specific items
rather than extensive shopping trips.
(b) The lot on which such use is established shall not be less than
three acres in size.
(c) The lot on which such use is established shall be located at a
highway intersection with the lot containing frontage on two
237. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(10), which permitted outside restaurant use as a
special exception use, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
8-25-2015 by Ord. No. 367.
§ 210-119 CONCORD CODE § 210-119
196:726
§ 210-120. Yard and area regulations.
Except as set forth in § 210-125.1 for the Concordville Village Overlay
District, the following shall apply for properties within the C-1 District
located outside the Concordville Village Overlay District:
highways classified as principal arterial highways and/or
collector highways by Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(3) Restaurant, fast-food.
(4) Any establishment that receives a transfer of a liquor license.
(5) Outside restaurant use, including the service of food, beverage
and/or liquor, provided that: [Added 8-25-2015 by Ord. No. 367]
(a) All outside service areas are limited to 10% of the size of the
indoor service area.
(b) No outside restaurant use is permitted with respect to any
restaurant property which borders a residential district.
(c) No outside bar, no outside entertainment, music, or games, and
no outside food preparation, grilling or cooking is permitted.
E. The uses permitted by right, special exception or conditional use shall
not include adult entertainment uses, as defined in Chapter 210,
Zoning.
A. Lot area and lot width. Except as otherwise required, every lot shall
have a lot area of not less than 6,500 square feet and such lot shall be
not less than 50 feet in width at the building line.
B. Total impervious coverage. The total impervious coverage shall not
exceed 80% of the lot area.
C. Total building area coverage. The building area coverage shall not
exceed 55% of the lot area.
D. Minimum structure setback.
(1) Front yard: 20 feet from each street right-of-way on which the lot
abuts.
(2) Side yards: for every detached building, two side yards, neither of
which shall be less than 12 feet in width. For every semidetached
building, one side yard, which shall be not less than 12 feet in
width.
(3) Rear yard: 25 feet.
E. Height. No building shall exceed two stories or 35 feet in height.
§ 210-119 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-121
196:727
§ 210-121. Special development regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all properties in the C-1 District:
A. Along each side or rear property line which directly abuts a residence
district in the Township or a similar district in an adjoining municipality,
a screen buffer planting strip of not less than 30 feet in width as defined
in Chapter 210, Article XXI, Landscaping, shall be provided. Parking
shall not be permitted within the buffer planting strip. Any part or
portion of site which is not used for buildings, other structures, loading
or parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks and designated storage areas
shall be planted with an all-season ground cover and shall be
landscaped according to an overall landscape plan to be reviewed and
evaluated by the Township in accordance with Chapter 210, Article XXI,
Landscaping, and Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
B. No storage of merchandise, articles or equipment shall be permitted
outside a building except for plant material sales or plant nursery, and
no goods, articles or equipment shall be stored, displayed or offered for
sale beyond the front lines of a building. No outdoor vending machine,
or similar use shall be allowed in any required yard abutting a street or
on a public sidewalk, and no more than two such machines shall be
permitted on a lot. If there are more than two, then such machines shall
be inside a building.
C. Any establishment which furnishes carts or mobile baskets for shopping
shall provide definite areas within that required space for storage of
shopping carts. Each designed storage area shall be clearly marked for
storage of shopping carts.
D. No use shall be permitted which is objectionable as defined in
§ 210-224.
E. The off-street parking, off-street loading and special requirements
relating to highway frontage prescribed in Chapter 210, Article XXII,
shall apply in commercial districts, and each use shall comply with the
provisions of § 210-219, relating to waste disposal.
F. Screening of roof objects. Water towers, storage tanks, processing
equipment, stand fans, skylights, cooling towers, vents, satellite dishes
and any other structures or equipment which rise above the roofline
shall be limited to five feet in height and shall be effectively shielded
from view from any public or private dedicated street by an
architecturally sound method to be submitted by the developer which
shall be approved, in writing, by the Board of Supervisors before
construction or erection of said structures or equipment.
G. Whenever the total gross floor area of a building, on a lot, exceeds
30,000 square feet, the design standards of Article VIII of Chapter 160,
Subdivision and Land Development, shall apply.
§ 210-121 CONCORD CODE § 210-121
196:728
§ 210-122. Landscaping regulations.
See Article XXI of Chapter 210.
§ 210-123. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII of Chapter 210, and § 210-125.1 for properties located
within the Concordville Village Overlay District.
§ 210-124. Off-street parking and loading regulations.
See Article XXII of Chapter 210, and § 210-125.1 for properties located
within the Concordville Village Overlay District.
§ 210-125. Site plan review regulations.
See Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-125.1. Concordville Village Overlay District.
H. Conditional uses shall be governed by the provisions of Article XXVII of
Chapter 210.
A. Application of regulations. In the Concordville Village Overlay District,
the regulations contained in this § 210-125.1 shall apply.
B. Intent. Pursuant to the powers and authority granted by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act No. 247, as amended,
the regulations of the Concordville Village Overlay District are
intended:
(1) To help implement the Concord Township Comprehensive Plan.
(2) To help implement the objectives in § 210-2C(4) of the overall
objectives of the Zoning Ordinance by creating a Concordville
Village District that would include historic structures along
Concord Road and Route 1 as significant elements of its identity.
C. Designation of Concord Village Overlay District boundaries.
(1) The Concordville Village Overlay District shall be as shown on the
map by the same name dated May 2, 2006, which is attached
hereto as Exhibit A.238
D. Use regulations for the Concordville Village Overlay District.
(1) Uses by right (permitted principal uses).
(a) Retail store or shop and with a gross floor area of less than
15,000 square feet on the ground floor of a building.
238. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-121 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-125.1
196:729
(b) Office, professional office.
(c) Studio, broadcasting studio.
(d) Bank or financial institution.
(e) Club, social.
(f) Health center; health spa and physical fitness club.
(g) Shops of craftsmen for carpentry, cabinetmaking, furniture
repair, light metal working, tinsmith, or similar shop, provided
that the gross floor area devoted to such use shall not exceed
8,000 square feet on the ground floor of a building, and further
provided that no such shop shall be part of a live-work unit.
(h) Library.
(i) Restaurant, without a drive-through.
(j) Antique shop.
(k) Day-care center.
(l) Museum.
(m) Convenience store or mini-market of up to 4,000 square feet of
gross floor area on the ground floor of a building, and without
the sale of gasoline.
(2) Accessory uses in the Concordville Village Overlay District.
(a) Vehicle parking lot as an accessory use to the principal
permitted commercial uses.
(b) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental
to any of the above permitted uses, which use may include:
[1] Storage within a completely enclosed building in
conjunction with a permitted use.
[2] Signs as permitted in Article XXIII of Chapter 210, Zoning.
(3) Uses by special exception in the Concordville Village Overlay
District.
(a) When authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board, any use of the
same general character as those permitted by right (principal
permitted uses) and not provided for in any other commercial
district.
(b) Veterinary office, consisting of a facility for the practice of
veterinary medicine by a licensed veterinary doctor, provided
that:
§ 210-125.1 CONCORD CODE § 210-125.1
196:730
[1] The keeping or kenneling of all animals shall be inside the
veterinary medicine building facility.
[2] All kennels shall be constructed of such sound-absorbing
material as specified by the Concord Township Codes
Enforcement Officer.
[3] All animals shall be housed indoors.
(c) Emergency service facility.
(d) Outside restaurant use, including the service of food, beverage
and/or liquor, provided that:
[1] All outside service areas are limited to 10% of the size of
the indoor service area.
[2] No outside restaurant use is permitted with respect to any
restaurant property which borders a residential district.
(4) Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article XXVII of
Chapter 210.
(a) Retail store or shop with a gross floor area of 15,000 square
feet to a maximum of 30,000 square feet on the ground floor of
a building, subject to § 210-125.1F and, in particular, the two
pages of Design Guidelines for Retail Building Design (for
large-scale buildings).
(b) Live-work units, subject to the transfer of development rights,
as per § 210-238.
(c) Any establishment that receives a transfer of a liquor license.
(5) The uses permitted by right, special exception, or conditional use
shall not include adult entertainment uses, as defined in Chapter
210, Zoning.
E. Yard and area regulations for the Concordville Village Overlay District.
(1) Lot area and lot width. Except as otherwise required, every lot shall
have a lot area of not less than 6,500 square feet and such lot shall
be not less than 50 feet in width at the building line.
(2) Total impervious coverage. The total impervious coverage shall not
exceed 70% of the lot area.
(3) Total building area coverage. The building area coverage shall not
exceed 50% of the lot area.
(4) Minimum structure setback/build-to line.
(a) Front yard: 15 to 20 feet from each street right-of-way on
which the lot abuts, as a build-to line.
§ 210-125.1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-125.1
196:731
(b) Side yards: for every detached building, two side yards, neither
of which shall be less than 12 feet in width; for every
semidetached building, one side yard, which shall be not less
than 12 feet in width.
(c) Rear yard: 25 feet.
F. Other design standards.
(1) The other design standards below shall apply. All design features
and streetscape elements expressed below are intended to be
generally consistent with the Concordville Village Development
Strategy Plan dated May 2, 2006, Exhibit B.239
(2) Building widths.
(a) The width of any new building shall be as follows:
[1] The width of individual bays of new buildings shall be in
the range of 24 feet to 32 feet. If a new building exceeds
32 feet in width, there shall be a recess or projection of up
to four feet, to differentiate the bays of the building in
twenty-four- to thirty-two-foot wide sections.
(3) Building heights shall be as follows:
(a) The minimum building height shall be 20 feet.
(b) The maximum building height shall be 35 feet, except that the
Board of Supervisors may allow live-work units in a building of
up to 45 feet in height as a conditional use.
(4) Buildings shall be located as follows:
(a) All new buildings shall be placed at the build-to line adjoining
the sidewalk, in alignment with existing buildings on the block,
thereby forming a street wall.
(b) In the event that a building is redeveloped in the exact location
as exists, and cannot be feasibly moved to the build-to line,
street wall elements such as walls, pillars, colonnades, and the
like shall be installed and maintained in general alignment
with existing buildings on the block.
(5) Building uses shall be as follows:
(a) New buildings shall be vertically mixed in use to the maximum
extent possible with ground floor retail, and with office or
residential use above the ground floor. Live-work units, when
approved as a conditional use, may provide opportunities for
residential use on the second or third floors.
239. Editor's Note: The aerial photo of the Concordville Village Overlay District is included at
the end of this chapter. The remainder of Exhibit B is on file in the Township offices.
§ 210-125.1 CONCORD CODE § 210-125.1
196:732
(6) Parking shall be arranged as follows:
(a) Parking shall be located and maintained to the side or rear of
buildings.
(b) Shared parking may be permitted when approved by the Board
of Supervisors, with guidance from the Township Engineer and
the Urban Land Institute publication titled "Shared Parking,"
Second Edition, 2005, or the most current edition thereof.
(7) Design shall also be in accordance with the guidelines and best
practices set forth on the pages that follow pertaining to:240
(a) Adaptive reuse of buildings. (m) Sidewalks.
(b) Rehabilitation of buildings. (n) Street edge strips.
(c) Building location. (o) Curbs and curb cuts.
(d) Building scale. (p) Parking: off-street.
(e) Porches, porticos and stoops. (q) Parking: on-street.
(f) Village-scale buildings. (r) Traffic calming.
(g) Retail building design. (s) Signage.
(h) Context sensitive. (t) Street furniture.
(i) Live-work units. (u) Awnings and banners.
(j) Streetscape. (v) Pavement materials.
(k) Streets and service lanes
(alleys).
(w) Dumpsters.
(l) Street-lights.
240. Editor's Note: These pages are on file in the Township offices.
§ 210-125.1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-125.1
196:733

ARTICLE XIV
C-2 Planned Business and Commercial District
[Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177; 11-7-1995 by Ord. No. 200;
3-4-1997 by Ord. No. 210; 7-1-1997 by Ord. No. 215; 10-7-1997 by
Ord. No. 218; 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 219; 3-3-1998 by Ord. No. 222;
12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231]
§ 210-126. Purpose.
§ 210-127. Use regulations.
A building or unified group of buildings may be erected or used and a
lot may be used or occupied for any of the following uses and no other,
and subject to § 210-224 of Chapter 210 dealing with prohibited uses and
performance standards, provided that the use and conversion of any
existing dwelling shall comply with the provisions of Article XXVI and
§ 210-225, and provided that the demolition of, or special exception or
conditional use for an historic resource shown on the Historic Resources
Map, or any subdivision, land development or construction activity within
300 feet of an historic resource shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter
210, Article XIXA, relating to historic preservation, and further provided
that the use shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 210, Article XX,
Floodplain Conservation District.
A. Planned Business and Commercial Districts are designed to offer
Township-wide and regional services and provide for development
which must meet special requirements.
B. The districts shall be developed as a group or groups of business and
compatible facilities with appropriate landscaping. All development
shall conform to a comprehensive set of design requirements related to
such issues as access, land use, building placement, building coverage,
traffic safety, off-street parking, buffering and screening and
stormwater management.
A. Uses by right (permitted principal uses).
(1) The principal permitted uses of the C-1 District from § 210-119A
and telecommunications facilities with antenna as a conditional use
subject to the provisions of Chapter 210, Articles XXA and XXVII,
may apply, whenever the total lot area of the property is less than
three acres on the effective date of this chapter. [Amended
10-5-1999 by Ord. No. 244]
(2) A planned shopping center, including the following uses as part of
an integrated retail development:
(a) Retail store, including department store, variety store,
furniture store, specialty shop or any other retail store or shop
designed primarily to serve an area larger than the
§ 210-126 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-127
196:735
immediately surrounding neighborhood, with a gross floor area
of less than 65,000 square feet.
(b) Retail service or personal service shop, provided that:
[1] Any repair or service activity, if located on the ground
floor, shall be not less than 15 feet from the front of the
building and shall be screened by a wall or partition from
the front portion of the building used by customers.
[2] The area devoted to repair or service activity shall
constitute not more than 60% of the gross floor area.
[3] Any materials employed for laundry or dry cleaning will
not involve danger of fire or explosion.
(c) Office, office building, utility office, professional office.
(d) Studio, broadcasting studio.
(e) Bank or financial institution.
(f) Automated teller machine (ATM).
(g) Commercial drop-off and pick-up boxes.
(h) Day-care center.
(3) Restaurant.
(4) Commercial education or instruction; educational institution.
(5) Governmental building.
(6) Health center.
(7) Health spa and/or physical fitness club.
(8) Religious institution.
(9) Community center.
(10) Library.
(11) Motor vehicle parts accessories store, not including sale of motor
fuel.
(12) Tourist house/home.
(13) Clinic.
(14) Cellular telecommunications facility with antenna, provided that
such antenna is attached to an existing tower, water tower, smoke
stack or other similar tall structure, subject to the requirements of
Chapter 210, Article XXA.
§ 210-127 CONCORD CODE § 210-127
196:736
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Vehicle parking lot as accessory use to the permitted commercial
uses.
(2) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the principal permitted uses, which use may include:
(a) Storage within a completely enclosed building in conjunction
with a permitted use.
(b) Living accommodations for the proprietor of a store or
business establishment, or for a watchman or caretaker or livework
units, provided that no such dwelling accommodation
shall be located on the first floor.
(c) Signs as permitted in Chapter 210, Article XXIII.
C. Uses by special exception, when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255]
(1) Any use of the same general character as those permitted by right
(principal permitted uses) and not provided for in any other
commercial district.
(2) Motor vehicle sales agency (not to include a heavy truck sales
agency as a principal use) and motor vehicle rental agency,
provided that all facilities are located and all services are
conducted within the confines of the lot.
(3) Hotel, motel, or inn, provided that such use is designed so as to
constitute a logical and harmonious element of the overall
development plan for the particular district location.
(4) Bus or railway station.
(5) Public or private garage or parking lot, provided that:
(a) All facilities are located and all services are conducted within
the confines of the lot.
(b) Such use shall not include the storage or accumulation of
motor vehicles or parts thereof outside of buildings in excess of
24 hours.
(6) Funeral home.
(7) Laundry, dry-cleaning or clothes-pressing establishment, provided
that the materials employed will not involve danger from fire or
explosion, and the use will not detract from the predominant
commercial character of the district and will be served by public
sewer.
(8) Commercial greenhouse or nursery.
§ 210-127 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-127
196:737
(9) Wholesale business establishment.
(10) Cellular telecommunications facility with antenna subject to the
provisions of Chapter 210, Articles XXA and XXVII.
(11) Auction house.
(12) Emergency service facility.
(13) Administrative regional headquarters of motor vehicle rental
agency, including incidental local motor vehicle rental agency,
together with an accessory temporary storage lot, provided that:
(a) The local motor vehicle rental agency shall be located in the
headquarters office building and shall occupy no more than
20% thereof.
(b) Vehicles for storage may be in a parking arrangement that is
stacked without aisles.
(c) Any accessory temporary storage lot shall be used only for
nonrented vehicles and shall be screened from adjacent streets
and properties by use of a berm, fence, wall or dense plantings,
or a combination thereof
(d) The sale, service, repair or washing of motor vehicles is
prohibited.
(14) Shops of craftsmen, provided that the gross floor area devoted to
such use shall not exceed 8,000 square feet.
(15) Indoor entertainment facility, including a dinner theatre, music
theatre and/or performing arts center or theatre.241
D. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Chapter 210, Article
XXVII. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255]
(1) Retail store, including department store, variety store, furniture
store, specialty shop or any other retail store or shop designed
primarily to serve an area larger than the immediately surrounding
neighborhood, with a gross floor area of 65,000 square feet and
greater, subject to § 210-129.
(2) Restaurant, fast-food; restaurant, drive-in service; restaurant,
drive-through service.
(3) Indoor place of amusement, such as a theater, or indoor recreation
such as a bowling alley.
(4) Outdoor place of amusement.
241. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(16), added 6-7-2005 by Ord. No. 293, which listed
outside restaurant use as a use by special exception, and which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 3-1-2011 by Ord. No. 334. See now Subsection D(11)
§ 210-127 CONCORD CODE § 210-127
196:738
(5) Hospital.
(6) Personal care facility in accordance with § 210-238F.
(7) Convenience store or mini-market of 4,000 square feet or more,
and/or including the retail sale of gasoline as an accessory use,
provided that: [Added 7-3-2001 by Ord. No. 259]
(a) Said use is designed for commercial goods and hours of
operation which encourage short stops for specific items
rather than extensive shopping trips.
(b) The lot on which such use is established shall not be less than
three acres in size.
(c) The lot on which such use is established shall be located at a
highway intersection with the lot containing frontage on two
highways classified as principal arterial highways and/or
collector highways by Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land
Development of the Code of the Township of Concord.
(8) Retail sale of fireworks. [Added 5-2-2006 by Ord. No. 302]
(9) Any establishment that receives a transfer of a liquor license.
[Added 1-2-2007 by Ord. No. 309]
(10) Car wash. [Added 5-6-2008 by Ord. No. 321]
(11) Seasonal outdoor restaurant seating. [Added 3-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 334]
(a) Seasonal outdoor restaurant seating contemplates the service
of food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages if the
establishment possesses a valid liquor license, to patrons
seated at tables and chairs arranged in an orderly fashion in a
partitioned area outside and contiguous to the restaurant
building. Said area shall not include a separate bar for the
service of alcohol.
(b) Additional parking shall be provided at a ratio of one parking
space per four outdoor seats. Required off-street parking shall
be provided in accordance with §§ 210-196 and 197 of this
chapter.
(c) An enclosure wall or fence shall be required to be constructed
around the perimeter of any seasonal outdoor restaurant
seating area at a minimum height of 42 inches.
(d) Seasonal outdoor restaurant seating may be uncovered,
partially covered or fully covered by means of umbrellas, an
awning or canopy, but in no instance shall said area be fully
enclosed and heated so as to be utilized as seating area at any
time from November 1 through April 1.
§ 210-127 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-127
196:739
(e) The design of the seasonal outdoor restaurant seating area
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Planner as
part of the conditional use permitting process to ensure
compatibility with the corresponding building and landscape.
(f) Minimum security lighting shall be provided for all seasonal
outdoor restaurant seating areas open to the public.
Decorative or accent lighting may be used, provided that the
canopy/awning lighting is directed downward. Exposed neon
tube lighting shall be prohibited.
(g) All forms of speaker amplification associated with the seasonal
outdoor restaurant seating shall be reviewed and approved by
the Township Engineer as part of the conditional use
permitting process.
(h) Outdoor fireplaces, fountains and any other structures
accessory to the seasonal outdoor restaurant seating area shall
be reviewed and approved by the Township Board of
Supervisors as part of the conditional use permitting process.
(12) Single-family attached dwelling units, provided that: [Added
2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 346]
(a) The parcel of land or tract on which such use is established
shall not be less than four acres gross in size.
(b) The tract on which such use is established shall be located at a
signalized intersection with the tract containing frontage on
one public roadway classified as a principal arterial highway
and three other existing or proposed public roadways of any
classification.
(c) The yard and area regulations shall be as set forth in
§ 210-128.1.
(d) 2.5 parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be provided.
(e) In lieu of any other zoning ordinance requirements for a screen
buffer planting strip or landscaping, a minimum strip of land
not less than 20 feet in width shall be suitably landscaped
except for necessary sidewalks and accessways crossing the
strip on three of the four sides of the property (no minimum
width of landscaping shall be required on the fourth side of the
property), and an overall landscape plan satisfactory to the
Board of Supervisors shall be required as part of the
conditional use process.
(f) Signage for single-family attached dwelling unit developments
shall be the same signs which are permitted in multifamily
residence zoning districts as specified in § 210-209.
§ 210-127 CONCORD CODE § 210-127
196:740
§ 210-128. Yard and area regulations.
E. The uses permitted by right (principal permitted uses) and the uses
permitted as conditional uses shall not include adult entertainment
uses, as defined in Chapter 210, Zoning.
A. Site area. Unless provided for otherwise, the minimum site area shall
be three acres, whether a single tract or several tracts are joined in one
application. Every development lot within the site area shall have an
area of not less than 2,500 square feet, and such lot shall be not less
than 20 feet in width at the building line, except for the
telecommunication facility which shall be in accordance with the
regulations governing same.
B. Total impervious coverage. The total impervious coverage shall not
exceed 70% of the lot area.
C. Total building area coverage. The building area coverage shall not
exceed 35% of the lot area.
D. Minimum structure setback.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a building setback on each street on
which a site abuts which shall be not less than 50 feet in depth from
the ultimate right-of-way line.
(a) The entire yard, except for required parking and walkways,
shall be planted with an all-season ground cover not to exceed
one foot in height. Such planting shall be continuous across the
entire frontage from one side property line to the other side
property line and may be broken only for access drives. A
decorative buffer wall, fence, or dense hedge, which shall not
be less than three feet or greater than five feet in height, shall
be erected or planted a minimum of 25 feet from the ultimate
right-of-way line. The buffer shall be interrupted only for
access drives.
(2) Side yards. For each building or unified group of buildings erected
on a building development lot or group of lots there shall be two
side yards, neither of which shall be less than 10 feet in width,
except that where a lot abuts a residence district in the Township
or a similar district in an adjoining municipality, a side yard shall be
provided which shall be not less than 50 feet in width.
(3) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each building development
lot or group of lots which shall be not less than 20 feet, except that
where the actual or designated rear yard abuts a residential
district in the Township or a similar district in an adjoining
municipality, in which case:
(a) The rear yard shall be increased to a minimum of 50 feet, and
30 feet of which shall be an evergreen screen landscaped
§ 210-127 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-128
196:741
§ 210-128.1. Yard and area regulations for single-family attached
dwelling unit developments. [Added 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 346]
buffer of at least six feet in height. Such planting shall be
continuous along the entire property line and may be broken
only for access drives.
(b) No driveway shall be closer than 15 feet to a property line,
except for approved shared driveways.
E. Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height, provided that such
height limits may be exceeded by five feet for each 5% that the lot
coverage is decreased below the maximum building area requirements,
up to a maximum height of 45 feet.
F. Lot area of less than three acres. Whenever a use is permitted on a
property of a total lot area of less than three acres on the effective date
of this chapter [see § 210-127A(1)], the yard and area regulations set
forth in § 210-120A through E, inclusive, shall govern. [Added
10-5-1999 by Ord. No. 244]
A. Site area and frontage. The minimum tract size (tract area) shall be four
acres, whether a single tract or several tracts are joined in one
application. There shall be no minimum lot size for single-family
attached dwelling units. The minimum tract frontage on a principal
arterial highway shall be 300 feet.
B. Total impervious coverage. The total impervious coverage shall not
exceed 70% of the tract area.
C. Total building area coverage. The building area coverage shall not
exceed 35% of the tract area.
D. Minimum building setback.
(1) There shall be a minimum building setback of 50 feet from the
principal arterial highway on which the tract has frontage. There
shall be a minimum building setback of 20 feet from the other three
roads on which the tract has frontage. Buildings may encroach up
to three feet into the setback to allow staggering of units.
E. Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height, provided that such
height limits may be exceeded by five feet for each 5% that the
impervious coverage of the tract is decreased below the maximum
impervious requirements, up to a maximum height of 45 feet.
F. Minimum building separation. Buildings containing attached dwelling
units shall have the following minimum separations between buildings
from window wall to window wall:
(1) End to end 30 feet;
(2) Rear to rear 50 feet;
§ 210-128 CONCORD CODE § 210-128.1
196:742
§ 210-129. Special development regulations.
The special requirements prescribed for C-1 Local Commercial Districts in
§ 210-121 shall apply to C-2, except as follows:
(3) Rear to side 30 feet; and
(4) Front to rear 30 feet.
G. Maximum number of units per building. Individual buildings shall have
no more than 12 units per building.
A. Along each side or rear property line which directly abuts an R-1 to R-3
Residence District in the Township or a similar district in an adjoining
municipality, a screen buffer planting strip of not less than 50 feet in
width, as defined in Chapter 210, Article XXI, Landscaping, shall be
provided. Along each side or rear property line which directly abuts an
R-A, R-AH, R-PRD or R-MHP District in the Township or a similar
district in an adjoining municipality, a screen buffer planting strip of not
less than 30 feet in width, as defined in Chapter 210, Article XXI,
Landscaping, shall be provided. Along each street line bounding a
residence district, a strip of land not less than 20 feet in width shall be
suitably landscaped except for necessary sidewalks and accessways
crossing the strip. Parking shall not be permitted within the buffer
planting strip. All landscaping shall be in accordance with Chapter 210,
Article XXI, and Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
B. Landscaping. Any part or portion of a site which is not used for
buildings, other structures, loading and parking spaces and aisles,
sidewalks and designated storage areas shall be planted with an allseason
ground cover and shall be landscaped according to an overall
landscape plan to be reviewed and evaluated by the Township.
Maximum protection shall be exercised with the conservation of the
natural woodland in landscaping.
C. Screening of roof objects. Water towers, storage tanks, processing
equipment, stand fans, skylights, cooling towers, communication
towers, vents, satellite dishes and any other structures or equipment
which rises above the roof line shall be limited to five feet in height and
shall be effectively shielded from view from any public or private
dedicated street by an architecturally sound method to be submitted by
the developer which shall be approved, in writing, by the Board of
Supervisors before construction or erection of said structures or
equipment.
D. No use shall be permitted which is objectionable as provided in
§ 210-224.
E. Fire protection. See Chapter 210, Article XXIV, § 210-220.
§ 210-128.1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-129
196:743
§ 210-129.1. Special development regulations for a single-family
attached dwelling unit development. [Added 2-19-2013 by Ord. No.
346]
When the parcel or tract on which the use is established abuts a Residential-
I or Residential-II District, a buffer of at least 50 feet shall be provided of
which 15 feet shall be evergreens of at least 12 feet in height.
§ 210-130. Landscaping regulations.
See Article XXI of Chapter 210.
§ 210-131. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII of Chapter 210.
§ 210-132. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
See Article XXII of Chapter 210.
§ 210-133. Site plan review regulations.
See Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
F. Whenever the total gross floor area of a building on a lot is 65,000
square feet or more, the design standards of Chapter 160, Article VIII,
Subdivision and Land Development, shall apply.
G. Conditional uses shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 210,
Article XXVII.
§ 210-129 CONCORD CODE § 210-133
196:744
ARTICLE XV
M/I Municipal/Institutional District242
[Added 7-5-2000 by Ord. No. 249]
§ 210-134. Purpose.
The purpose of this zoning district is to provide specific opportunities for
municipal and institutional uses.
§ 210-135. Use regulations.
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be
used, for any of the purposes set forth in this section and for no other:
A. Uses by right.
(1) Township governmental administrative office building and facilities
and meeting rooms.
(2) Township maintenance facilities and storage.
(3) Municipal use.
(4) Library.
(5) Museum.
(6) Educational institution.
(7) Conversion of buildings and/or dwellings to a nonmunicipal/
institutional use in accordance with the provisions of § 210-225.
[Added 7-3-2001 by Ord. No. 260]
B. Accessory uses.
(1) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above permitted uses.
(2) Parking in accordance with Article XXII of Chapter 210, Zoning.
(3) Signs as permitted in Article XXIII of Chapter 210, Zoning.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article XXVII.
(1) Community center.
(2) Day-care center.
(3) Active and passive outdoor recreational uses, other than those
related to a municipal use.
(4) Cellular telecommunications facility.
242. Editor's Note: Former Art. XV, C-2A Planned Business and Commercial District, as
amended, was repealed 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231.
§ 210-134 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-135
196:745
§ 210-136. Yard and area regulations.
§ 210-137. Special development regulations.
(5) Power generation facility, in accordance with § 210-238G.
A. Lot area. A lot area not less than five acres shall be provided.
B. Lot width. The width at the building line shall be not less than 300 feet.
C. Minimum building setback.
(1) Front yard: 100 feet from each street right-of-way on which the lot
abuts.
(2) Side yards: 100 feet on each side, except as provided in
§ 210-137C.
(3) Rear yard: 100 feet, except as provided in § 210-137C.
D. Total building area coverage. The building area coverage shall not
exceed 20% of the lot area.
E. Total impervious coverage. The total impervious coverage shall not
exceed 40% of the lot area.
A. Pedestrian pathways and trails shall be provided to link together
municipal, institutional, recreational and civic activities and buildings.
B. The campus environment of the M/I District shall be enhanced through
landscaping, pavilions, gazebos, benches, playgrounds, playfields and
other civic amenities, all of which shall be approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
C. In the case where a maintenance building, garage or other like repair or
storage building is used jointly as a municipal use and educational
institutional use, such joint facility shall be set back at least 10 feet
from front, side or rear property lines, provided that such facility is
located at least 100 feet from the perimeter boundary of the District.
D. A twenty-five-foot wide landscaped buffer shall be installed in
accordance with Article XXI along property lines which directly abut a
residential use, if any proposed building is within 200 feet of such
property line or if any bus parking is within 200 feet of such property
line.
E. Lighting. The maximum exposure of footcandles at the property line
shall be 0.5, and no trespass glare shall occur beyond the property
lines.
F. Security fencing shall be installed around any bus parking area.
§ 210-135 CONCORD CODE § 210-138
196:746
§ 210-138. Landscaping regulations.
See Article XXI.
§ 210-139. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII.
§ 210-140. Off-street parking and loading regulations.
See Article XXII.
§ 210-141. Site plan review requirements.
See subdivision and land development provisions of the Township Code,
Chapter 160.
§ 210-138 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-141
196:747

ARTICLE XVI
(Reserved)243
§ 210-142. (Reserved)
§ 210-143. (Reserved)
§ 210-144. (Reserved)
§ 210-145. (Reserved)
§ 210-146. (Reserved)
§ 210-147. (Reserved)
§ 210-148. (Reserved)
§ 210-149. (Reserved)
§ 210-150. (Reserved)
243. Editor's Note: Former Article XVI, C-3 Service Commercial District, as amended, was
repealed 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231.
§ 210-142 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-150
196:749

ARTICLE XVII
LI Light Industry District
§ 210-151. General description and purpose.
§ 210-152. Use regulations. [Amended 11-7-1995 by Ord. No. 200;
7-1-1997 by Ord. No. 216; 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 218]
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may
be used for any of the following purposes and for no other except those
allowed on special exception, provided that such building or use does not
create any substantial amount of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat,
glare or other objectional influences, and provided that the demolition
of or special exception or conditional use for a historic resource shown
on the Historic Resources Map or any subdivision, land development or
construction activity within 300 feet of a historic resource shown on the
Historic Resources Map shall be subject to the provisions of Article XIXA
relating to historic preservation.
A. The LI Light Industry District is hereby established as a district in
which the regulations are intended to permit and encourage industrial
and office use development and will be so located and designed as to
constitute a harmonious and appropriate part of the physical
development of the Township, to contribute to the soundness of the
economic base of the Township and to otherwise further the purposes of
this chapter. [Amended 6-6-2000 by Ord. No. 247]
B. Consistent with the general purpose of this chapter, the specific intent
of this article is:
(1) To encourage the construction on and continued use of the land in
the district for industrial and office use purposes. [Amended
6-6-2000 by Ord. No. 247]
(2) To prohibit any use which would substantially interfere with the
development, continuation or expansion of industrial and office
uses in the district. [Amended 6-6-2000 by Ord. No. 247]
(3) To establish reasonable standards for buildings and other
structures, the areas and dimensions of yards and other open
spaces and the provision of facilities and operation of industries to
minimize air pollution, noise, glare, heat, vibration, fire, safety
hazards, etc.
A. Uses by right.
(1) Scientific or industrial research testing or experimental laboratory
or product development, provided that any laboratory animals be
kept within completely enclosed buildings at all times.
§ 210-151 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-152
196:751
(2) The manufacture, compounding, assembly or treatment of articles
or merchandise from the following materials, previously prepared
outside of the Township.
(a) Bone.
(b) Cloth.
(c) Cord, twine or rope, except jute and sisal.
(d) Cork.
(e) Feathers.
(f) Felt.
(g) Fiber.
(h) Glass.
(i) Hair (except washing, curling or dyeing).
(j) Horn.
(k) Leather and fur (excluding tanning, curing and dyeing).
(l) Metals.
(m) Paper.
(n) Plaster.
(o) Plastics.
(p) Precious or semiprecious stones.
(q) Shell.
(r) Tobacco.
(s) Wood (excluding use of planing mill, chemical treatment or
preservation and the bulk processing of wood and lumber).
(3) The manufacture, compounding, processing, canning, containing,
packaging, treatment, sale and distribution of such products as:
(a) Candy.
(b) Ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay.
(c) Clocks and watches.
(d) Cosmetics.
(e) Electrical or electronic devices, also home, commercial or
industrial appliances and instruments, including the
manufacture of accessory parts or assemblies.
§ 210-152 CONCORD CODE § 210-152
196:752
(f) Food products, including bottling, canning and/or distribution
of liquids for human consumption, including the manufacture
of soft drinks and carbonated waters.
(g) Hardware, cutlery, tools, scientific instruments and apparatus.
(h) Jewelry.
(i) Medical, drafting and other professional and scientific
instruments and equipment.
(j) Light metal processing, such as cleaning, machining, grinding,
stamping, extrusion, polishing, finishing, and excluding use of
drop hammer.
(k) Musical instruments.
(l) Novelties.
(m) Office machines and equipment.
(n) Optical goods and equipment.
(o) Paper and cardboard products from previously prepared
material purchased outside the Township.
(p) Pharmaceuticals.
(q) Photographic equipment.
(r) Small rubber products and synthetic treated fabrics (excluding
all rubber and synthetic processing).
(s) Sporting goods.
(t) Textiles, including spinning and weaving, but excluding wool
scouring and pulling or jute or burlap processing or
reconditioning or dyeing of any sort.
(u) Toiletries.
(v) Toys.
(w) Provided, however, that the following uses shall not be
permitted: manufacture of sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast,
refining or rendering of fats, bones or oils, roasting of coffee,
spices or soy beans, milling of flour, drying, smoking, pickling,
preserving or curing meats or fish. See also other prohibited
uses in Article XXV.
(4) Publishing, printing, lithography, binding and kindred arts.
(5) Cold storage plant, frozen food plant and lockers.
(6) Food commissaries and catering plants.
§ 210-152 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-152
196:753
(7) Laundry, dry cleaning, provided that no inflammable fluids are
used.
(8) Assembly, sales, repairs and service of business and office
machines, equipment and devices.
(9) Sales, service, repairs of farm and garden machinery, equipment
and supplies.
(10) Design, manufacture, distribution and sale of burial monuments
and underground burial vaults.
(11) Manufacture and/or storage of construction materials and
equipment.
(12) Machine, plumbing, heating, roofing, carpenter, cabinet,
upholstery furniture, electrical, welding, buffing, finishing, plating,
heat-treating, annealing, prefabricating, craftsman's, tinsmith,
pipe-fitting, paperhanger's, painter's and decorator's shops.
(13) Mail-order store, house or business.
(14) Carpet or rug cleaning.
(15)Warehouse: wholesale, storage or distribution.
(16) An office building or offices of an administrative, executive,
governmental, professional or similar agency.
(17) Public utility installation.
(18) Cinema, radio and television stations or studios.
(19) Central heating plant.
(20) Underground storage, in bulk, of fuel oil for sale and distribution,
excluding gasoline and other highly volatile or explosive fluids.
(21) Accessory use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to
any of the above-permitted uses and not detrimental to the
neighborhood, which uses may include:
(a) Storage within completely enclosed building in conjunction
with a permitted use.
(b) A cafeteria or other service facility located within the building
and separated for the exclusive use of occupants of the
building.
(c) A recreational area for occupants.
(d) Living quarters for watchman, caretakers or similar
employees.
(e) Signs as permitted in Article XXIII.
§ 210-152 CONCORD CODE § 210-152
196:754
(f) Parking structures which are accessory to a hospital. [Added
4-4-2006 by Ord. No. 299]
(g) Helistops which are accessory to a hospital. [Added 4-4-2006
by Ord. No. 299]
(22) A cellular telecommunications facility subject to the requirements
of Article XXA. [Added 3-3-1998 by Ord. No. 222]
(23)Office building or buildings; offices for administrative, executive,
professional or similar use. [Added 6-6-2000 by Ord. No. 247]
(24) Health center, health club or juvenile or adult day-care facility.
[Added 4-4-2006 by Ord. No. 299]
(25) Hospital. [Added 4-4-2006 by Ord. No. 299]
B. Uses by special exception. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255]
(1) Any nonresidential use of the same character as any of the uses
hereinbefore specifically permitted.
(2) Outside treatment or storage of materials or waste products, where
such materials are adequately enclosed by a fence erected of
substantial materials conforming to the design of the building, and
where such use is accessory to a permitted use.
(3) Religious institution.
(4) Educational institution, provided that the educational institution
may be associated with and developed upon the same lot as a
religious institution.
(5) Family entertainment center. [Added 6-8-2004 by Ord. No. 280]
(6) Hotel. Hotels in the LI Light Industry District are limited to parcels
located on a principal arterial highway and shall utilize the yard
and area regulations set forth in § 210-128, except that with
respect to height, no hotel in the LI Light Industry District shall
exceed 35 feet in height, provided that such height limit may be
exceeded by five feet for each 5% that the lot coverage is decreased
below the maximum building area requirements in § 210-128C, up
to a maximum of 50 feet in height. [Added 3-4-2014 by Ord. No.
355]
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article XXVII. [Amended
1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255]
(1) Adult entertainment uses.
(a) Adult entertainment uses, which uses shall not be permitted in
any other zoning district in Concord Township:
[1] Adult arcades.
§ 210-152 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-152
196:755
[2] Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores or adult video
stores.
[3] Adult cabarets.
[4] Adult motion-picture theaters.
[5] Adult theaters.
[6] Escort agencies.
[7] Nude model studios.
[8] Sexual encounter centers.
(b) Adult entertainment uses shall not include any use which is
prohibited by or would be in violation of the provisions of
Ordinance No. 198 or Ordinance No. 199, enacted October 3,
1995.244
(c) As used herein in Subsection C(1) above, the following words
shall have the meanings herein indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted
or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or for any form
of consideration or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still- or motion-picture machines, projectors, video
or laser disc players or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or
describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT
VIDEO STORE —
A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter
or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes
or video reproductions, slide or other visual
representations which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas; or
[a]
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are
designed for use in connection with specified sexual
activities.
[b]
[1]
244. Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Article I, Display, Sale and Distribution of Obscene Materials,
and Article II, Establishments Serving Alcoholic Beverages, respectively.
§ 210-152 CONCORD CODE § 210-152
196:756
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features:
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial
establishment where, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER — A theater, concert hall, auditorium or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features
persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or
live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the
premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, parttime
or contract basis, whether or not the person is
denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or
otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary,
wage or other compensation by the operator of said business.
"Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the
premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or
equipment on the premises or for the delivery of goods to the
premises.
A commercial establishment may have other principal
business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale
or rental of material depicting or describing specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still
be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store
or adult video store. Such other business purposes will
not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from
being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store or adult video store, so long as one of its business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration
the specified materials which are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
[2]
[1] Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity.
Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities; or
[2]
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
[3]
§ 210-152 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-152
196:757
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers
to act as a companion, guide or date for another person or
who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately
perform a striptease for another person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who
furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as
one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other
consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any of the following:
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who
appears seminude or in a state of nudity or who displays
specified anatomical areas and is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any
form of consideration. "Nude model studio" shall not include
a proprietary school licensed by the State of Pennsylvania or
a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in
part by public taxation; a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits
are transferable to a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human
male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or
cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any
part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state.
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business;
[1]
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not
a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented
business;
[2]
The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
[3]
[4] The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude
person is available for viewing; and
[1]
Where in order to participate in a class a student must
enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and
[2]
Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the
premises at any one time.
[3]
§ 210-152 CONCORD CODE § 210-152
196:758
§ 210-153. Yard and area regulations.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE or in a SEMINUDE CONDITION — The state of
dress in which clothing partially or opaquely covers specified
anatomical areas.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers
for any form of consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret,
adult motion-picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude
model studio or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Human genitals, pubic
region, anus, buttocks, female breast(s) below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, or human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Any of the following:
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — The increase in floor areas occupied by the
business by more than 25%, as the floor areas existed on
October 3, 1995.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between persons of the opposite sex; or
[1]
Activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons
is in a state of nudity or seminudity.
[2]
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
[1]
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or
sodomy; or
[2]
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth in Subsection C(1)(c)[1] or [2]
above.
[3]
(2) Any establishment that receives a transfer of a liquor license.
[Added 1-2-2007 by Ord. No. 309]
(3) Tattoo parlor, provided it is located at least 1,000 feet away from a
school or a place of worship. [Added 10-2-2007 by Ord. No. 317]
§ 210-152 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-153
196:759
§ 210-154. Performance requirements.
A. Lot area and lot width. A minimum of three acres with a lot width of no
less than 200 feet shall be provided for each building or group of
buildings.
B. Total site coverage. The maximum area permitted to be occupied by a
building or buildings and enclosed storage and shall be 40% of the lot
area.
C. Minimum structure setback. [Amended 10-4-1983 by Ord. No. 133]
(1) Front yard: 100 feet from each street right-of-way on which the lot
abuts, except for properties fronting either U.S. Route 1 or U.S.
Route 202, in which event the front yard setback shall be 150 feet
from each street right-of-way on which the lot abuts.
(2) Side yards: for every detached building, two side yards which shall
have an aggregate width of not less than 60 feet, and neither of
which shall be less than 20 feet. However, no building or other
permanent structure and no parking, loading or service area shall
be within 100 feet of a property or a zoning boundary line of a
residential district.
(3) Rear yard: 40 feet, except that no building or other permanent
structure and no parking, loading or service area shall be within
150 feet of a property or a zoning boundary line of a residential
district.
D. Heights. No building shall exceed two stories or more than 35 feet in
height, except for office buildings. No office building shall exceed 40
feet in height unless the setback for the office building from the rightof-
way line of a street is increased by 4 feet for every one foot of office
building height above 40 feet, in which case the height of the office
building may be increased to a maximum of 84 feet. [Amended
3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177; 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221; 6-6-2000 by
Ord. No. 247]
A. Smoke. No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other source of
visible gray greater than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as
published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a shade not
darker than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart may be emitted for not
more than four minutes in any thirty-minute period. These provisions,
applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also apply to visible smoke of any
other color, with an equivalent apparent opacity.
B. Dust and dirt, fumes, vapors and gases.
(1) The emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases which can
cause any damage to human health, to animals or vegetation or to
other forms of property or which can cause any soiling or staining
§ 210-153 CONCORD CODE § 210-154
196:760
of persons or property at any point beyond the lot line of the use
creating the emission is herewith prohibited.
(2) No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney or
otherwise shall exceed 0.3 grains per cubic foot of the covering gas
at any point beyond the lot line of the use creating the emission.
For measurement of the amount of particles in gases resulting from
combustion, standard correction shall be applied to a stack
temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess air in stack at full load.
C. Noise. The sound pressure level of any operation shall not exceed, at
any point on the boundary of a nonresidential district, the decibel levels
in the designated octave band shown below, except for emergency
alarm signals, and subject to the following corrections: subtract five
decibels for pulsating or periodic noises and five decibels for noise
sources operating less than 20% of any one-hour period. [Amended
3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
SOUND LEVELS
Maximum Permitted Sound Level
Octive Band in
Cycles Per Second
Along Agricultural
or Residential
District Boundaries
Along Any Other
District Boundaries
0 to 600 50 55
600 to 2,400 38 40
2,400 to 4,800 35 38
Above 4,800 32 38
D. Odors. There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous
matter in such quantities as to be offensive at any point on or beyond
the lot boundary line within which the industrial operation in situated.
Any process which may involve the creation or emission of any odors
shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system in order that
control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail.
There is hereby established as a guide in determining such quantities of
offensive odors Table 111 (Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5, Air Pollution
Abatement Manual, copyright 1951, by Manufacturing Chemists'
Association, as cited; the numerical average value for all authorities
listed may be used.
E. Glare and heat. No industrial use shall carry on an operation that would
produce heat or glare beyond the property line of the lot on which the
industrial operation is situated.
§ 210-154 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-154
196:761
§ 210-155. Waste storage and disposal.
§ 210-156. Other development requirements.
F. Variation. Machines or operations which cause vibrations shall be
permitted, but in no case shall any such vibrations be perceptible along
the boundary line of any nonindustrial district.
G. Radioactivity, electrical, radio disturbance or EMF and RFI emission.
There shall be no activities which emit dangerous radioactivity
disturbance (except from domestic household appliances) adversely
affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of
the creator of such disturbance.
A. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored
in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting
with energy devices, heating devices or appliances located and
operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel.
B. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products and all
fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by
an approved safety fence and visual screen and shall conform to all yard
requirements imposed upon the main buildings of this district.
C. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream or
watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or which will
destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
D. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive
to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if enclosed in
containers which are adequate to eliminate such hazards.
E. All applicable state and county regulations pertaining to sanitary land
fill must be complied with.
A. All buildings shall be arranged in a group or groups of buildings, and
the distance at the closest point between any two buildings or groups of
attached buildings shall be not less than 25 feet except where such
auxiliary building shall be used for housing a transformer or tanks or to
be used as a hose house or other items which are to be used within the
main building.
B. The proposed development shall abut two or more major or secondary
streets as defined in the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,245 and ingress and egress shall not be permitted from or to
residential streets. Exceptions may be approved by the Township Board
245. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-154 CONCORD CODE § 210-156
196:762
of Supervisors in such cases where the requirement of this subsection
is clearly impractical. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
C. A planting area shall be provided along each property or right-of-way
line that is opposite or adjacent to a residential zoning district boundary
line of a type and width as specified in Article XXI, §§ 210-193A(1) and
(2).
D. Any part or portion of a site which is not for buildings, other structures,
loading and parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks and designated
storage areas shall be planted with an all-season ground cover and shall
be landscaped to an overall plan. Maximum advantage shall be taken of
natural woods in landscaping.
E. All spaces between buildings and all parking, loading and unloading,
access and service areas shall be adequately illuminated at night. Such
illumination, including sign lighting, shall be arranged so as to protect
the surrounding streets and adjoining property from direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind.
F. On fire protection, requirements of Article XXIV, § 210-220, shall be
met. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
G. On all mechanical equipment not enclosed in a structure, regulations
given in Article XXI, § 210-193A(3), shall be followed. [Amended
3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
H. Water towers, storage tanks, processing equipment, stand fans,
skylights, cooling towers, communication towers, vents and any other
structures or equipment which rise above the roofline shall be
architecturally compatible or effectively shielded from view from any
public or private dedicated street by an architecturally sound method to
be submitted by the developer, which shall be approved, in writing, by
the Township Board of Supervisors before construction or erection of
said structures or equipment.
I. Where a development abuts a state highway, a traffic survey shall be
conducted and provisions shall be made for appropriate automatic
traffic control signal and acceleration and deceleration lanes if required
by the Township of Concord and approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation. Such a report and plans for access
roads, after approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, will then be submitted to the Board of Supervisors.
J. Sewage disposal.
(1) Industrial sewage pretreatment facilities shall be permitted as
required by state regulations. Secondary and tertiary treatment
facilities shall be permitted where essential to an appropriate site
plan. However, septic systems using on-lot drainage fields shall be
prohibited.
§ 210-156 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-156
196:763
§ 210-157. Landscaping regulations.
See Article XXI.
§ 210-158. Sign regulations. [Amended 8-25-2015 by Ord. No. 367;
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
(2) All industries intending to discharge liquid wastes into any reaches
of the creeks or drainageways flowing through or indirectly
draining areas of the Township shall provide such levels of
treatment described above as are required to maintain the quality
and composition of such discharge at the levels specified in the
Water Quality Criteria of the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law of
1937, as amended, for the Brandywine Creek and Tributaries (Zone
01.102) and shall obtain approval and a permit to discharge from
the State Sanitary Water Board. Proof of such permit shall be
submitted to the Board of Supervisors before approval shall be
given to occupy and use the buildings or waste treatment facilities.
(3) The Clean Streams Law was enacted as Act 4 of June 22, 1937, P.L.
1987, as amended. This law has since been incorporated into
various chapters of Title 25, Rules and Regulations of the
Department of Environmental Protection.
A. In addition to the sign regulations in Article XXIII, and notwithstanding
any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, multiple wall signs
for buildings fronting on a major arterial highway and on a major
collector road that connects to a major arterial highway, and located on
properties providing vehicular access onto more than one public road
may be permitted, provided that the following regulations are met:
(1) Such signs shall be visible from building frontage on that portion of
a building facing a major arterial highway and each side visible
from the roadway, unless the primary vehicular entrance and/or the
primary building entrance face another frontage or do not face any
frontage.
(2) The maximum combined total surface display area of all wall signs
on a building shall not exceed the following limits:
(a) One times the total linear footage of the subject property's
public road frontage for a building with a footprint of less than
8,000 square feet.
(b) One and two tenths times the total linear footage of the subject
property's public road frontage for a building with a footprint
greater than 8,000 square feet but less than 40,000 square
feet.
(c) One and five tenths times the total linear footage of the subject
property's public road frontage for a building with a footprint
greater than 40,000 square feet.
§ 210-156 CONCORD CODE § 210-158
196:764
§ 210-159. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
See Article XXII.
§ 210-160. Site plan review requirements.
See the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.246
(3) Wall-mounted signs shall be installed parallel to the supporting
wall and project no more than 18 inches from the face of such wall
and shall not extend above the roofline of such building. Chimneys,
spires, towers, elevator penthouses and similar projections shall be
considered above the roofline of buildings.
(4) An individual wall sign may identify only the occupant's name and/
or logo, an entrance to the building and/or a service offered within
the building.
(5) Wall signage shall consist of individual channel letters directly
connected to the exterior wall structure or interconnected by use of
a raceway.
(6) No wall of a building may contain more than one primary wall sign,
not to exceed 400 square feet in area, and no building shall contain
more than two primary wall signs. Each secondary wall sign (i.e.,
not primary wall sign) shall not exceed 150 square feet in area, and
no building shall contain more than six secondary wall signs. One
secondary wall sign may be on each side of a building that does not
include a primary wall sign, and two secondary wall signs may be
on each side of a building that does include a primary wall sign.
B. For all other regulations regarding signs, see Article XXIII.
C. All signage for individual tenants shall be reviewed and approved by the
Board of Supervisors on a case-by-case basis prior to issuance of
building permit, including but not limited to fonts, colors and
illumination.
246. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-158 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-160
196:765

ARTICLE XVIIA
Loop Road Overlay District
[Added 6-4-2013 by Ord. No. 348; amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No.
352247]
§ 210-160.1. Intent; purpose; use regulations.
A. Intent. Pursuant to the power and authority granted by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act No. 247,248 as
amended, the regulations of the Loop Road Overlay District are
intended to meet the following criteria:
(1) The Loop Road Overlay District shall be deemed an overlay district
on the specific parcels identified on the Zoning Map. The
regulations, requirements and restrictions set forth in this article
shall apply to development in the Loop Road Overlay District and
shall supersede the regulations, requirements and restrictions
applicable to the underlying zoning district.
(2) The purpose of establishing the Loop Road Overlay District shall be
to allow the development of a well-planned, designed, built and
maintained shopping center on a large parcel of ground crossing
municipal boundaries and designed around a new loop road. The
planned shopping centers in the Loop Road Overlay District may
provide for a variety of uses within the same complex. Such centers
shall have all necessary services and facilities comprehensively
provided in accordance with an approved development plan.
Provisions of this district are formulated to achieve harmoniously
designed structures upon a well-designed and well-landscaped site.
(3) The Loop Road Overlay District may be applied to those parcels of
land, as designated by the Township from time to time, that are
zoned LI, Light Industry District.
(4) The Loop Road Overlay District may be applied to those parcels of
land that include in their development plan the completion of the
Wilmington-West Chester Pike and Baltimore Pike Loop Road as
recommended in the Comprehensive Plan Update of Concord
Township dated June 6, 2000.
(5) The Loop Road Overlay District may be employed to mitigate
zoning provision differences with other municipalities when a
parcel of land is situated in two municipalities and different zoning
provisions apply, thus creating a more coordinated, efficient and
well-planned development.
B. Use regulations for the Loop Road Overlay District.
247. Editor’s Note: This ordinance was reaffirmed 10-1-2013.
248. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-160.1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-160.1
196:767
(1) Use by right (permitted principal uses).
(a) Retail shops and services in excess of 65,000 square feet are
permitted uses. Retail shops and services in excess of 65,000
square feet shall utilize a Loop Road Overlay District design as
set forth below, and shall be governed exclusively by the area,
bulk and design requirements as set forth in § 210-160.2 below,
with no other area, bulk and/or design regulations being
applied. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of
§ 210-160.2 and any other ordinance provision, the
requirements of § 210-160.2 shall supersede, govern and
control. Developments within the Loop Road Overlay District
may consist of one or any combination of the following uses:
[1] Retail shops;
[2] Retail services;
[3] Restaurants (including outdoor seating, but excluding
drive-through services, with outdoor seating permitted
only by conditional use);
[4] Banks or other financial institutions;
[5] Offices;
[6] Health club, or juvenile or adult-care facility by special
exception only;
[7] Supermarket (i.e., a large retail store that sells groceries,
food, household goods, and a variety of other items; with
the right to sell prepared food for takeout or on-site
consumption);
[8] Retail and wholesale hardware and building supply store
(i.e., a store selling hardware, building supplies and
similar products and services on a retail and/or wholesale
basis);
[9] Only one motor vehicle repair shop and/or motor vehicle
parts and accessories store, not to exceed 9,500 square
feet total gross floor area, with no vehicle sales and with
all temporary outdoor storage of vehicles visually
screened;
[10] Civic or municipal facilities;
[11] Hotel or inn, with or without conference facilities; and
[12] Health centers, medical offices, rehabilitation and therapy
centers, sports medicine facilities and urgent care
facilities. Such uses shall not include overnight stays.
[Added 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 366]
§ 210-160.1 CONCORD CODE § 210-160.1
196:768
§ 210-160.2. Requirements.
(2) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses listed above.
(3) Conditional use. Retail shops and services that include a single
building in excess of 65,000 square feet shall require conditional
use approval.
A. The following requirements shall control the development in the Loop
Road Overlay District:
(1) Yard and area regulations.
(a) Tract area. The minimum size of a tract shall be 20 acres.
(b) Maximum building coverage. Not more than 40% of the tract
area within a Loop Road Overlay District may be occupied by
buildings.
(c) Maximum impervious surface coverage. Not more than 70% of
the tract area within a Loop Road Overlay District may consist
of impervious surface coverage.
(d) Minimum setbacks from streets and parking.
[1] Any building face to a public street: 35 feet.
[2] Any building face to a private street (excluding internal
drive aisles): 10 feet.
[3] Any building face to a parking space: five feet.
[4] Surface parking areas to any street: five feet.
(e) Minimum setback requirements for buildings and parking
structures, measured from the tract perimeter. Any building or
parking structure shall be set back at least 35 feet from the
tract boundary; except where the tract boundary abuts an
existing residential use which is residentially zoned (excluding
overlay district zoning), in which case the building or parking
structure setback requirement shall be increased to 150 feet.
(f) Minimum setback requirements for surface parking areas and
interior roads, measured from the tract perimeter. Any surface
parking area or interior road (excluding a loop road
constructed to divert traffic from a major intersection) shall be
set back at least 5 feet from the tract boundary; except where
the tract boundary abuts an existing residential use which is
residentially zoned (excluding overlay district zoning), in which
case the setback requirement for any surface parking area or
interior mad (excluding a loop road constructed to divert traffic
from a major intersection) shall be increased to 100 feet.
§ 210-160.1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-160.2
196:769
(g) Minimum distance between buildings. All buildings shall be
arranged in a group or groups of buildings, and the distance, at
the closest point between any two buildings, or groups of
attached buildings, shall be not less than 25 feet, except where
such auxiliary building shall be used for housing a
transformer(s), tank(s) or is to be used as a hose house or for
other items which are to be used within the building it serves.
(h) Maximum heights. No building shall exceed 40 feet in height;
except that the building setback from the right-of-way line of a
street shall be increased by four fret for every one foot of
building height above 40 feet, up to a maximum height of 60
feet.
(i) Contiguous lands located in an adjacent municipality may be
utilized to satisfy the dimensional requirements applicable to
developments within the Loop Road Overlay District, provided
said lands are being developed as part of a planned shopping
center.
(2) Performance requirements. See § 210-154.
(3) Waste storage and disposal. See § 210-155.
(4) Other development requirements. See § 210-265.
(5) Landscaping regulations. The landscaping needs associated with
any given Loop Road Overlay District may vary substantially
depending upon the site design, topography and other factors; thus
landscaping requirements need to be determined on a case-by-case
basis. The applicant shall submit a detailed landscape plan during
land development review, which shall follow the applicant's
submission of a conceptual landscape plan as part of the
conditional use hearing. The detailed landscape plan shall be
substantially consistent with the conceptual landscape plan, as
approved at the conditional use hearing.
(6) Screening and buffering. As with landscaping in general, the
screening and buffering needs associated with any given Loop
Road Overlay District may vary substantially depending upon the
site design, topography and other factors; thus requiring design on
a case-by-case basis. The applicant shall submit a detailed
screening and buffering plan during land development review,
which shall follow the applicant's submission of a conceptual
screening and buffering plan as part of the conditional use hearing.
The detailed plan submitted at land development review shall be
substantially consistent with the conceptual plan as approved at
the conditional use hearing.
(7) Lighting. Lighting shall be approved as a condition of final plan
approval.
§ 210-160.2 CONCORD CODE § 210-160.2
196:770
(8) Permitted signs.
(a) Entrance signs. No more than one entrance sign identifying
the name of the development(s), developer(s), owner(s),
operator(s) or tenants shall be permitted at each intersection
of an entrance drive and a principal arterial street or public
collector street, provided that the following regulations are
met:
[1] The maximum surface display area of the sign shall not
exceed 200 square feet on any one face; however, the
Board of Supervisors shall have discretion to increase the
surface display area to 225 feet if, upon review, such sign
size is deemed necessary or otherwise in the Township's
best interest.
[2] The maximum height shall not exceed 30 feet.
[3] In no event shall the sign overhang any parking area, drive
or pedestrian walkway or be closer than five feet to a
public street right-of-way or be installed in sight triangles
necessary for the clear view of traffic.
[4] Notwithstanding the foregoing, a second entrance sign
shall be permitted at the intersection of an entrance drive
and a principal arterial street or public collector street,
subject to the criteria listed above, if the entrance serves
as access to another use which does not have existing road
frontage along a principal arterial street or public
collector street.
(b) A Loop Road Overlay District identification sign shall be
permitted subject to the following regulations:
[1] One project identification sign shall be permitted for each
proposed lot in the Loop Road Overlay District.
[2] The maximum surface display area of any one face of the
sign shall not exceed 100 square feet.
[3] The maximum height shall not exceed 15 feet.
(c) Wall signs. Signs mounted on the walls or facades of a building
shall be permitted, provided that the following regulations are
met.
[1] The total area of all wall signs may not exceed 1.0 square
foot of sign area per linear foot of primary facade,
including windows, doors, and cornices; and .5 square feet
of sign area per linear feet for all other facades, including
windows, doors, and cornices.
§ 210-160.2 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-160.2
196:771
[2] Wall-mounted signs shall be installed parallel to the
supporting wall and project no more than 18 inches from
the face of such wall and shall not extend above the roof
line of such building. Chimneys, spires, towers, elevator
penthouses and similar projections shall be considered
above the roof line of buildings.
(d) Under-canopy signs. Under-canopy signs not to exceed 10
square feet in aggregate sign area per tenancy or occupancy
shall be permitted.
(e) Parking structure signs. No exterior signs identifying or
advertising the name of the building, the name of the
development, owner, operator or principal user of the building
shall be permitted on any parking structure, excepting
directional signs for traffic control.
(f) Directory signs. At each of the major entrances to the tract
and/or parking areas signs for the direction of traffic to, or
identification of individual buildings or tenants within the
development, shall be permitted, provided that the following
regulations are met:
[1] The maximum surface display area of each sign shall not
exceed 40 square feet on any one face.
[2] The maximum height shall not exceed 12 feet.
[3] Each sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the
curb line or edge of paving of any public or private drive or
collector drive, measured from the vertical plane
established by the leading edge of the sign. In no event
shall the sign overhang any parking area, public right-ofway
or pedestrian walkway or be installed in a sight
triangle necessary for the clear view of traffic.
[4] Any directory sign may identify only the development's
subarea name, building name and/or tenants.
(g) Traffic-control and directional signs. Signs for the control of
vehicular traffic shall be permitted, provided that the area of
each sign shall not exceed four square feet in size. Except for
street signs approved for use on public streets by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, no sign shall
exceed three feet in height.
(h) Flags. Flags of the United States of America, other sovereign
nations, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Delaware County,
Concord Township and the corporate flags of the Loop Road
Overlay or its tenants shall be permitted, provided that the
total number and location of such flags shall be subject to the
§ 210-160.2 CONCORD CODE § 210-160.2
196:772
review and approval of the Board of Supervisors, and that the
square footage be no greater than 96 square feet.
(i) Off-premises signs. In addition to the freestanding signs
permitted by this article, a sign for a development in the Loop
Road Overlay District may be located off site, shall have the
same area, height and setback restrictions as entrance signs,
and shall not be subject to the regulations of § 210-210I, if the
sign is located within 2,500 feet of the tract.
(j) Calculation of the sign area. For the purposes of this section,
"surface display area" or "sign area" shall mean the entire area
within a continuous perimeter formed by straight lines joined
at right angles which enclose the extreme limits of the writing,
background, representation or display of the sign face. The
supports, uprights or structure on which any sign is supported
shall not be included in determining the surface display area
unless such supports, uprights or structure are designed in
such a manner as to form an integral background of the display
or conveys meaning.
(k) All signage for individual tenants shall be reviewed and
approved by the Board of Supervisors, on a case-by-case basis,
prior to issuance of a building permit.
(9) Off-street parking and loading requirements.
(a) For developments in the Loop Road Overlay District, all uses
shall be parked at a minimum of 4.5 spaces for each 1,000
square feet of gross floor area, except as set forth below:
[1] Restaurant uses: 4.5 for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area, provided that the gross floor area of all
restaurants in the Loop Road Overlay District does not
exceed 10% of the total gross floor area. If the gross floor
area of all restaurants in the Loop Road Overlay District
exceeds 10% of the total gross floor area, the gross floor
area in excess of 10% shall be parked at 15 spaces for each
1,000 square feet of gross floor area. Because
developments in the Loop Road Overlay District
necessarily provide for shared and overflow parking, an
outdoor seating area shall not be counted as gross floor
area for purposes of determining the number of required
parking spaces.
[2] Hotel uses: 1.1 spaces for each rental room or suite. If a
restaurant in connection with such a use is open to the
public, the off-street parking facilities for such restaurant
shall not be less than those required for a restaurant.
(b) Each surface parking space shall consist of a rectangular area
having dimensions not less than nine feet in width and 18 feet
§ 210-160.2 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-160.2
196:773
in length. Aisles serving such surface parking areas shall have
a minimum width of 24 feet for two-way traffic and 15 feet for
one-way traffic. Parking lot striping shall conform to existing
Township regulations.
(c) In addition to the required off-street parking areas, there shall
be provided off-street areas for the loading and unloading of
delivery trucks and for the servicing of the buildings by refuse
collection, fuel and other service vehicles, which areas shall be
located at the side or rear of the building, shall be adequate in
size and shall be so arranged that each may be used without
blockage or obstruction of accessways or the automobile
parking facilities.
(d) Contiguous land located in an adjacent municipality may be
utilized to satisfy the parking requirements applicable to
developments within the Loop Road Overlay District, provided
said lands are being developed as part of the planned shopping
center.
(e) The width of an entrance and exit drive is permitted to be
greater than 25 feet for two-way use.
(f) There shall be no limitation as to the number of parking spaces
permitted to be accommodated in a single parking area.
(10) Special development regulations.
(a) Unified plan. Any development plan hereunder shall consist of
a unified, harmonious grouping of buildings, service and
parking areas and landscaped spaces, planned and designed as
an integrated unit.
(b) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in single
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly
by the owners of the entire tract, and in which it shall be
agreed that the tract will be developed under single direction
in accordance with an approved master development plan.
(c) Condominium. The owner of a property in the Loop Road
Overlay District, who has received land development plan
approval for a project, shall be permitted to subject their
property to the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act249
without having to obtain separate land development approval
for the establishment of the condominium.
(11) Bus shelters. Bus shelter(s) shall be provided at location(s)
consistent with area bus routes, and subject to approval during
final plan review.
249. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 210-160.2 CONCORD CODE § 210-160.2
196:774
(12) Utilities. All buildings within the Loop Road Overlay District shall
be served by public water and public sewage services. All utility
lines servicing a development in the Loop Road Overlay District
shall be underground. The applicant shall propose design criteria
for all new traffic signal poles and other poles, which shall be
subject to Township review at final plan approval, unless such
design is otherwise prescribed by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(13) Stormwater management. As part of the conditional use
application, the applicant for a development in the Loop Road
Overlay District shall provide plans showing that the tract will be
provided with a unified storm water management plan. The plan
shall show the proposed locations and general design of
stormwater detention basins; however, detailed stormwater
engineering and calculations shall not be required until
subdivision/land development plans are submitted.
(14) Traffic. A traffic impact study shall be required and submitted as
part of the conditional use application. The applicant shall provide
credible evidence that the development in the Loop Road Overlay
District will include sufficient road improvements to mitigate the
traffic impacts of the development on public streets and will avoid
significant increased traffic safety hazards, consistent with the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.250
(15) Design guidelines. The applicant shall submit design guidelines for
the development in the Loop Road Overlay District to the Township
during the conditional use hearing which shall be reviewed and
approved by the Township as part of the conditional use
application, if such application is approved. The design guidelines
shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following:
(a) Architectural design guidelines for all of the main buildings,
such guidelines providing for facade ornamentation, building
offsets, window treatments, variations of roof line and other
elements designed to reduce the horizontal mass of the
buildings.
(b) Pedestrian linkages to provide for the safe passageway of
pedestrians throughout the Loop Road Overlay District. Trails
shall be considered for connection to adjacent parcels in
accordance with the Township pedestrian linkage plans.
(c) The applicant shall submit a conceptual public access and
pedestrian connectivity plan as part of the conditional use
hearing. This plan may include site elements such as public
open space areas, sidewalks, crosswalks, plaza space, walking
paths, landscaping and other such features to enhance the
250. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-160.2 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-160.2
196:775
public's access to the site and provide some benefit in terms of
gathering space and pedestrian connectivity. The detailed plan
submitted at land development review shall be substantially
consistent with the conceptual plan as approved at the
conditional use hearing.
(16) Amendments to approved conditional use plan. The Board of
Supervisors may, with the consent of the applicant, modify one or
more of the design elements or conditions of conditional use
approval, without resorting to an amended or new conditional use
application, provided that the amendment is in the best interest of
the Township.
§ 210-160.2 CONCORD CODE § 210-160.2
196:776
ARTICLE XVIII
PIP — Planned Industrial Park District
§ 210-161. Purpose. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
Planned Industrial Park Districts are designed primarily to provide for
selected modern laboratory, light manufacturing and regional office
establishments located in attractive large-site low-lot-coverage
development in areas where traditional development would be
inappropriate and which are compatible with the character of surrounding
areas. PIP Districts may be established and developed only in accordance
with the special provisions and subject to the regulations of this article and
any other pertinent provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 210-162. Use regulations. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177;
10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 218; 6-6-2000 by Ord. No. 246]
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may
be used for any of the following purposes and for no other except those
allowed on special exception, provided that such building or use does not
create any substantial amount of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat,
glare or other objectional influences, and provided that the demolition
of or special exception or conditional use for a historic resource shown
on the Historic Resources Map or any subdivision, land development or
construction activity within 300 feet of a historic resource shown on the
Historic Resources Map shall be subject to the provisions of Article XIXA
relating to historic preservation.
A. Uses by right.
(1) Hotel, motel or inn.
(2) Conference facility.
(3) Restaurant.
(4) Retail shops and services of 65,000 square feet or less; however,
such uses shall not be permitted at a distance in excess of 2,000
feet from U.S. Route 1 and PA Route 322.
(5) Bank or financial institution.
(6) Office building or buildings; offices for administrative, executive,
professional or similar use.
(7) Governmental or public service corporation building, grounds, or
facility, or any other similar use, including utility office.
(8) Health center, health club or juvenile or adult day-care facility.
(9) Light industrial uses permitted by right in the LI Light Industry
District pursuant to § 210-152A of the Township Code, Zoning;
provided, however, that all such light industrial uses shall be set
§ 210-161 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-162
196:777
back at least 600 feet from U.S. Route 1 and PA Route 322, except
for the office uses provided for in § 210-162A(6).
(10) Parking structures which are accessory to the principal use or uses
of the property.
B. Uses by special exception.
(1) Any nonresidential use of the same character as any of the uses
hereinbefore specifically permitted.
(2) Outside treatment or storage of materials or waste products, where
such materials are adequately enclosed by a fence erected of
substantial materials conforming to the design of the building, and
where such use is accessory to a permitted use.
C. Conditional uses. Subject to the provisions of Article XXVII.
(1) Indoor or outdoor place of amusement, recreation or assembly (not
including drive-in theater).
(2) Commercial greenhouse or nursery.
(3) Motor vehicle sales/rental.
(4) Cellular towers.
(5) Drive-through restaurants.
(6) Adult entertainment uses as permitted in § 210-152C of the
Township Code, Zoning.
(7) Religious institution.
(8) Educational institution use.
(9) Retail shops and services in excess of 65,000 square feet. Retail
shops and services in excess of 65,000 square feet shall utilize a
Main Street lifestyle center design as set forth below and shall be
governed exclusively by the area, bulk and design requirements as
set forth in § 210-170.1 below, with no other area, bulk and/or
design regulations being applied. In the event of any conflict
between the requirements of § 210-170.1 and any other ordinance
provision, the requirements of § 210-170.1 shall supercede, govern
and control. A Main Street lifestyle center shall consist of five or
more of the following uses: [Amended 1-4-2006 by Ord. No.
297]
(a) Retail shops;
(b) Retail services;
(c) Restaurants (including outdoor seating, but excluding drivethrough
services, with outdoor seating permitted only by
special exception);
§ 210-162 CONCORD CODE § 210-162
196:778
§ 210-163. Yard and area regulations.
(d) Bank or other financial institution;
(e) Offices;
(f) Health club or juvenile or adult-care facility by special
exception only;
(g) Only one motor vehicle repair shop and/or motor vehicle parts
and accessories store, not to exceed 9,500 square feet total
gross floor area, with no vehicle sales and with all temporary
outdoor storage of vehicles visually screened;
(h) Civic or municipal facilities;
(i) Hotel or inn, with or without conference facilities;
(j) Accessory uses customarily incidental to the uses listed above;
and
(k) Massage establishments by conditional use subject to
satisfaction of all of the requirements for massage
establishments set forth in Chapter 120 of the Concord
Township Code of Ordinances. [Added 9-2-2008 by Ord. No.
324]
(10) Any establishment that receives a transfer of a liquor license.
[Added 1-2-2007 by Ord. No. 309]
A. Tract area. The minimum size of tract for which the PIP District may be
used shall be 40 acres.
B. Lot area and lot width. Every lot on which a building or combination of
buildings is hereafter erected or used shall have a lot area of not less
than five acres, and such lot shall be not less than 300 feet in width at
the building line.
C. Building area coverage. Not more than 30% of the area of any lot may
be occupied by buildings, and a total of not more than 60% of the area
of any lot may be occupied by buildings and parking area.
D. Minimum structure setback.
(1) Front yard: 150 feet from each street right-of-way on which the
tract abuts.
(2) Side yards: 75 feet, except that no building or other permanent
structure and no parking, loading or service area shall be within
150 feet of a property or zoning boundary line of a residential
district.
(3) Rear yard: 75 feet, except that no building or other permanent
structure and no parking, loading or service area shall be within
§ 210-162 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-163
196:779
§ 210-164. Performance requirements. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord.
No. 177]
See Article XVII, § 210-154.
§ 210-165. Waste storage and disposal.
§ 210-166. Other development requirements.
150 feet of a property of a zoning boundary line of a residential
district.
E. Maximum height. No building shall exceed 40 feet in height; except that
the building setback from the right-of-way line of a street shall be
increased by four feet for every one foot of building height above 40
feet up to a maximum height of 84 feet. [Amended 6-6-2000 by Ord.
No. 246]
A. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored
in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting
with energy devices, heating devices or appliances located and
operated on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel.
B. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and products and all
fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by
an approved safety fence and visual screen and shall conform to all yard
requirements imposed upon the main buildings in this district.
C. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces, nor shall any substance which can contaminate a stream or
watercourse or otherwise render such stream or watercourse
undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation or which will
destroy aquatic life be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
D. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive
to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only if enclosed in
containers which are adequate to eliminate such hazards.
E. All applicable state and county regulations pertaining to sanitary
landfill must be complied with.
A. Each building shall be designed so as to minimize its industrial
appearance and shall, insofar as practicable, afford minimum external
evidence of the operation conducted therein.
B. All buildings shall be arranged in a group or groups of buildings, and
the distance, at the closest point between any two buildings or groups
of attached buildings, shall be not less than 25 feet except where such
auxiliary building shall be used for housing a transformer or tanks or to
§ 210-163 CONCORD CODE § 210-166
196:780
be used as a hose house or other items which are to be used within the
main building.
C. No products or goods shall be publicly displayed on the exterior of the
premises.
D. A planting area shall be provided along each property or right-of-way
line that is opposite or adjacent to a residential zoning district boundary
line of a type and width as specified in Article XXI, § 210-193A(1) and
(2).
E. Any part or portion of a site which is not used for buildings, other
structures, loading and parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks and
designated storage areas shall be planted with an all-season ground
cover and shall be landscaped according to an overall plan. Maximum
advantage shall be taken of natural woods in landscaping.
F. On fire protection, requirements of Article XXIV, § 210-220, shall be
met. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
G. The proposed development shall abut two or more major or secondary
streets as defined in the Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,251 and ingress and egress shall not be permitted from or to
residential streets. Exceptions may be approved by the Township Board
of Supervisors in such cases where the requirement of this subsection is
clearly impractical. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
H. On all mechanical equipment not enclosed in a structure, regulations
given in Article XXI, § 210-193A(3), shall be followed.
I. Water towers, storage tanks, processing equipment, stand fans,
skylights, cooling towers, communication towers, vents and any other
structures or equipment which rise above the roofline shall be
architecturally compatible or effectively shielded from view from any
public or private dedicated street by an architecturally sound method to
be submitted by the developer, which shall be approved, in writing, by
the Township Board of Supervisors before construction or erection of
said structures or equipment.
J. All spaces between buildings and all parking, loading and unloading,
access and service areas shall be adequately illuminated at night. Such
illumination, including sign lighting, shall be arranged so as to protect
the surrounding streets and adjoining property from direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind.
K. Traffic survey.
(1) Where a development abuts a state highway, a traffic survey shall
be conducted and provisions shall be made for appropriate
automatic traffic control signal and acceleration and deceleration
251. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-166 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-166
196:781
lanes if required by the Township of Concord and approved by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation. Such a report and
plans for access roads, after approval by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, will then be submitted to the Board
of Supervisors.
(2) All accessways to any public street shall be located at least 300 feet
from the intersection of any other public street lines and shall be
designed in a manner conducive to safe ingress and egress. Where
possible, exits shall be located on service streets and minor
highways rather than directly on major streets or highways.
(3) No accessways shall be permitted to extend more than 50 feet in
width as measured from the curb cuts. An accessway shall be
assigned to accommodate two-way traffic and shall not be less than
30 feet in width.
L. Interior circulation. Interior drives providing access to each lot within
the park shall be designed with a minimum paved width of 26 feet and a
right-of-way of 50 feet and with curvatures so as to prevent blockage of
vehicles entering or leaving the site.
M. Lighting. All spaces between buildings and all parking, loading and
unloading, access and service areas shall be adequately illuminated at
night. Such illumination, including sign lighting, shall be arranged so as
to protect the surrounding street and adjoining property from direct
glare or hazardous interference of any kind.252
N. Sewage disposal.
(1) Industrial sewage pretreatment facilities shall be permitted as
required by state regulations. Secondary and tertiary treatment
facilities shall be permitted where essential to an appropriate site
plan. However, septic systems using on-lot drainage fields shall be
prohibited.
(2) All industries intending to discharge liquid wastes into any reaches
of the creeks or drainageways flowing through or indirectly
draining areas of the Township shall provide such levels of
treatment described above as are required to maintain the quality
and composition of such discharge at the levels specified in the
Water Quality Criteria of the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law of
1937, as amended, for the Brandywine Creek and tributaries (Zone
01.102) and shall obtain approval and a permit to discharge from
the State Sanitary Water Board. Proof of such permit shall be
submitted to the Board of Supervisors before approval shall be
given to occupy and use the buildings or waste treatment facilities.
252. Editor's Note: Original Subsection 3106.N, which immediately followed this subsection,
regarding fire protection, as amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177, was deleted 1-5-1998 by
Ord. No. 221.
§ 210-166 CONCORD CODE § 210-167
196:782
§ 210-167. Landscaping regulations.
See Article XXI.
§ 210-168. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII.
§ 210-169. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
See Article XXII.
§ 210-170. Site plan review requirements.
See the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.253
§ 210-170.1. Retail shops and services in excess of 65,000 square
feet. [Added 1-4-2006 by Ord. No. 297]
The requirements herein shall control the development of retail shops and
services in excess of 65,000 square feet.
A. Yard and area regulations.
(1) Tract area: the minimum size of a tract shall be 40 acres.
(2) Minimum tract frontage on U.S. Route 1 or Pennsylvania Route
322: 1,000 feet.
(3) Maximum building coverage: not more than 30% of the tract area
within a Main Street lifestyle center may be occupied by buildings.
(4) Maximum impervious surface coverage: not more than 70% of the
tract area within a Main Street lifestyle center may consist of
impervious surface coverage.
(5) Minimum setbacks from streets and parking:
(a) Any building face to a public street: 35 feet.
(b) Any building face to a private street (excluding internal drive
aisles): 15 feet.
(c) Any building face to a parking space: five feet.
(d) Surface parking areas to any street: 10 feet.
(6) Minimum setback requirements for buildings and parking
structures, measured from the tract perimeter: any building or
parking structure shall be set back at least 35 feet from the tract
boundary; except where the tract boundary abuts an existing
residential use which is residentially zoned (excluding overlay
253. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-167 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-170.1
196:783
district zoning), in which case the building or parking structure
setback requirement shall be increased to 150 feet.
(7) Minimum setback requirements for surface parking areas and
interior roads, measured from the tract perimeter: any surface
parking area or interior road (excluding a loop road constructed to
divert traffic from a major intersection) shall be set back at least 10
feet from the tract boundary; except where the tract boundary
abuts an existing residential use which is residentially zoned
(excluding overlay district zoning), in which case the setback
requirement for any surface parking area or interior road
(excluding a loop road constructed to divert traffic from a major
intersection) shall be increased to 100 feet.
(8) Minimum distance between buildings. All buildings shall be
arranged in a group or groups of buildings, and the distance, at the
closest point between any two buildings or groups of attached
buildings, shall be not less than 25 feet, except where such
auxiliary building shall be used for housing a transformer(s),
tank(s) or is to be used as a hose house or for other items which are
to be used within the building it serves.
(9) Maximum heights: No building shall exceed 40 feet in height;
except that the building setback from the right-of-way line of a
street shall be increased by four feet for every one foot of building
height above 40 feet, up to a maximum height of 84 feet.
B. Performance requirements. See § 210-154.
C. Waste storage and disposal. See § 210-155.
D. Other development requirements. See § 210-265.
E. Landscaping regulations. The landscaping needs associated with any
given Main Street lifestyle center may vary substantially depending
upon the site design, topography and other factors, thus landscaping
requirements need to be determined on a case-by-case basis. Applicant
shall submit a detailed landscape plan during land development review,
which shall follow applicant's submission of a conceptual landscape
plan as part of the conditional use hearing. The detailed landscape plan
shall be substantially consistent with the conceptual landscape plan, as
approved at the conditional use hearing.
F. Screening and buffering. As with landscaping in general, the screening
and buffering needs associated with any given Main Street lifestyle
center may vary substantially depending upon the site design,
topography and other factors, thus requiring design on a case-by-case
basis. Applicant shall submit a detailed screening and buffering plan
during land development review, which shall follow applicant's
submission of a conceptual screening and buffering plan as part of the
conditional use hearing. The detailed plan submitted at land
§ 210-170.1 CONCORD CODE § 210-170.1
196:784
development review shall be substantially consistent with the
conceptual plan approved at the conditional use hearing.
G. Lighting. Lighting shall be generally consistent with that which is
required in the PBPD District, with a specific lighting plan to be
approved as a condition of final plan approval.
H. Permitted signs.
(1) Entrance signs: No more than one entrance sign identifying the
name of the development(s), developer(s), owner(s), operator(s) or
tenants shall be permitted at each intersection of an entrance drive
and a principal arterial street or public collector street, provided
that the following regulations are met:
(a) The maximum surface display area of the sign shall not exceed
150 square feet on any one face; however, the Board of
Supervisors shall have discretion to increase the surface
display area to 225 feet if, upon review, such sign size is
deemed necessary or otherwise in the Township's best interest.
(b) The maximum height shall not exceed 24 feet.
(c) In no event shall the sign overhang any parking area, drive or
pedestrian walkway or be closer than five feet to a public street
right-of-way or be installed in sight triangles necessary for the
clear view of traffic.
(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing, a second entrance sign shall be
permitted at the intersection of an entrance drive and a
principal arterial street or public collector street, subject to the
criteria listed above, if the entrance serves as access to
another use which does not have existing road frontage along a
principal arterial street or public collector street.
(2) A Main Street lifestyle center identification sign shall be permitted
subject to the following regulations:
(a) One project identification sign shall be permitted for each
Main Street lifestyle center.
(b) The maximum surface display area of any one face of the sign
shall not exceed 100 square feet.
(c) The maximum height shall not exceed 15 feet.
(3) Wall signs: Signs mounted on the walls or facades of a building
shall be permitted, provided that the following regulations are met:
(a) The total area of all wall signs may not exceed one square foot
of sign area per linear foot of primary facade, including
windows, doors, and cornices; and 0.5 square feet of sign area
per linear feet for all other facades, including windows, doors,
§ 210-170.1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-170.1
196:785
and cornices. Buildings along the Main Street corridor which
maintain one entrance along the Main Street corridor and one
entrance opening to the parking fields shall be considered to
have a primary facade at each entrance.
(b) Wall-mounted signs shall be installed parallel to the supporting
wall and project no more than 18 inches from the face of such
wall and shall not extend above the roofline of such building.
Chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses and similar
projections shall be considered above the roofline of buildings.
(4) Under-canopy signs: Under-canopy signs not to exceed 10 square
feet in aggregate sign area per tenancy or occupancy shall be
permitted.
(5) Parking structure signs: No exterior signs identifying or
advertising the name of the building, the name of the development,
owner, operator or principal user of the building shall be permitted
on any parking structure, excepting directional signs for traffic
control.
(6) Directory signs: At each of the major entrances to the tract and/or
parking areas signs for the direction of traffic to or identification of
individual buildings or tenants within the development shall be
permitted, provided that the following regulations are met:
(a) The maximum surface display area of each sign shall not
exceed 40 square feet on any one face.
(b) The maximum height shall not exceed 12 feet.
(c) Each sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the
curbline or edge of paving of any public or private drive or
collector drive, measured from the vertical plane established
by the leading edge of the sign. In no event shall the sign
overhang any parking area, public right-of-way or pedestrian
walkway or be installed in sight triangle necessary for the clear
view of traffic.
(d) Any directory sign may identify only the development's
subarea name, building name and/or tenants.
(7) Traffic-control and directional signs: Signs for the control of
vehicular traffic shall be permitted, provided that the area of each
sign shall not exceed four square feet in size. Except for street
signs approved for use on public streets by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, no sign shall exceed three feet in
height.
(8) Flags: Flags of the United States of America, other sovereign
nations, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Delaware County,
Concord Township and the corporate flags of the Main Street
§ 210-170.1 CONCORD CODE § 210-170.1
196:786
lifestyle center or its tenants shall be permitted, provided that the
total number and location of such flags shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Board of Supervisors, and that the
square footage be no greater that 96 square feet.
(9) Calculation of sign area: For the purposes of this section, "surface
display area" or "sign area" shall mean the entire area within a
continuous perimeter formed by straight lines joined at right
angles which encloses the extreme limits of the writing,
background, representation or display of the sign face. The
supports, uprights or structure on which any sign is supported shall
not be included in determining the surface display area unless such
supports, uprights or structure are designed in such a manner as to
form an integral background of the display or convey meaning.
(10) All signage for individual tenants shall be reviewed and approved
by the Board of Supervisors on a case-by-case basis prior to
issuance of building permit.
(11) Signage along entrance locations: At each of the major entrances
to the tract known as Evergreen Drive and in addition to the
directory signs of § 210-170.1H(6), signs for the identification of
developments directly adjacent to the shared tract shall be
permitted, provided that the following regulations are met: [Added
8-25-2015 by Ord. No. 367]
(a) Such signs shall share a common structure or be adjoining
along their length.
(b) The maximum total surface display area of each sign shall not
exceed 20 square feet on any one face.
(c) The maximum total surface display of each individual
development shall not exceed 20 square feet.
(d) The maximum height, above ground surface, shall not exceed
eight feet.
(e) Each sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the
curbline or edge of paving of any public or private drive or
collector drive, measured from the vertical plane established
by the leading edge of the sign. In no event shall the sign
overhang any parking area, public right-of-way or pedestrian
walkway or be installed in sight triangle necessary for the clear
view of traffic.
(f) Any individual development sign may identify only the
development's name.
(12) Temporary signage: temporary signage related to sites bordering
Evergreen Drive may be placed along the tract's perimeter areas
§ 210-170.1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-170.1
196:787
abutting along Routes 1 and 322, provided the following
regulations are met: [Added 8-25-2015 by Ord. No. 367]
(a) One portable temporary sign advertising a special event, not
exceeding 32 square feet in total structure area, may be
erected, provided.
(b) The maximum height may not exceed 12 feet.
(c) Such sign may be displayed a maximum of 60 days display
period in one year.
(d) Such sign must be so located as not to cause a hazard to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(e) Mobile or movable signs with removable-type frontages shall
have enclosed, locked covers to prevent unauthorized access
and must be well secured. Displays that are illuminated,
flashing, animated, etc., shall not be permitted.
(f) Any temporary sign may identify only the development's name
and/or building name.
(13) All signage for qualified individual developments and/or
occupancies shall be reviewed and approved by the Board of
Supervisors on a case-by-case basis prior to issuance of building
permit. [Added 8-25-2015 by Ord. No. 367]
I. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
(1) In Main Street lifestyle centers under 400,000 square feet gross
floor area, the parking requirements of Article XXII shall apply. For
Main Street lifestyle centers in excess of 400,000 square feet, all
uses shall be parked at 4.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area, except as set forth below:
(a) Retail sales and service uses: 4.5 spaces for each 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area, excluding accessory outdoor retail
areas such as sidewalk displays and kiosks.
(b) Restaurant uses: 4.5 for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area, provided that the gross floor area of all restaurants in the
Main Street lifestyle center does not exceed 10% of the total
gross floor area. If the gross floor area of all restaurants in the
Main Street lifestyle center exceeds 10% of the total gross
floor area, the gross floor area in excess of 10% shall be parked
at 15 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
Because Main Street lifestyle centers necessarily provide for
shared and overflow parking, outdoor seating area shall not be
counted as gross floor area for purposes of determining the
number of required parking spaces. If a restaurant use
includes outdoor dining (which is by special exception only),
§ 210-170.1 CONCORD CODE § 210-170.1
196:788
then such use shall be parked at 4.75 spaces per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area.
(c) Hotel uses: 1.1 spaces for each rental room or suite. If a
restaurant in connection with such a use is open to the public,
the off-street parking facilities for such restaurant shall not be
less than those required for a restaurant.
(2) Each surface parking space shall consist of a rectangular area
having dimensions not less than nine feet in width and 18 feet in
length. Aisles serving such surface parking areas shall have a
minimum width of 24 feet for two-way traffic and 15 feet for oneway
traffic. Parking lot striping shall conform to existing Township
regulations.
(3) In addition to the required off-street parking areas, there shall be
provided off-street areas for the loading and unloading of delivery
trucks and for the servicing of the buildings by refuse collection,
fuel and other service vehicles, which areas shall be located at the
side or rear of the building, shall be adequate in size and shall be so
arranged that each may be used without blockage or obstruction of
accessways or the automobile parking facilities.
J. Special development regulations.
(1) Unified plan. Any development plan hereunder shall consist of a
unified, harmonious grouping of buildings, service and parking
areas and landscaped spaces, planned and designed as an
integrated unit.
(2) Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in single
ownership or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by
the owners of the entire tract in which it shall be agreed that the
tract will be developed under single direction in accordance with
an approved master development plan.
(3) Further subdivision of tract. After the Board of Supervisors
approves a final development plan for a lot containing approval for
the construction of more than one building, the subsequent division
of that lot into a separate lot for each building for purposes of
financing and/or conveyancing shall be permitted and is exempted
from additional plan review requirements and/or the lot design
criteria requirements of the Concord Township Code, Chapter 160,
Subdivision and Land Development, provided that the deeds
conveying such separate lots for each building depicted on said
final development plan contain covenants requiring the purchasers
to, at all times, operate and maintain such lots in good order and
repair and in a clean and sanitary condition; that cross-easements
for parking areas and all appurtenant ways, pedestrian access and
utilities shall be maintained between such lots; and that such
covenants shall be subject to the approval of the Township Solicitor.
§ 210-170.1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-170.1
196:789
The purchaser of any such lot shall so covenant and agree thereby
to be bound by such conditions as set forth herein.
K. Bus shelters. Bus shelter(s) shall be provided at location(s) consistent
with area bus routes and subject to approval during final plan review.
L. Utilities. All buildings within the Main Street lifestyle center shall be
served by public water and public sewage services. All utility lines
servicing a Main Street lifestyle center shall be underground. Applicant
shall propose design criteria for all new traffic signal poles and other
poles, which shall be subject to Township review at final plan approval,
unless such design is otherwise prescribed by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
M. Stormwater management. As part of the conditional use application,
the applicant for a Main Street lifestyle center shall provide plans
showing that the tract will be provided with a unified stormwater
management plan. The plan shall show the proposed locations and
general design of stormwater detention basins; however, detailed
stormwater engineering and calculations shall not be required until
subdivision/land development plans are submitted.
N. Traffic. A traffic impact study shall be required and submitted as part of
the conditional use application. The applicant shall provide credible
evidence that the Main Street lifestyle center will include sufficient
road improvements to mitigate the traffic impacts of the development
on public streets and will avoid significant increased traffic safety
hazards consistent with the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
O. Design guidelines. Applicant shall submit design guidelines for the
Main Street lifestyle center to the Township during the conditional use
hearing, which shall be reviewed and approved by the Township as part
of the conditional use application, if such application is approved. The
design guidelines shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following:
(1) A centrally located pedestrian plaza of not less than 6,500 square
feet, which includes trees, planters, benches and/or similar
elements, plus plaza surfacing of brick, flagstone or other unit
pavers.
(2) Architectural design guidelines for all of the main buildings, such
guidelines providing for facade ornamentation, building offsets,
window treatments, variations of roofline and other elements
designed to reduce the horizontal mass of the buildings.
(3) Pedestrian linkages to provide for the safe passageway of
pedestrians throughout the Main Street lifestyle center.
P. Amendments to approved conditional use plan. The Board of
Supervisors may, with the consent of the applicant, modify one of more
§ 210-170.1 CONCORD CODE § 210-170.1
196:790
of the design elements or conditions of conditional use approval,
without resort to an amended or new conditional use application,
provided that the amendment is in the best interest of the Township.
§ 210-170.1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-170.1
196:791

ARTICLE XIX
R-PLO Planned Laboratory-Office District
§ 210-171. Purpose.
R-PLO Planned Laboratory-Office Districts are designed primarily to
provide for selected modern laboratory and office establishments which
provide for attractive large-site low-lot-coverage development in areas
where traditional business development would be inappropriate and to
strengthen and diversify the Township tax base and are compatible with the
character of surrounding areas.
§ 210-172. Area and height regulations.
A. Uses by right. A building or unified group of buildings may be erected
or used and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following
purposes, provided that the demolition of or special exception or
conditional use for a historic resource shown on the Historic Resources
Map or any subdivision, land development or construction activity
within 300 feet of a historic resource shown on the Historic Resources
Map shall be subject to the provisions of Article XIXA relating to historic
preservation: [Amended 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 218]
(1) Scientific or industrial research, testing or experimental laboratory
or similar establishment for research or product development,
provided that there is no commercial production or storage of any
commodity or substance except for storage necessary for scientific
research.
(2) Office building.
(3) Accessory uses of the following:
(a) A cafeteria or other service facility located within the building
and operated for the exclusive use of occupants of the building,
guests and invitees, in the normal course of business.
(b) A recreational area for occupants of the building.
(c) Storage within a completely enclosed building in conjunction
with a permitted use.
(d) Living quarters for watchmen, caretakers or similar
employees, provided that no such living accommodation or
sleeping quarters shall be located on the first floor of a
building.
(e) Signs as permitted in Article XXIII, Sign Regulations.
A. Lot area and lot width. Every lot on which a building or combination of
buildings is hereafter erected or used shall have a lot area of not less
than 50 acres, and such lot shall be not less than 300 feet in width at the
building line. In the event that a development site consists of 50 or
§ 210-171 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-172
196:793
§ 210-173. Performance standards.
No building may be erected, altered or used and no lot or premises may
be used which is noxious or offensive or which constitutes a hazard to the
immediate surrounding area. Each permitted use shall provide and utilize
such smoke, noise and other control devices as are necessary to assure that
such use will not:
more acres upon which is to be located one building structure used and
occupied by one business entity, one additional lot with a lot area of not
less than 10 acres may be located upon the development site, provided
that both lots and structures located thereon otherwise comply with all
of the terms and provisions of this article.
B. Total site coverage. Not more than 20% of the area of any lot may be
occupied by buildings, and a total of not more than 60% of the area of
any lot may be occupied by buildings and parking areas.
C. Minimum structure setback.
(1) No building shall be located less than 100 feet from a street rightof-
way line nor less than 100 feet from a side or rear property line.
(2) In the event that more than one building is to be erected or used on
a lot, such building shall have front, rear and side yard setbacks of
75 feet, 75 feet and 50 feet, respectively.
(3) A driveway or road system may be located within said front, rear or
side yard setbacks, provided that a minimum of 20 feet of properly
landscaped property is planted and maintained between the front,
rear and side property line and the driveway or road system.
(4) In the event that the development of the tract involves the
installation by the developer of an approved loop road as part of the
overall traffic network of the intersection of U.S. Route 1 and U.S.
Route 202, the Supervisors have the right to permit the loop road
right-of-way on one side to coincide with the property line, and in
such event the applicant shall be relieved of the requirements for
buffering between the road right-of-way and the property line; and
no building shall be located less than 100 feet from the loop road
right-of-way, and there shall be a buffer planting strip of not less
than 50 feet in width or a five-foot-high earthen landscaped berm
within said twenty-foot buffer strip between the loop road right-ofway
and said building line setback.
D. Height. No building shall exceed two stories nor more than 35 feet in
height. Basement areas of buildings may not be used for human
occupancy.
A. Constitute any nuisance beyond the boundary of the site by reason of
dissemination of noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes, smoke, odor or dust.
§ 210-172 CONCORD CODE § 210-173
196:794
§ 210-174. Special development regulations.
§ 210-175. General development regulations.
B. Result in noise or vibration exceeding the average intensity of noise
from other causes at the boundary site.
C. Produce objectionable heat, glare or radiation.
D. Result in electrical disturbance in nearby residences.
E. Create any other objectionable condition which is dangerous to health,
safety or the proper use of adjoining property.
A. Each building shall be designed so as to minimize its commercial
appearance and shall, insofar as practicable, afford minimum external
evidence of the nature of the operation conducted therein.
B. No products or goods shall be publicly displayed on the exterior of the
premises, and no showrooms, display rooms or rooms of like use for the
public display of goods or products shall be permitted.
A. Utilities and sewers.
(1) All utility lines servicing the buildings shall be placed underground
within the lot lines of the property.
(2) All buildings shall be served by public water and, if existing within
a reasonable proximity, an operating municipal or other available
sewage treatment plant.
(3) In locations where there is no access to an operating municipal or
other available sewage treatment plant, one or more on-site
sewage treatment systems must be provided. Said system or
systems must be in accordance with the Township Sewage
Facilities Plan and approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Disposal requirements. All trash, garbage, rubbish and debris of every
kind shall be stored within the building in fireproofed rooms or
containers or in a screened and shielded courtyard area and shall be
collected and disposed of as often as may be required under the
particular circumstances by private collectors and at no cost to the
Township.
C. Development agreement. Upon final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans and as a condition to such approval, the Board of
Supervisors may require the owner to enter into a written agreement
with the Township to guarantee completion of the development within a
stated period of time and compliance with all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations and conditions of approval. Said
guaranty may be in the form of a bond with or without corporate or
§ 210-173 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-175
196:795
§ 210-176. Landscaping regulations.
§ 210-177. Sign regulations.
See Article XXIII.
§ 210-178. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
other suitable surety or security, as determined by the Board of
Supervisors.
A. Screening along property lines adjoining other zoning districts.
(1) Along each side or rear property line which directly abuts a
residence in the Township or similar district in an adjoining
municipality: see Article XXI, Landscaping, § 210-193A, for width
and nature of planting.
(2) Along each street line bounding a residence district, a strip of land
not less than 50 feet in width shall be suitably landscaped except
for necessary sidewalks and accessways crossing the strip or a
twenty-foot-wide buffer strip with a five-foot berm; except that
property abutting a loop road shall be governed by the provisions of
§ 210-172C. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
B. Mechanical equipment. See Article XXI § 210-193A(3).
C. General landscaping.
(1) The lot and each building, parking area and service area shall be
suitably landscaped in accordance with a landscaping plan,
prepared by a licensed landscape architect and approved by the
Board of Supervisors.
(2) All landscaping shall be appropriate to the architectural design of
the building, using to the maximum extent possible the existing
terrain and trees on the site.
D. Screening of roof objects. Water towers, storage tanks, processing
equipment, stand fans, skylights, cooling towers, communication
towers, vents and other structures or equipment which arise above the
roofline shall be architecturally compatible or effectively shielded from
view from any public dedicated street or private thoroughfare by an
architecturally sound method which shall be approved by the Board of
Supervisors.
A. General characteristics. Adequate off-street parking areas shall be
provided.
B. Specific location.
§ 210-175 CONCORD CODE § 210-178
196:796
§ 210-179. Size and number of parking spaces.
§ 210-180. Paving.
All parking, loading, access and service areas shall be paved with concrete,
blacktop or other hard surface material.
§ 210-181. Access.
§ 210-182. Lighting.
All parking, loading, access and service areas shall be adequately
illuminated at night. Said lighting shall be arranged so as to protect the
(1) No more than 3% of the parking spaces shall be located between
the building and any adjoining highway upon which the building
fronts.
(2) No parking, loading or service area shall be permitted in the front
yard setback within 75 feet of the street right-of-way line, nor shall
any parking, loading or service area be permitted within 50 feet of
the side or rear property line, except that parking may be allowed
by the Supervisors within 20 feet of the side or rear yard property
line, provided that there is installed and maintained a five-foot-high
earthen landscaped berm within said twenty-foot strip.
A. Size. Each parking space shall be not less than 180 square feet in area
(nine feet by 20 feet).
B. Number. Not less than one automobile parking space with suitable
access shall be provided for each 300 square feet of gross floor area.
C. In that the need for parking is dependent upon the type and volume of
use of a building, these minimum parking requirements may be
increased or decreased by the Board of Supervisors, upon the
recommendation of the Township Planning Commission, to the required
size and number to provide adequate off-street parking for the
contemplated type and volume of use.
A. Access to a major highway or secondary street shall be controlled in the
interest of public safety by the use of deceleration and acceleration
lanes, buffer strips and traffic control devices. Each building or group of
buildings shall be physically separated from the highway or street by a
planting strip or other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor
vehicles ingress and egress, except for designed accessways.
B. In the event that the lot fronts upon a state highway, the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall approve the
means of ingress and egress to and from the lot.
C. Traffic control devices required to accommodate the traffic generated
by the use of the site shall be at the expense of the owner.
§ 210-178 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-182
196:797
streets, highways and adjoining property from direct glare. The location,
type and intensity of said lighting shall be in accordance with a lighting plan
approved by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 210-183. Loading and unloading.
In addition to the required off-street parking areas, there shall be provided
off-street areas for the loading and unloading of delivery trucks and for
the servicing of the buildings by refuse collection, fuel and other service
vehicles, which areas shall be located at the side or rear of the building,
shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged that each may be used
without blockage or interference with the use of the accessways or the
automobile parking facilities.
§ 210-182 CONCORD CODE § 210-183
196:798
ARTICLE XIXA
Historic Preservation
[Added 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 218]
§ 210-183.1. Purposes.
The Historic Preservation Article is designed to:
§ 210-183.2. Application and interpretation.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this article to have the meanings indicated below:
A. Promote the general welfare by protecting the integrity of the historic
resources of Concord Township.
B. Establish a clear process by which proposed changes affecting historic
resources, such as requests for demolition of, or special exception or
conditional uses for, or any subdivision or land development or
construction within 300 feet of an historic resource as described in
§§ 210-183.6 and 210-183.7, are reviewed by the Concord Township
Historical Commission and the Board of Supervisors.
C. Mitigate the negative effects of proposed changes on historic
resources.
D. Encourage the continued use of historic resources and facilitate their
appropriate reuse.
E. Tailor protective measures to those clearly delineated historic
resources in Concord Township worthy of preservation.
F. Encourage the preservation of historic settings and landscapes.
G. Discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
H. Implement Section 605(2)(vi) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code254 whereby uses and structures at or near places having
unique historical, architectural or patriotic interest or value may be
regulated.
A. The present tense includes all other tenses; the singular includes the
plural, and the plural includes the singular; the masculine gender
includes the feminine and neuter; the word "used" includes the words
"designed" or "arranged;" the word "person" includes any individual,
estate, trust, fiduciary, partnership, association, corporation or any
other organization or entity, including the principal officers thereof or
any person or entity acting directly or indirectly by, through or under
any of the foregoing; the word "occupied" includes the words
"designed, or intended to be occupied;" the word "structure" includes
254. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-183.1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-183.2
196:799
§ 210-183.3. (Reserved)255
§ 210-183.4. Historic Resources Map.
Historic resources in Concord Township shall be as shown upon the map
attached to and made part of this article which shall be designated "Historic
Resources Map," prepared by Thomas Comitta Associates, Inc., Town
Planners & Landscape Architects, dated August 12, 1997, last revised
August 18, 1997. Said map and all the notations, references and other data
shown thereon and the inventory attached hereto compiled by the Concord
Township Historical Society, dated August 10, 1997, last revised August 17,
1997, are hereby incorporated herein by reference into this article and shall
be as much a part of this article as if all were fully described herein.256
"building"; the word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is
always permissive and the words "as amended" as applied to any
statute, ordinance, code, regulation, plan or map includes
replacements, supplements or restatements thereof; and reference to
a particular article, section or subsection which inherently refers to
other articles, sections or subsections, includes all articles, sections or
subsections referred to.
B. The word "Township" means Concord Township, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania; the term "Board" or "Board of Supervisors" means the
Board of Supervisors of the Township; the term "Planning Commission"
means the Planning Commission of the Township; and "Commission" or
"Historical Commission" means the Historical Commission of the
Township.
C. The terms "such as" and "including" are intended to introduce matters
which are illustrative of the meaning of the sentence, clause or phrase
in which such terms appear without limiting or derogating from the
general application of the sentence, clause or phrase in which such
terms appear.
A. Classifications. The Historic Resources Map delineates resources by
classification. Three classifications of historic resources in Concord
Township are defined as follows:
(1) Class I:
(a) Buildings on the National Register.
(b) Contributing resources in a registered historic district, i.e.,
buildings, sites, structures and objects filed as such with the
National Register of Historic Places.
255. Editor's Note: Former § 210-183.3, Definition of terms, was repealed 12-15-1998 by Ord.
No. 231. See now § 210-4.
256. Editor's Note: Said Historic Resources Map and Historic Resources Inventory are located
at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-183.2 CONCORD CODE § 210-183.4
196:800
§ 210-183.5. Historical Commission.
(c) Buildings, sites, structures, objects and districts which have
received a determination of eligibility (DOE).
(2) Class II. Historic resources and districts not meeting National
Register criteria, but determined to be of historical significance
(for example, more than 100 years old or related in some way to an
important person or significant to local history) to Delaware County
and/or Concord Township and appropriately documented to that
effect by the Concord Township Historical Commission.
(3) Class III. Historic resources and districts included in the Historic
Resources Map of the Historical Commission and not included in
either Class I or Class II above.
B. Revisions. The Historic Resources Map shall be reviewed as needed but
at least once each calendar year every year and revised if needed by
legislative action of the Board of Supervisors, after a public hearing.
(1) In considering any revisions, including additions, deletions or
changes of classification to the Historic Resources Map, the Board
of Supervisors shall afford the Historical Commission an
opportunity to supply a written recommendation.
(2) The owner(s) of any property(ies) which is the subject of any such
proposed legislative action shall be given written notice of the
Historical Commission's recommendation to the Board of
Supervisors at least 30 days prior to the public hearing.
C. Official inventory. The Historical Commission shall maintain an updated
inventory of resources shown on the Historic Resources Map and their
respective classifications for Concord Township.
A. Establishment and membership. There is hereby established an
Historical Commission which shall consist of five members who shall all
be residents of Concord Township, and who shall be appointed by the
Board of Supervisors. The membership of the Commission shall include
individuals who have an interest in history, archaeology or historic
preservation.
B. Each Commission member shall serve for a term of three years which
shall be so fixed that no more than two terms shall expire each year. The
Commission shall notify the Board of Supervisors of any vacancies in
the Commission. Appointments to fill vacancies for unexpired terms
shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
C. Members shall serve without pay, but shall be reimbursed for any
personal expenditures in the conduct of Commission business when
authorized by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 210-183.4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-183.5
196:801
D. The Board of Supervisors may, after a hearing, remove any member of
the Commission from office for inefficiency, neglect of duty,
malfeasance in office or conflict of interest.
E. Organization. The Commission shall annually elect from its own
membership a Chairman, who will direct the activities of the
Commission, and such other officers as may be required for the conduct
of its business. A quorum shall be not less than a majority of the current
membership. The Commission may make, alter and rescind rules and
forms for its procedures consistent with the ordinances of the Township
and laws and regulations of the commonwealth. The Commission shall
keep full public records of its business and shall submit a monthly
report of its activities to the Board of Supervisors.
F. Expenditures for services. Within the limits of funds appropriated by
the Board of Supervisors, the Commission may employ staff or contract
for clerical, consulting or other technical services.
G. Functions and duties. In accordance with the purposes of this article,
the Commission's primary purpose is to advise the Board of Supervisors
and the Zoning Hearing Board of Concord Township on matters
pertaining to the historic resources of Concord Township and shall have
the following functions and duties:
(1) Gather documentary evidence, illustrations, photographs and other
appropriate materials to establish historic sites worthy of listing in
the Historic Resources Map and to maintain a system for the
continued survey and inventory of historic buildings, sites,
structures, objects and districts in Concord Township.
(2) Conduct research on and nominate significant resources to the
National Register of Historic Places and any other appropriate lists
or programs.
(3) Advise the Building Inspector and Board of Supervisors on the
issuance of demolition permits for historic resources, as set forth in
§ 210-183.6.
(4) Review and comment on subdivision or land development
applications which contain historic resources, or are within 300
feet of an historic resource, in accordance with the requirements
and procedures of the Concord Township Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,257 this article and other applicable
ordinances.
(5) Make recommendations to the Board of Supervisors concerning
revisions, updates or corrections to the Historic Resources Map.
257. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-183.5 CONCORD CODE § 210-183.5
196:802
§ 210-183.6. Demolition of historic resources.
(6) Maintain an updated inventory which clearly identifies buildings,
sites, structures, objects and districts and their respective
classifications on the Historic Resources Map.
(7) Consider, promote and, with the approval of the Board of
Supervisors, apply for technical and financial assistance from
appropriate local, county, state, federal and other agencies in the
preservation of significant historical and architectural sites within
the Township and to report all related actions to the Board of
Supervisors.
(8) Prepare and submit a yearly budget to the Board of Supervisors for
sums deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of the
Commission.
(9) Assist individual property owners with decisions pertaining to
historic resources in terms of their use and maintenance.
(10) Identify resources suffering from neglect and confer and advise
with property owners to alleviate and correct neglect situations.
(11) Advise the Building Inspector and Board of Supervisors on all
requests for special exceptions, conditional uses or variances
affecting historic resources.
(12) Perform any other activities as might be requested by the Concord
Township Board of Supervisors.
A. No Class I or Class II historic resource, as defined on the Historic
Resources Map, may be demolished unless the property owner obtains
a permit and complies with this section. Demolition includes demolition
by neglect which refers to leaving a building or structure or other
resource open to vandalism or vulnerable to decay by the elements.
Unoccupied structures are required to be tightly sealed and fenced off
and the utilities turned off for safety.
B. Permit requirements. No Class I or Class II historic resource within
Concord Township shall be demolished unless in compliance with the
applicable standards and procedures of the Township building and fire
codes. In particular, the Building Inspector, or such other person or
agency charged by the Board of Supervisors with the issuance of
permits for demolitions, shall not issue a permit for any proposed
demolition that is not in compliance with those requirements and, as
applicable, with the requirements of this section. If such a resource is
determined to be a victim of neglect and the owner fails to rehabilitate
the resource or apply for a demolition permit, the Township may then
determine that the property is being demolished and may request a
demolition permit application from the owner and require the owner to
participate in the permit process.
§ 210-183.5 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-183.6
196:803
C. Proposed demolition of historic resources. All applications to demolish
a Class I or Class II historic resource, as defined on the Historic
Resources Map, that are received by the Township will be forwarded to
the Board of Supervisors for acceptance at its next public meeting. This
meeting will begin the review period, at the end of which, or prior if
appropriate, the Board of Supervisors will render a decision. The
review period begins with the acceptance of the application and ends at
the Board's monthly meeting three calendar months after acceptance of
the application.
D. Following the Board's acceptance of the application, the Historical
Commission shall review the application and may appoint a Project
Manager to work with the property owner on processing the
application.
E. Application requirements for historic resources. In addition to
applicable requirements under the Township building and fire codes,
any property owner seeking a permit to demolish a Class I or Class II
historic resource shall provide a written report of the following with
regard to that historic resource. Some of the information required may
be obtained through the Historical Commission; however, it is the
property owner's responsibility to produce the report.
(1) Owner of record.
(2) Identification, description and classification from the Historic
Resources Map.
(3) Site plan showing all buildings and structures and all historic
resources on the property.
(4) Recent photographs of the resource proposed for demolition.
(5) Reasons for the demolition.
(6) Method of demolition.
(7) Future uses of the site and of the materials from the demolished
resource.
(8) Alternatives to demolition.
F. Review by the Concord Township Historical Commission. After the
property owner has provided the information required and the
Historical Commission has reviewed the findings and discussed
alternatives with the property owner, the Historical Commission will
review the application at its next public meeting. The property owner
shall be notified of the meeting and requested to present evidence or
testimony pertaining to the demolition at the meeting. In reviewing the
application, the Commission shall take into account:
§ 210-183.6 CONCORD CODE § 210-183.6
196:804
(1) The effect of demolition on the historical significance and
architectural integrity of neighboring contributing historic
resources.
(2) Economic feasibility of adaptively reusing the resource proposed
for demolition.
(3) Alternatives to demolition of the resource.
(4) Special incentives to encourage the owner to maintain the
structure, such as including the historic resource as part of the
open space contribution, including it as part of a homeowners'
association or including the resource in the conditional use
provisions under § 210-183.7.
G. Initial recommendation of the Concord Historical Commission. Within
the review period, unless the property owner has agreed, in writing, to
an extension of time, the Commission shall recommend one of the
following courses of action to the Board of Supervisors:
(1) The Commission may recommend that the Board issue a certificate
of appropriateness to the Building Inspector to issue the demolition
permit.
(2) The Commission may elect to request additional time, as specified
in Subsection H below, to provide adequate opportunity for the
Commission to document the resource proposed for demolition,
prior to the actual demolition of the resource. Such documentation
may include photographs, floor plans, measured drawings,
archaeological survey and any other comparable form of
documentation required by the Commission.
(3) The Commission may recommend that the demolition permit be
denied because an economically viable alternative use has been
found for the historic resource. This alternative use may be in
concurrence with the property owner, or may require additional
time as specified in Subsection H below, to resolve the issues
around the alternative use.
H. Time extension. The Commission or the property owner may request an
extension of the review period in order to resolve the issues around the
issuance of the demolition permit as stipulated in Subsection G above.
Each extension shall be mutually agreed upon and shall be for a
specified period of time.
I. Action by Board of Supervisors. The Board of Supervisors, within the
time frame specified herein and after reviewing all available
information, shall take final action upon the application and, where
appropriate, issue a certificate of appropriateness to the Building
Inspector.
§ 210-183.6 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-183.7
196:805
§ 210-183.7. Conditional use provisions. [Amended 12-1-1998 by
Ord. No. 227]
A. In addition to the uses permitted by right, special exception or
conditional use in the various zoning districts of Concord Township,
each Class I or Class II historic resource dwelling, barn, outbuilding or
other building as defined on the Historic Resources Map258 in these
districts shall be entitled to continue any use in existence for a
continuous period of not less than 25 years at the time of adoption of
this Ordinance. Subject to the following provisions, such Class I or
Class II historic resource dwelling, barn, outbuilding or other building
shall be entitled to one or more of the additional use opportunities
specified in Subsections B and C of this section. [Amended 12-4-2001
by Ord. No. 265]
(1) Compliance with the standards and procedures contained in
applicable sections of this article.
(2) Preparation of historic resource study as defined in § 210-183.10.
(3) Review and recommendation by the Historical Commission.
(4) Additional requirements set forth in this section.
(5) Approval of the Board of Supervisors, following a conditional use
hearing.
B. Additional dwelling unit. An additional dwelling unit, over and above
existing zoning requirements, may be allowed in an historic dwelling,
barn, outbuilding or other building as defined on the Historic Resources
Map,259 provided that the following conditions are met:
(1) The additional dwelling unit has no more than two bedrooms.
(2) There is sufficient off-street parking, to the rear or side, to
accommodate two additional vehicles, and the additional unit will
not require or generate additional vehicle parking beyond the two
provided.
(3) Any additions/alterations to the existing historic structure, and all
landscaping, must conform to existing zoning and subdivision and
land development ordinance requirements and should follow as
closely as possible the most recent edition of the Secretary of the
United States Department of the Interior's Standards for
Rehabilitation (defined in Subsection D below) and the most recent
edition of the Secretary of the Interior's Guidelines for Preserving,
Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings.
(4) The dwelling unit shall be totally contained within the historic
resource.
258. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map is located at the end of this chapter.
259. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-183.7 CONCORD CODE § 210-183.7
196:806
(5) Property containing an historic resource shall be of sufficient size
to comply with the zoning requirements of the district for two
dwelling units.
(6) The dwelling unit may be in the form of an apartment unit in the
historic dwelling or may be wholly contained within the barn,
outbuilding or other building.
C. Conditional uses. The historic dwelling, barn, outbuilding or other
building as defined on the Historic Resources Map260 may be utilized for
the uses listed below, provided that the conditions set forth in
Subsection D of this section are met:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast homestay subject to provisions of § 210-238 of
this chapter.
(2) Cultural studio/facility. A studio used for artistic instruction or
education used by artists, photographers, dancers, craftsmen,
artisans and/or used by artists to produce artistic objects and/or a
facility for public viewing of artistic, educational or historic objects
that would allow the selling of the objects on view, such as
museums, galleries, as well as antique shops, provided that it
includes only the display and sale of objects and does not include
the repair, finish/refinish, construction or preparation of objects for
sale.
(3) Educational/social center. A facility, on a lot of not less than five
acres, for educational and business conferences, including
teleconferencing, as well as private parties and gatherings, to
include the preparation and serving of food and beverage to the
guests, but does not include a public restaurant.
(4) Flower shop. An establishment for the retail sale of flowers, plants
and floral arrangements prepared on site.
(5) Indoor recreational facility. A facility for athletic activities involving
physical exercise, fitness and health maintenance, such as
aerobics, racquetball, handball and tennis.
(6) Funeral home. An establishment in which the dead are prepared for
burial or cremation and in which wakes and funerals may be held.
(7) Educational farm. A facility, on a lot not less than 10 acres in size,
making use of its current farming facilities and usage to provide
instruction in farming history, methods, techniques and farm
animals as practiced in Concord Township and Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
D. The conditions that must be met in order for the historic dwelling, barn,
outbuilding or other building as defined on the Historic Resources
260. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-183.7 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-183.7
196:807
Map261 to be utilized for the above defined conditional use are as
follows:
(1) The historic resource is located on a lot five acres or more or, if on a
lot one to five acres, the activity generated by the proposed use is
located at least 300 feet from any residential dwelling.
(2) The use conforms to existing fire and safety regulations.
(3) There is sufficient off-street parking to accommodate the use,
which parking conforms to the following:
(a) Parking spaces do not exceed eight allowable spaces per acre
of available lot coverage.
(b) Parking is at least 100 feet from any residential dwelling
located on adjacent property, is placed to the side or rear of the
main structure and is sufficiently landscaped to shield the
parking area from residential view.
(4) Lighting is limited to providing sufficient lighting for safety and
security of customers of the establishment, but does not impinge on
neighboring residential character, as determined by the Historical
Commission.
(5) The conditional use does not include a liquor license.
(6) Entertainment is not provided by the property owner or lessee
(leasing agent), but is allowed if a customer provides the
entertainment, the entertainment conforms to existing ordinances
and includes no amplified music audible from the outside.
(7) Hours of operation are limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m., excluding
time required for set up and clean up.
(8) Any addition/alteration to the existing historic structure, and all
landscaping, must conform to the existing zoning and subdivision
and land development ordinance requirements.
(9) Board approval or rejection.
(a) In determining whether to approve or reject the proposed
addition or alteration, the Board of Supervisors shall consider
the effect which the proposed addition/alteration will have
upon the general historic and architectural nature of the
Township. The Board shall pass upon the appropriateness of
the proposed exterior architectural features which can be seen
from a public street or way and shall consider the general
design, arrangement, texture, material and color of the
building or structure and the relation of such factors to similar
features of buildings and structures in the Township. In
261. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-183.7 CONCORD CODE § 210-183.7
196:808
§ 210-183.8. Modification to area and bulk regulations.
evaluating the proposed addition/alteration, the Board shall
consider:
[1] Broad historical values representing the cultural, political,
economic or social history of the Township.
[2] The relationship of the structure with historic personages
or events.
[3] Specimen architectural types representative of a certain
period and a style or method of construction.
[4] The effect of the proposed change upon the general
historic and architectural nature of the Township.
[5] The appropriateness of exterior architectural features
which can be seen from a public street or way.
(b) In its review the Board may rely upon, where appropriate, the
most recent edition of the Standards for Rehabilitation and the
Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating, Restoring and
Reconstructing Historic Buildings of the United States
Department of Interior.
E. An applicant requesting a conditional use shall follow, as applicable, the
provisions of Article XXVII, Conditional Uses, and in addition shall
comply with the following:
(1) The request for a conditional use shall be accompanied by an
historic resource study complying with the provisions of
§ 210-183.10, Historic resource study.
(2) At the conditional use hearing conducted by the Township or its
designee a representative from the Historic Commission, when
requested by the hearing body, may be present and offer testimony
and evidence on behalf of the Historic Commission.
(3) Applicants shall have the option of submitting the historic resource
study to the Historic Commission prior to filing the application
request for a conditional use and meeting with the Historic
Commission to discuss the request for a conditional use.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board, through the grant of a variance, may
approve requested modifications to the otherwise applicable lot size, lot
dimension or yard requirements for plans affecting Class I and Class II
historic resources, if it is necessary in order to preserve and protect an
historic resource, as long as it does not adversely affect water supply,
sewer systems and off-street parking.
§ 210-183.7 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-183.8
196:809
§ 210-183.9. Development provisions. [Amended 12-1-1998 by Ord.
No. 227]
§ 210-183.10. Historic resource study.
B. In a cluster development, the minimum lot area of specific lot(s) may be
lowered to as low as a quarter acre and averaged with others in order to
provide additional acreage within the historic resource.
C. The lot dimensions and/or yard requirements for an historic resource
and the lots adjacent to the historic resource may be adjusted, if no
alternatives exist, in order to preserve the historic resource on its own
lot.
A. Residential development.
(1) In the preservation and use of a Class I and/or Class II historic
resource, there shall be included a lot area of sufficient size to
preserve those portions and features of the historic resource which
are significant to its historical, architectural and cultural values. As
a minimum, no lot line shall be closer than 85 feet to a Class I or
Class II historic resource.
(2) After the lot area of the Class I and/or Class II historic resource is
determined in accordance with Subsection A(1) above, the
remaining number of buildable lots that would be allowed on the
parcel by the Zoning Ordinance may be reduced in size, if
necessary, to accommodate that same number on the parcel, to not
smaller than 20,000 square feet or 10, 000 square feet in a cluster
development.
B. Nonresidential properties. For each additional acre, above the
minimum required lot area for the historic resource, remaining with the
historic resource, an additional 1% of building coverage may be
permitted for nonresidential properties.
A. Applicability. A historic resource study is required when any of the
following are proposed:
(1) When a developer or landowner files an application for approval of
a subdivision or land development plan which proposes
construction of buildings and other structures, streets, ways and
parking facilities, common open space and/or public facilities or
any other facility or improvement requiring subdivision and/or land
development approval pursuant to the provisions of the Concord
Township Subdivision/Land Development Ordinance262 located
within 300 feet of the exterior walls of any Class I or Class II
historic resource.
262. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-183.8 CONCORD CODE § 210-183.10
196:810
(2) Any application or plan which proposes a conditional use as defined
in § 210-183.7, Conditional use provisions.
(3) General bridge or highway construction or substantial repair
passing within 300 feet of the exterior walls of any Class I or Class
II historic resource.
B. The historic resource study shall be prepared by the developer and/or
land owner and submitted to the Commission. The study may utilize the
records contained within the jurisdiction of the Commission.
C. Contents. The study shall contain at least the following information:
(1) Background information. [Amended 12-1-1998 by Ord. No. 227]
(a) A general site description, including topography, watercourses,
vegetation, landscaping, existing drives, etc.
(b) General description and classification of all historic resources
located on the subject tract, on tracts immediately adjacent to
the subject tract or road, or within 300 feet of the subject tract
or road.
(c) Physical description of all historic resources identified in
Subsection C(1)(b) above.
(d) An assessment of the significance of each historic resource,
both relative to the Township and region in general.
(e) Sufficient number of black and white or color five-inch-byseven-
inch or eight-inch-by-ten-inch photographs to show
every historic resource identified in Subsection C(1)(b) above,
in its setting.
(2) Proposed change.
(a) General description of project, including timetable or phases.
(b) Description of effect on each historic resource identified in
Subsection C(1)(b) above, with regard to architectural
integrity, historic setting and future use.
(c) General description of effect of noise and traffic and any other
consequence generated by the proposed change on each
historic resource.
(3) Mitigation measures.
(a) Recommendations for mitigating the project's effect on historic
resources, including design alternatives, buffering, screening,
tree replacement, berming, fencing, landscaping and any other
appropriate measures permitted or required under the terms
of this article and any Township ordinance or any other federal
or state regulations.
§ 210-183.10 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-183.10
196:811
§ 210-183.11. Preservation of other restrictions.
The provisions of this Article XIXA shall not be construed to repeal,
abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions
applicable to historic resources and any such existing easements, covenants
or deed restrictions shall remain in full force and effect, enforceable by any
and all parties in interest.
§ 210-183.12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency except Article XX, Floodplain
Conservation District, of the Zoning Ordinance of Concord Township, which
is not repealed or amended and its provisions shall remain in full force and
effect.
(b) Measures to control traffic, noise, odor or other emissions
which may have an adverse effect on the historic resource.
(c) Other mitigation measures may include, but need not be
limited to:
[1] Any new construction cannot be closer than 85 feet to the
historic resource.
[2] Any structure to be built within 300 feet of a historic
resource must have 10% glass on any wall facing the
historic resource and the public way, and the design must
include a vertical bay design with a sixteen-foot-to-twentyfour-
foot dimension for each bay, and the gable end of the
roof must face the historic resource.
(d) Concord Township Historical Commission. The Historic
Resource Study will be reviewed by the Commission. The
Commission shall set forth its evaluation and recommendations
in a written report.
§ 210-183.10 CONCORD CODE § 210-183.12
196:812
ARTICLE XX
Floodplain Conservation District
[Amended 2-1-1994 by Ord. No. 189; 8-1-1994 by Ord. No. 190;
1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221; 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231; 1-4-2010 by
Ord. No. 331; 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 332; 10-6-2015 by Ord. No. 369]
§ 210-184. Declaration of legislative intent.
A. The intent of this article is to:
(1) Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
(2) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
(3) Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
(4) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units and its residents by preventing development in
areas subject to flooding.
(5) Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
B. Applicability.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake or cause to be undertaken any
construction or development anywhere within the Township unless
a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
(2) A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures, provided that no structural alterations are
made to the existing building.
C. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article supersedes any other
conflicting provision which may be in effect in identified floodplain
areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full
force and effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive.
If there is any conflict between any of the provisions of this article, the
more restrictive shall apply.
D. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this article shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
the article, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this
purpose the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be
severable.
E. Warning. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur.
§ 210-184 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-184
196:813
§ 210-185. Administration.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain area or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
F. Disclaimer of liability. This article shall not create liability on the part of
the Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
A. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
article and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The
Floodplain Administrator may fulfill the duties and responsibilities set
forth in these regulations; delegate duties and responsibilities set forth
in these regulations as qualified technical personnel, plan examiners,
inspectors, and other employees; or enter into a written agreement or
written contract with another agency or private sector entity to
administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of
any part of these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the
community of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in
the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. Permits required. Permits shall be required before any construction or
development is undertaken within any area of the Township.
C. Issuance of permit.
(1) The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be
in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the
Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as
amended)263 and the U.S. Clean Water Act, § 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
No permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
(3) In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
263. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq. and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
§ 210-184 CONCORD CODE § 210-185
196:814
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
(4) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all
records associated with the requirements of this article including,
but not limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting,
inspection, violations and enforcement.
(5) The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for
submitting a biennial report to FEMA concerning community
participation in the National Flood Insurance Program.
(6) The responsibility, authority and means to implement the
commitments of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated
from the person identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies
with the person identified in this article as the Floodplain
Administrator.
(7) The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of
the 34 Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or latest
revisions thereof.
D. Application procedures and requirements.
(1) Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Township. Such
application shall contain the following:
(a) Name and address of applicant.
(b) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(c) Name and address of contractor.
(d) Site location including address.
(e) Listing of other permits required.
(f) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value
of the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate.
(g) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
(2) If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient
detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to
determine that:
§ 210-185 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-185
196:815
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage and conform with the requirements of this article
and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage;
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards;
(d) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(e) Building materials are flood resistant;
(f) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been
used; and
(g) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
(3) Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any
other pertinent information (e.g., any or all of the technical
information contained in § 210-188B) as may be required by the
Floodplain Administrator to make the above determination:
(a) A completed permit application form.
(b) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
[1] North arrow, scale and date.
[2] Topographic contour lines, if available.
[3] All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the
size of the site expressed in acres or square feet.
[4] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and land
development.
[5] The location of all existing streets, drives and other
accessways.
[6] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, identified floodplain areas and, if available,
information pertaining to the floodway and the flow of
water, including direction and velocities.
§ 210-185 CONCORD CODE § 210-185
196:816
(c) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
[1] The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon North American Vertical Datum of
1988.
[2] The elevation of the base flood.
[3] If available, information concerning flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
factors associated with a base flood.
[4] Detailed information concerning any proposed
floodproofing measures.
[5] Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34
Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(d) The following data and documentation:
[1] Documentation, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of
any proposed development within a floodway when
combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation at
any point.
[2] A document, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed
construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces associated with the base flood. Such
statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
[3] Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 210-187G(6), Storage, and § 210-187I, Development
which may endanger human life, including:
[a] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 210-187G and I which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[b] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or
spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed
in § 210-187I during a base flood.
§ 210-185 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-185
196:817
[4] The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
[5] Where any excavation of grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
E. Review by County Conservation District. A copy of all applications and
plans for any proposed construction or development in any identified
floodplain area to be considered for approval shall be submitted by the
Floodplain Administrator to the County Conservation District for review
and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The recommendations of
the Conservation District shall be considered by the Floodplain
Administrator for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
F. Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications for
any proposed construction or development in any identified floodplain
area to be considered for approval may be submitted by the Floodplain
Administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/or individuals
(e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.) for review and
comment.
G. Changes. After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain
Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application,
permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted
with the application without the written consent or approval of the
Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in
writing and shall be submitted by the applicant to the Floodplain
Administrator for consideration.
H. Placards. In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the
time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of
the permit and the date of its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
I. Start of construction. Work on the proposed construction and/or
development shall begin within six months and shall be completed
within 12 months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit
shall expire, unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the
Floodplain Administrator. The actual start of construction means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
§ 210-185 CONCORD CODE § 210-185
196:818
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For substantial improvement, the actual start of construction
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building. Time extensions shall be granted only if a
written request is submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient
and reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such
a request and the original permit is compliant with the article and
FIRM/FIS in effect at the time the extension is granted.
J. Inspection and revocation.
(1) During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine
that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable
municipal laws and ordinances. He/she shall make as many
inspections during and upon completion of the work as are
necessary.
(2) In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises
or development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation
of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the
provisions of this article.
(3) In the event that the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the
work does not comply with the permit application or any applicable
laws and ordinances or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator
shall revoke the permit and report such fact to the Board of
Supervisors for whatever action it considers necessary.
(4) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all
records associated with the requirements of this article including,
but not limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting,
inspection and enforcement.
K. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
L. Enforcement.
(1) Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized municipal representative determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this article or of any regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such
alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
§ 210-185 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-185
196:819
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(c) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for
the performance of any act it requires;
(d) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice of order shall
be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by
any other method authorized or required by the laws of this
state; and
(e) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this article.
M. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of
this article may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal
must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision or action
of the Floodplain Administrator.
(2) Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall set a
time and place, within not less than 10 nor more than 30 days, for
the purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place
at which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
(3) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board
may seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the
laws of this commonwealth, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain
Management Act.264
N. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the Township shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor or violation and upon conviction shall pay a
fine to the Township of not less than $25 nor more than $600 plus costs
of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties all other actions are
hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this article. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this article shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
264. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 210-185 CONCORD CODE § 210-185
196:820
§ 210-186. Identification of floodplain areas.
or relocated, in noncompliance with the article may be declared by the
Supervisors to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Identification. The identified floodplain area shall be those areas of the
Township of Concord which are classified as special flood hazard areas
(SFHA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated November 18, 2009, and
September 2, 2015, or the most recent revision thereof issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), including all digital
data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study, or the Floodplain
Conservation District Map for Concord Township, dated October 1971,
as revised December 1977, whichever is more restrictive. The abovereferenced
FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments, are hereby adopted by Concord Township and declared to
be a part of this article.
B. Description and special requirements of floodplain areas. The identified
floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
(1) The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and
the FIRM as Floodway and which represent the channel of a
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water
surface elevation by more than one foot at any point. The term shall
also include floodway areas which have been identified in other
available studies or sources of information for those special flood
hazard areas where no floodway has been identified in the FIS and
FIRM.
(a) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development, shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(2) The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base
flood elevations have been provided.
(a) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS
§ 210-185 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-186
196:821
prepared by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been
provided and a floodway has been delineated.
(3) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base elevation shall be determined
by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the identified
floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. In lieu of the
above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine the
elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications,
who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect
currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses,
computation, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the Township.
(4) The Floodplain Conservation District Map for Concord Township,
dated October 1971, as revised December 1977 identifies local
flood hazard or ponding areas using best available topographic
data and locally derived information such as flood of record,
historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
C. Changes in identification of area. The identified floodplain area may be
revised or modified by the Board, where studies or information
provided by a qualified agency or person documents the need for such
revision. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained
from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after
the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify
FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting
technical or scientific data. See § 210-187 for situations where FEMA
notification is required.
D. Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any identified
floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the
Township, and any party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
E. Jurisdictional boundary changes. Prior to development occurring in
areas where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are
proposed or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard
data affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The community
shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to
annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those
in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 210-186 CONCORD CODE § 210-187
196:822
§ 210-187. Technical provisions.
A. General.
(1) No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Regional Office. No encroachment, alteration, or
improvement of any kind shall be made to any watercourse unless
it can be shown that the activity will not reduce or impede the
flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse in any way. In addition,
FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or
relocation of any watercourse.
(2) Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed
within any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict
compliance with the provisions contained in this article and any
other applicable codes, ordinances and regulations.
(3) When a community proposes to permit the following
encroachments: any development that causes a rise in the base
flood elevations within the floodway; any development occurring in
Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of
more than one foot in the base flood elevation; alteration or
relocation of a stream (including but not limited to installing
culverts and bridges); the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part
65.12):
(a) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(b) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of
map change and prior to approving the proposed
encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to FEMA
of the adoption of floodplain management ordinances
incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or
revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition.
(c) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final
map revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance
with 44 CFR Part 67.
(4) Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a permit
is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
§ 210-187 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-187
196:823
B. The following provisions shall apply within any floodplain area, as
defined in § 210-186A.
(1) Uses by right:
(a) Cultivation and harvesting crops according to recognized soil
conservation practices, which shall in no case cause alluvial
deposits to build up in the watercourses or cause undue
erosion of the floodplain.
(b) Pasture, grazing land.
(c) Outdoor plant nursery, orchard.
(d) Tree farms or reforestation.
(e) Game farm, fish hatchery (excluding structures).
(f) Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserves, arboretum.
(g) Sealed public water supply wells.
(h) Underground utility transmission lines, excluding substations
or similar structures.
(i) Front, side or rear yards for any district; provided, however,
that no land in the Floodplain Conservation District shall
qualify in computing the minimum lot area for the district as
specified under the Township Zoning Ordinance, except in the
case of residential lots of one acre or larger, where there must
be a minimum of 0.7 acre in contiguous land outside of the
floodplain, and all other requirements of the Township Zoning
Ordinance and regulations are met.
(j) Parking lots with a surface permeable to stormwater here
required by the regulations for the district applicable to the lot,
without consideration of this section.
(k) Sanitary sewers and sewage pumping stations and treatment
plans of floodproofed design subject to the approval of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and the
Township Board of Supervisors.
(2) Uses by special exception:
(a) Dams, culverts and bridges approved by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Protection.
(b) Grading or regrading of lands, and the construction of
retaining walls.
(c) Recreation use, including park, day camp, picnic grove, golf
course, fishing and boating club.
(d) Private roads and driveways.
§ 210-187 CONCORD CODE § 210-187
196:824
(e) Storm sewers.
(f) The cutting, killing and destruction of trees over three inches
in diameter.
(g) Other uses similar to the above, provided that the effect is not
to alter the cross-sectional profile of the stream basin at the
point of the proposed construction or use.
(3) Prohibited uses. The following uses shall not be permitted:
(a) All structures, buildings, and retaining walls, except as
provided in § 210-187B(2).
(b) All on-site waste disposal systems.
(c) All storage of materials that can float or that are explosive or
that are toxic to humans, animals or vegetation.
(d) The relocation or alteration of any watercourse without
approval by both the Board of Supervisors and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection;
without documentation, to be provided by the person(s)
proposing the alteration, that all adjacent municipalities have
received prior notice of the proposed alteration, and that
copies of such notification have been sent to the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development and the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
C. When allowed by variance or special exception, the following elevation
and floodproofing requirements shall apply.
(1) Residential structures. Within any identified floodplain area, the
lowest floor (including basement) of any new construction or any
substantial improvement to an existing residential structure shall
be elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation. In A
Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the
regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with this
article. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more
restrictive.
(2) Nonresidential structures.
(a) Within any identified floodplain area, the lowest floor
(including basement) of any new construction or any
substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall be
elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be
§ 210-187 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-187
196:825
designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the
regulatory flood elevation is floodproofed so that the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and has structural components with the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy.
(b) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with this article.
(c) Any nonresidential structure or part thereof made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations," published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(June 1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other
equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect, which states
that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above-referenced standards.
(d) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most
recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized,
where they are more restrictive.
D. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet
or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
§ 210-187 CONCORD CODE § 210-187
196:826
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
E. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this article must comply with all article requirements that do
not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure. Documentation that a specific article requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the
Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any
exemption from article requirements will be the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be at least above the
regulatory flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
§ 210-187 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-187
196:827
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
G. Design and construction standards. The following minimum standards
shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
identified floodplain area:
(1) Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points.
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted.
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring or settling.
(d) Be no steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal,
unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are
submitted to and approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
(2) Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
(3) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(a) All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of
floodwaters.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(c) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with
all state and local regulations for such systems. If any such
system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to it or contamination from it during a flood.
(d) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
#348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages,"
and "The International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be
utilized.
§ 210-187 CONCORD CODE § 210-187
196:828
(4) Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
(5) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
(6) Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal or plant life
and are not listed in § 210-187I, Development which may endanger
human life, shall be restored at or above the regulatory flood
elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
(7) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
(8) Anchoring.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
floatation, collapse or lateral movement.
(b) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(9) Floors, walls and ceilings.
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing
structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are waterresistant
and will withstand inundation.
(d) Windows, doors and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
water-resistant material.
(10) Paints and adhesives.
(a) Paints or other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(b) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
§ 210-187 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-187
196:829
(c) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other
finishing material.
(11) Electrical components.
(a) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(12) Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and
ventilating units and other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory
flood elevation.
(13) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
H. Uniform Construction Code coordination.
(1) The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 to 405), as amended, and not limited to the following
provisions, shall apply for all construction within the Floodplain
Conservation District to the extent that they are more restrictive
and/or supplement the requirements of this article.
(a) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402,
and Appendix G.
(b) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the
latest edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R322,
Appendix E and Appendix J.
I. Development which may endanger human life.
(1) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act265 and the regulations adopted by the Department of
Community and Economic Development as required by the Act, any
new or substantially improved structure which will be used for the
production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances or will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons or other
comparable volume of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises or will involve the production, storage
or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject to
265. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 210-187 CONCORD CODE § 210-187
196:830
the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(2) Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection I(1) above shall be prohibited. Where permitted within
any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
residential structure of the kind described in § 210-187C(1), above,
shall be elevated to remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet
above base flood elevation and built in accordance with
§ 210-187A, C and G.
(3) Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind
described in § 210-187C(2) above shall be built in accordance with
§ 210-187A, C and G including:
§ 210-187 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-187
196:831
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation; and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood. Any such structure or part
thereof that will be built below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
standards for completely dry floodproofing contained in the
publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, June 1972, as amended March 1992), or with some
other equivalent watertight standard.
J. Special requirements for subdivisions. All subdivision proposals and
development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres,
whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain areas where base flood
elevation data are not available, shall be supported by hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations
and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional
letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal requirements
and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
K. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(1) Within any Floodway Area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
(2) Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(a) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(b) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
1 1/2 feet or more above the base flood elevation.
(c) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(d) Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in
accordance with the manufacturers' installation instructions as
provided by the manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot
provide the above information, the requirements of Appendix E
of the 2009 International Residential Building Code or the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent
Foundations for Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or
latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401 to 405
shall apply.
(e) Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of
the 2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions
thereto and 34 Pa. Code, as amended where appropriate and/
or applicable to units where the manufacturers' standards for
§ 210-187 CONCORD CODE § 210-187
196:832
§ 210-188. Activities requiring special permits.
anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for the
proposed unit(s) installation.
L. Special requirements for recreational vehicles. Within any identified
floodplain area recreational vehicles shall be prohibited.
A. General. In accordance with the administrative regulations
promulgated by the Department of Community and Economic
Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act,266 the following activities shall be prohibited within any identified
floodplain area unless a special permit has been issued by the
Township.
(1) The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used or
intended to be used for any of the following activities:
(a) Hospitals.
(b) Nursing homes.
(c) Jails or prisons.
(2) The commencement of or any construction of a new manufactured
home, park or manufactured home subdivision or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
B. Application requirements for special permits. Applicants for special
permits shall provide five copies of the following items:
(1) A written request, including a completed permit application form.
(2) A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
(3) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date.
(b) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum of
1988, showing existing and proposed contours at intervals of
two feet.
(c) All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet.
266. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 210-187 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-188
196:833
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways
and parking areas, with information concerning widths,
pavement types and construction, and elevations.
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural
and man-made features affecting or affected by the proposed
activity or development.
(f) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and
spot elevations concerning the base flood elevations and
information concerning the flow of water, including direction
and velocities.
(g) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities and
any other improvements.
(h) Any other information which the municipality considers
necessary for adequate review of the application.
(4) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing
the following:
(a) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections and exterior building elevations,
as appropriate.
(b) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any
other floor.
(c) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with the base flood.
(d) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
(e) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths.
(f) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades.
(g) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems and any other utilities and
facilities.
(5) The following data and documentation:
§ 210-188 CONCORD CODE § 210-188
196:834
(a) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he
represents.
(b) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect
or landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood.
(c) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect or other qualified person, which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the
development during the course of a base flood, including a
statement concerning the effects such pollution may have on
human life.
(d) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on flood elevations and flows.
(e) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect or a landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose
buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be
located on the site below the base flood elevation and the
effects such materials and debris may have on base flood
elevations and flows.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(h) Any other applicable permits, such as, but not limited to, a
permit for any activity regulated by the Department of
Environmental Protection under Section 302 of Act
1978-166.267
(i) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which
the site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of
a base flood.
267. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 210-188 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-188
196:835
C. Application review procedures. Upon receipt of an application for
special permit by the Township, the following procedures shall apply, in
addition to those of Subsection B above:
(1) Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying
documentation shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Commission by registered or certified mail for its review and
recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be
forwarded to the Township, Planning Commission and Township
Engineer for review and comment.
(2) If an application is received that is incomplete, the Township shall
notify the applicant, in writing, stating in what respect the
application is deficient.
(3) If the Township decides to disapprove an application, it shall notify
the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
(4) If the Township approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent
information with the Department of Community and Economic
Development, by registered or certified mail, within five working
days after the date of approval.
(5) Before issuing the special permit, the Township shall allow the
Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days,
after receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the
application and decision made by the Township.
(6) If the Township does not receive any communication from the
Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the
applicant.
(7) If the Department of Community and Economic Development
should decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the
Township and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval, and the Township shall not issue the special permit.
D. Special technical requirements.
(1) In addition to the requirements of § 210-187 of this article, the
following minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed
development requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict
between any of the following requirements and those in § 210-187
of this article or in any other code, ordinance or regulation, the
more restrictive provision shall apply.
(2) No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can
be determined that the structure or activity will be located,
constructed and maintained in a manner which will:
§ 210-188 CONCORD CODE § 210-188
196:836
§ 210-189. Existing structures in identified floodplain areas.
(a) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and
any occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new
structures shall be designed, located and constructed so that:
[1] The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either
the structure itself or to any of its equipment or contents
below the base flood elevation.
[2] The lowest floor elevation will be at least 1 1/2 feet above
the base flood elevation.
[3] The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any
time during the base flood.
(b) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows or debris endangering life and property.
(3) All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications,
who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect
currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses,
computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by the Township and the Department of
Community and Economic Development.
A. Existing structures. The provisions of this article do not require any
changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing structures.
However, when an improvement is made to any existing structure, the
provisions of Subsection B shall apply.
B. Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within any
identified floodplain area:
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any floodway area that would cause any increase in
the elevation of the base flood.
(2) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this article.
(3) Any modifications, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of
any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less
than 50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed
to the greatest extent possible.
§ 210-188 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-189
196:837
§ 210-190. Variances.
(4) The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
(5) Within any floodway area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless a permit is obtained from the Department
of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
(6) Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a permit
is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(7) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
article.
A. General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this article
would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder,
developer or landowner, the Township may, upon request, grant relief
from the strict application of the requirements.
B. Variance procedures and conditions.
(1) Requests for variances shall be considered by the Township in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 210-185M and the
following:
(a) No variance shall be granted for any construction,
development, use or activity within any floodway area that
would cause any increase in the base flood elevation.
(b) Except for a possible modification of the one-and-one-half-foot
freeboard requirement involved, no variance shall be granted
for any of the other requirements pertaining specifically to
development regulated by special permit (§ 210-188) or to
development which may endanger human life (§ 210-187I).
(c) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(d) In granting any variance, the Township shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to
achieve the objectives of this article.
(e) Whenever a variance is granted, the Township shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that:
§ 210-189 CONCORD CODE § 210-190
196:838
§ 210-191. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this article
shall be interpreted so as to give this article its most reasonable application.
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the meanings indicated herein:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year-flood" or
one-percent-annual-chance flood).
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) for Zone AE that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a one-percent-or-greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
[1] The granting of the variance may result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance.
[2] Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(f) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Township shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
[1] That there is good and sufficient cause.
[2] That failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the application.
[3] That the granting of the variance will neither result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public
expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimize
the public or conflict with any other applicable state or
local ordinances and regulations.
(g) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions
shall be maintained by the Township. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to FEMA.
(2) Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting
the base flood.
§ 210-190 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-191
196:839
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
§ 210-191 CONCORD CODE § 210-191
196:840
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See § 210-186A and B for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this article.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified by an approved state
program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior.
D.
§ 210-191 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-191
196:841
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after August 9, 2015, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after January 5,
1978, and before August 9, 2015, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the
time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within
180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated January 5,
1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated January 5,
1978, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation or estimated
flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a freeboard safety
factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.
§ 210-191 CONCORD CODE § 210-191
196:842
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all, or a designated portion of, a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
§ 210-191 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-191
196:843
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the Township's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 210-191 CONCORD CODE § 210-191
196:844
ARTICLE XXA
Cellular Telecommunications Facilities
[Added 3-3-1998 by Ord. No. 222]
§ 210-191.1. Purpose.
The cellular telecommunications facility article is designed to:
§ 210-191.2. Application and interpretation.
In interpreting the provisions of this article to determine the extent of the
restriction upon the use of the property, the provision shall be interpreted,
where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of the language written and
enacted, as permitting the cellular telecommunications facilities sites that
are appropriate and yet compatible with surrounding land uses.
§ 210-191.3. Definition of terms.
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms and phrases
shall have the meanings indicated herein:
ANTENNA — A device used to collect or transmit telecommunications or
radio signals. Examples are panels, microwave dishes and single poles
known as "whips."
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any pole, telescoping mast,
monopole, tower, tripod or any other structure which supports or has
attached to it an antenna or antennas.
ANTENNA HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the base of
an antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the antenna
support structure, including any antenna affixed thereto. If the antenna
support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the
highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — The equipment and
structures involved in receiving telecommunication or radio signals from
a mobile radio communications source and transmitting those signals to a
A. Accommodate the need for cellular telecommunications facilities while
regulating their location and number in the Township;
B. Minimize adverse visual effects of cellular telecommunications facilities
through careful design, siting and vegetative screening;
C. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from cellular
telecommunications facilities failure and falling ice and debris through
engineering and careful siting of cellular telecommunications facilities;
and
D. Maximize the use of any new or existing cellular telecommunications
facilities or other tall structure(s) so as to reduce the number of cellular
telecommunications facilities needed in the future.
§ 210-191.1 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-191.3
196:845
central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the landbased
telephone lines.
LANDSITE — A tract or parcel of land that contains the cellular
communications facility, tower, antenna and/or telecommunications
equipment building.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING — The building in
which the electronic receiving and relay equipment for a cellular
telecommunications facility is housed.
TOWER — A structure that is intended to support equipment used to
transmit and/or receive telecommunications signals.
§ 210-191.4. Use, area, landscaping, fencing and heights
requirements.
A. A cellular telecommunications facility with antenna that is attached to
an existing wireless communications, cellular communications or
personal communications services tower, smokestack, water tower or
other similar tall structure, together with any antenna support
structure, shall not exceed the height of the existing structure by more
than 15 feet and shall require a building and zoning permit.
B. A cellular telecommunications facility with antenna that is not mounted
on an existing antenna support structure, shall not have an antenna
height or tower height in excess of the minimum height necessary to
effectively provide the wireless communications service, and not in
excess of 180 feet, and shall require a building and zoning permit and
land development approval pursuant to the provisions of the
Subdivision and Land Development Chapter of the Code.268
C. If a new antenna support structure is constructed (as opposed to
mounting the antenna on an existing tall structure), the minimum
distance between the base of the support structure (excluding any guy
wire anchors) and any property line shall be the largest of the following:
[Amended 10-5-1999 by Ord. No. 244]
(1) The minimum setback in the underlying zoning district.
(2) Fifty feet.
(3) In addition, unless the communication tower is designed to collapse
upon itself so as not to fall upon any adjoining property, the setback
from each lot line shall be equal to the height of the tower. It shall
be an applicant's burden to establish by clear and convincing
evidence that a proposed communication tower has been so
designed by a Pennsylvania Licensed Structural Engineer.
D. Any provisions of the Township Code, especially Chapters 210 and 160
which are not addressed hereunder, shall remain in effect and shall not
268. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-191.3 CONCORD CODE § 210-191.4
196:846
be considered altered or modified by this § 210-191.4 and shall apply
to the proposed cellular telecommunications facilities and/or
telecommunications equipment building.
E. Landscaping.
(1) Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
(2) Landscaping shall be required to screen and buffer as much of the
cellular telecommunications facility as possible, and the fence
surrounding the cellular telecommunications facility, and any other
ground-level features of the cellular telecommunications facility,
from the abutting properties.
(3) Where the cellular telecommunications facility abuts residentially
developed land, residential zoning districts, public land or streets,
the cellular telecommunications facility perimeter shall be
landscaped with at least one row of deciduous trees, not less than
3 1/2 inches in caliper, spaced not more than 30 feet apart, on
center, and within 40 feet of the cellular telecommunications
facility boundary, as well as at least one row of evergreen trees or
shrubs, at least 14 feet high when planted and spaced not more
than 15 feet apart and within 25 feet of the cellular
telecommunications facility boundary.
F. Fencing. A security fence shall be required around the cellular
communications facility, unless the antenna is mounted on an existing
tall structure. The security fence shall be a minimum of eight feet in
height; the type of fencing shall be solid wood as approved by the
Township.
G. In the event that a cellular telecommunications facility is attached to a
nonresidential building or structure in a residential district, the
maximum antenna height shall be 20 feet above the existing building or
structure.
H. In the event that a cellular telecommunications facility is attached to a
mid-rise or high-rise apartment building in a residential district, the
maximum antenna height shall be 20 feet above the existing apartment
building.
I. All uses ancillary to the cellular telecommunications facility, including
without limitation a business office, maintenance depot, vehicle
storage, etc. are prohibited from the landsite, unless otherwise
permitted in the zoning district in which the landsite is located.
J. The cellular telecommunications facility shall be fully automated and
unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for periodic
maintenance.
§ 210-191.4 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-191.5
196:847
§ 210-191.5. Standards for approval; additional design standards.
The following standards of approval shall apply to all cellular
telecommunications facilities:
A. The applicant shall demonstrate, using accepted technological
evidence, that the antenna and antenna support structure must be
located where proposed in order to satisfy its function in the applicant's
grid system.
B. If the applicant proposes to build a tower (as opposed to mounting the
antenna on an existing tall structure), it is required to demonstrate that
it contacted the owners of tall structures within a one-mile radius of the
site proposed, requested permission to install the antenna on those tall
structures and was denied permission for reasons other than economic
reasons. The term "tall structures" includes smokestacks, water towers,
antenna support structures of other cellular phone companies and
other communications towers (fire, police, etc.). If the antenna can be
physically and legally accommodated on an existing tall structure, the
governing body may deny the conditional use application to construct a
new tower.
C. The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna height is the
minimum required to function satisfactorily. No antenna height taller
than this minimum height shall be approved, unless the applicant
provides proof that another provider of wireless, cellular or personal
communications services has already agreed to collocate on the
applicant's antenna support structure at a greater height than is
required by the applicant.
D. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna and
antenna support structure are safe and the surrounding properties will
not be negatively affected by antenna support structure failure, falling
ice or other debris. All antenna support structures shall be fitted with
anti-climbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers and the
Township.
E. In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in
the Township in the future, the proposed antenna support structure
shall be required to accommodate, where possible, other users,
including other wireless communication, cellular communication and
personal communication service provider companies, and local police,
fire and ambulance companies. Applicants shall provide evidence that
all other authorized users have been contacted by the applicant with an
offer of collocation on the applicant's proposed antenna support
structure.
F. The applicant must demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission to provide wireless communications,
cellular communications and/or personal communications services.
§ 210-191.5 CONCORD CODE § 210-191.5
196:848
§ 210-191.6. Conditional use or special exception provisions.
[Amended 11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 325]
In addition to the requirements of Article XXVII (applicable to conditional
uses), or Article XXVIII (applicable to special exceptions), a conditional
use or a special exception for a cellular telecommunications facility with
antenna shall not be granted except upon compliance with the following
where relevant:
G. If the wireless communications facility is fully automated, adequate
parking shall be required for maintenance workers.
H. Antenna support structures shall, to the extent possible, be finished so
as to reduce the visual impact. Support structures may be painted
green up to the height of nearby trees and shall meet all Federal
Aviation Administration regulations.
I. A full site plan shall be required for all landsites, showing the antenna
and antenna support structure, together with any building, fencing,
buffering, access and all other items required in the code, Chapter 160,
Subdivision and Land Development, for a land development application.
J. Towers shall be designed and constructed to all applicable standards of
the American National Standards Institute, ANSI/EID-222-E Manual, as
amended from time to time.
K. A soil report complying with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical
Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222-E, as amended, shall be submitted to the
Township to document and verify the design specifications of the
foundation for the tower and anchors for the guy wires, if used.
L. Towers and antennas shall be designed to withstand wind gusts of at
least 100 miles per hour.
M. An antenna may not be located on a building or structure that is listed
on the Township's Historic Resources Map.269
N. No antenna or its support structure may be artificially lighted except
when required by the Federal Aviation Agency.
A. The applicant shall demonstrate that the tower for the cellular
telecommunications facility is the minimum height necessary for the
service area. The applicant shall also demonstrate that the facility must
be located where it is to serve the company's system.
B. The applicant shall present documentation that the tower is designed in
accordance with the standards cited in this article for cellular
telecommunications towers.
C. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed tower complies with
all state and federal laws and regulations concerning aviation safety.
269. Editor's Note: The Historic Resources Map is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 210-191.5 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-191.6
196:849
§ 210-191.7. Maintenance; abandonment.
D. The need for additional buffer yard treatment shall be evaluated.
E. The applicant shall demonstrate that the cellular telecommunications
facility must be located where it is proposed in order to serve the
applicant's service area.
F. Where the cellular telecommunications facility is located on a property
with another principal use, the applicant shall present documentation
that the owner of the property has granted an easement for the
proposed facility and that vehicular access is provided to the facility.
A. The cellular telecommunications facility shall be maintained and kept in
good order and repair and in compliance with all applicable federal and
state requirements and the Code of the Township.
B. In the event that a cellular telecommunications facility is not used by its
owner/operator for a period of six months, it shall be conclusively
presumed to be abandoned. All such abandoned facilities shall be
removed within six months after the presumed abandonment.
§ 210-191.6 CONCORD CODE § 210-191.7
196:850
ARTICLE XXI
Landscaping
[Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177; 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221;
12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231; 2-6-2001 by Ord. No. 256]
§ 210-192. General landscaping.
Generally, landscaping shall be in accordance with the requirements set
forth in Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development, and this article,
and shall encompass the following:
§ 210-193. Screening and buffering.
A. All of property.
B. Street trees.
C. Other trees, including tree protection.
D. Building integration with land.
E. Sidewalk and driveway areas.
F. Berms and planting beds.
G. Walls and fencing.
H. Natural and man-made site features.
I. Screening ad buffering within the required buffer planting strip.
J. Screening of mechanical equipment and trash storage areas.
K. View enhancement.
L. Pedestrian spaces such as courtyards, plazas and building entrances.
A. Screening along property line adjoining other zoning districts.
(1) Width of buffer planting strip. The width of the buffer planting strip
shall conform to the following table: [Amended 8-25-2015 by
Ord. No. 367; 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
§ 210-192 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-193
196:851
District That Adjoins Side or Rear Property Line
District for
Which
Requirements
Are Given
Residential
R-1 to R-4
(feet)
Residential
R-A, R-AH,
R-PRD, RMHD
(feet)
Commercial
C-1, C-2
(feet)
Industrial
LI, PIP
(feet)
Residential2
Residential R-1
to R-41
0 30 30/50 50
Residential RA,
R-AH, RPRD,
R-MHD
30 0 30 50
Nonresidential2
Commercial
C-1 30 30 0 0
C-2 30/50 30 0 0
PBP 50 30 15 15
Industrial LI,
PIP, SU
50 50 15 0
R-PLO 30/50 30 0 0
M/I 25/30 30 15 15
CCRC 50 30 0 30
CVOD 50 30 0 0
LROD 50 50 15 0
RMOD 50 30 0 0
NOTES:
1 In the case of a conditional use, the width of boundary planting
shall be 25 feet, no matter what district it may adjoin,
including R-1 to R-4.
2 Refer to § 160-50C, Landscaping of parking and loading areas,
in the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance for
additional screening and buffering requirements.
3 Refer to the provisions of each zoning district for complete
details.
(2) Planting in buffer strip. Buffer planting strip of yard space which is
landscaped for the full width and on which is placed a screen of
sufficient density and of sufficient height to constitute an effective
screen and give a maximum protection and immediate visual
screening to an abutting property in accordance with § 160-50 of
§ 210-193 CONCORD CODE § 210-193
196:852
Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development. The required
screen shall be permanently maintained and shall constitute a
planting of dense evergreens or a compact hedge or, where
otherwise specifically designated by this chapter, an appropriate
wall, fence suitable planting or combination thereof. All planting
shall comply with the provisions of the Township Code, Chapter
160, Subdivision and Land Development. If natural buffering exists,
it may be incorporated in the planting plan.
(3) Screening of mechanical equipment and trash storage areas not
enclosed in a structure. All mechanical equipment not enclosed in a
structure shall be fully and completely screened from view in a
manner compatible with the architectural and landscaping style of
the remainder of the lot. Such screening shall be subject to site
plan and architectural review by the Township.
§ 210-193 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-193
196:853

ARTICLE XXII
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
§ 210-194. General characteristics.
§ 210-195. Location and use.
§ 210-196. Specific location.
A. Off-street parking space, with proper and safe access from a street,
alley or driveway, shall be provided and maintained in accordance with
the requirements established below.
B. All districts, existing parking. Structures and uses in existence at the
date of adoption of this article shall not be subject to the requirements
of this article so long as the kind or extent of use is not changed, and
provided that any parking facility now serving such structures or uses
shall not in the future be reduced below such requirements.
A. Location of parking spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall be
on the same lot or premises with the principal use served. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prevent the collective provision of offstreet
parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses, provided that
the total of such off-street parking facilities provided collectively shall
be not less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual
uses computed separately.
B. Continuing character of obligation. All required parking facilities shall
be provided and maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities
were designed to serve.
C. Conflict with other uses. No parking area shall be used for any use that
interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve.
D. Precautions. Reasonable precautions shall be taken by the owner or
sponsor of particular uses to assure the availability of required facilities
to the employees or other persons whom the facilities are designed to
serve. Such facilities shall be designed and used in such a manner as to
at no time constitute a nuisance or a hazard or unreasonable
impediment to traffic.
E. Use restriction. No commercial vehicle exceeding three-fourths-ton
manufacturer's rating may be stored on a residential lot. [Amended
1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
A. All parking, loading or service areas used by motor vehicles shall be
located entirely within the lot lines of the property or center.
B. Parking shall be solely for patrons, occupants and employees.
§ 210-194 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-196
196:855
§ 210-197. Size and number of parking spaces. [Amended 3-5-1991
by Ord. No. 177; 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231; 6-8-2004 by Ord. No.
278]
C. Bumper curbs shall be furnished, located a minimum of five feet from
the edge of the parking lot.
D. The following requirements apply for individual zoning districts:
[Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 219; 12-4-2001 by Ord. No. 265]
(1) C-2. No service, loading or parking area in a commercial or
commercial office district shall be located between a main building
and a street unless authorized by the Township Board of
Supervisors as part of a use allowed as a conditional use or
authorized by the Township Zoning Hearing Board as part of a use
allowed as a special exception. In no case, however, shall the
distance between the street right-of-way line and the portion of a
lot used for parking be less than 20 feet.
(2) R-A, R-AH. Off-street parking space may be provided as an
individual garage, carport or parking compound adjacent to or near
the apartment it serves, but not closer than 20 feet to an apartment
wall containing windows or 10 feet to a bank wall, except when
located within the apartment house.
(3) PRD. All parking areas shall be a minimum of 50 feet from all
structures (access roads and traffic arterials).
E. No more than 60 parking spaces shall be accommodated in any single
parking area.
F. The minimum number of parking spaces shall not be met by permitting
on-street parking on any street whether public or private. Each single
parking area shall be separated from others by a buffer strip and
landscaping described below in § 210-201, Landscaping (or Article
XXI).
A. The design standards specified below shall be required for all off-street
parking facilities with a capacity of five or more vehicles built after the
effective date of this Article XXII:
(1) The minimum dimensions of stalls and aisles shall be in accordance
with § 160-44 of the Concord Township Code, Chapter 160,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(2) All handicapped parking spaces shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990,
P.L. 101-336, as may be amended from time to time, which shall be
located as close as possible to the entrance of the building.
§ 210-196 CONCORD CODE § 210-197
196:856
B. Parking spaces shall be clearly delineated by painted lines or markers
as defined within § 160-44 of the Concord Township Code, Chapter 160,
Subdivision and Land Development.
C. Off-street parking facilities shall not be reduced in total extent after
their provision except upon the approval of the Zoning Hearing Board
and then only after proof that, by reason of diminution in floor area,
seating area, the number of employees or change in other factors
controlling the regulation of the number of parking spaces, such
reduction is in conformity with the requirements of this article.
D. Service requirements. Areas for loading and unloading of delivery
trucks and other vehicles and for the servicing of refuse collection, fuel
and other service shall be provided and shall be adequate in size and
shall be so arranged that they may be used without blockage or
interference with the use of accessways or automobile parking
facilities.
E. Fire protection. See Article XXIV, § 210-220.
F. General requirements. As a general requirement, each use in the
Township shall provide sufficient off-street parking area to serve its
users. In the event that a particular use requires more parking area
than is prescribed in § 210-197 and additional area is available for
parking on the lot on which such use is conducted, the Township may
require that all or part of such area be provided for parking, even if the
total area for parking exceeds the minimum specified in § 210-197.
G. Minimum standards. Subject to the general requirements for off-street
parking, off-street parking space, with proper access from a street,
alley or driveway, shall be provided in all districts in the amounts
indicated below. Such parking space shall be provided on any lot on
which a dwelling is hereafter erected or converted or, in the case of any
other use, on or near the lot on which any main building is hereafter
erected or converted. In no case shall the number and arrangement of
parking spaces provided or the area devoted to parking be less than the
minimum requirements of this section, without the approval of the
Township Supervisors. Where the computation of required parking
space results in a fractional number, any fraction of the next higher
number shall be counted as one.
USE Parking Space Required
Single-family dwelling 2 per dwelling unit
Apartments
One bedroom per apartment if
more than one unit
1.5 per apartment (If 3
apartments or less, only 1 space
per apartment required)
Two bedrooms per apartment 2 per apartment
Three bedrooms per apartment 2.5 per apartment
§ 210-197 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-197
196:857
USE Parking Space Required
Hotel, motel or inn 1 per rental room or suite plus 2
additional parking spaces for
owners or managers. If a
restaurant in connection with
such a use is open to the public,
the off-street parking facilities for
such restaurant shall be not less
than those required for a
restaurant.
Tourist home 1 per each sleeping room or
suite, plus 2 additional spaces for
the owner or manager if resident
on the premises
Rooming houses and
boardinghouses
1 per each sleeping room to be
occupied by roomers or boarders,
plus 2 per each dwelling unit on
the premises, plus 1 per
additional space for every two
persons regularly employed on
the premises
Clubhouses and permanent
meeting places of veterans,
business, civic, fraternal, labor and
similar organizations
1 per 50 square feet of aggregate
floor area in the auditorium,
assembly hall and dining room of
such building, plus 1 per each
employee
Dormitories, fraternity houses and
sorority houses
1 per every four beds, plus 1 per
each employee thereof
Hospitals [Amended 4-4-2006 by
Ord. No. 299]
3 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area. The minimum
dimensions of stalls and aisles
shall be in accordance with
§ 160-44 of the Township of
Concord Code, Chapter 160,
Subdivision and Land
Development; provided, however,
that stall width measured from
the center of the double side
stripes shall be at least 8.5 feet in
accessory parking structures,
except that all handicapped stalls
shall meet the minimum
requirements established by the
American with Disabilities Act
(ADA)
Health centers [Amended
4-4-2006 by Ord. No. 299]
5 per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
§ 210-197 CONCORD CODE § 210-197
196:858
USE Parking Space Required
Nursing and convalescent homes 1 1/2 per resident
Medical and dental clinics 6 1/2 per each 100 sq. ft. of
examination area
Mortuaries or funeral parlors 1 per each official vehicle, plus 1
per each family resident on the
premises, plus 1 per each two
employees (other than resident
on the premises), plus 1 per 50
square feet of floor area in the
viewing rooms, slumber rooms,
parlors or individual funeral
service rooms
Welfare institutions, such as
asylums, elderly housing,
orphanages
3 spaces for every 4 staff
members or visiting doctors, plus
1 per every three employees
normally employed during any
shift, plus 1 space per dwelling
unit in elderly housing and 1
space for every 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area in asylums or
orphanages
Libraries, museums, post offices,
civic centers and similar
establishments
1 per each vehicle used directly
in the operation of such
establishment, plus 4 per first
1,000 square feet of total floor
area, plus 1 per each additional
250 square feet of floor area
Convention halls, gymnasiums,
skating rinks, stadiums, sports
arenas, auditoriums, theaters,
churches and similar uses
1 per each 4 persons who may
legally be admitted therein at one
time under the state fire
prevention laws
Theater, auditorium or similar
recreational establishment or place
of public assemblage
1 per each 3 fixed seats or, where
capacity is not determined by the
number of fixed seats, 1 per each
60 square feet of floor area
devoted to patron use
Bowling alleys 3 per each lane, plus 1 per each 2
employees. If a restaurant or a
lounge in connection with such a
use is open to the public, the offstreet
parking facilities for such
restaurant shall be not less than
those required for a restaurant
§ 210-197 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-197
196:859
USE Parking Space Required
Schools 1 for each employee including
teachers and administrators, plus
0.25 per each student over
driving age along with off-street
space for the safe and convenient
loading and unloading of
students, plus additional facilities
for parking of school busses or
such related vehicles
Universities, colleges, academies
and similar institutions of higher
learning
1 for each person regularly
employed at the institution, plus
additional space to be established
by the Zoning Administrator
based on a study of parking
needs prepared specifically for
the subject institution
Office, professional or public
buildings
1 per each 250 sq. ft. of gross
floor plan area
Transportation terminals 1 for every 100 square feet of
waiting room space, plus 1 per
regular employee
Restaurants
Fast food or tea room 3 per every 250 sq. ft. of gross
floor plan area
Fine dining or family restaurant 4 per every 250 sq. ft. of gross
floor plan area, plus 3 per every
250 sq. ft. of gross banquet floor
plan area
Lounge/bar restaurant 6 per every 250 sq. ft. of gross
floor plan area, plus 3 per every
250 sq. ft. of gross banquet floor
plan area
Roadside stands or other roadside
service establishments
1 per each employee, plus
additional spaces or equivalent
standing area for customermotorists
in the ratio of 1 per
every 25 linear feet of road
frontage
§ 210-197 CONCORD CODE § 210-197
196:860
USE Parking Space Required
Carwash establishment 1 for every two persons regularly
employed at the institution, in
addition to sufficient parking
space to prevent the use of
adjoining public street for the
storage or holding of motor
vehicles before and after
servicing
Indoor retail businesses Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the
conduct of such business, plus 1
for every 250 sq. ft. of gross floor
area
Shopping center of planned
business area
6 per 1,000 sq. ft. for floor plans
in excess of 50,000 sq. ft. of gross
floor area
8 per 1,000 sq. ft. for floor plans
less than or equal to 50,000 sq.
ft.
In an enclosed shopping mall,
however, that floor area which is
used exclusively for pedestrian
traffic and which is not within the
area specifically assigned to a
particular store may be excluded
from the gross floor area
computation with the exclusion of
kiosks, sale booths and other
exhibits which must conform to
the standard density
requirements
Repair shops, plumbing shops,
electrical shops, roofing shops and
other service establishments
Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the
conduct of the business, plus 2
for each person regularly
employed on the premises
Self-service laundries 1 for every four washing
machines
Outdoor retail businesses Parking or storage space for all
vehicles used directly in the
conduct of such business, plus 1
per each 50 sq. ft. of associated
sales and display areas, plus 1
per each person employed
§ 210-197 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-197
196:861
USE Parking Space Required
Motor vehicles service station or
public garage
2 either within or without the
structure, for each 200 square
feet of floor or ground area
devoted to repair, sales or service
facilities and, in addition, such
space as is necessary for the
normal storage of motor vehicles.
In no case shall the spaces for
permitted motor vehicle storage
in conjunction with a service
station be fewer than five.
Wholesale establishment 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor
areas, including basement areas
used for the sale or display of
merchandise or manufacturing
Swimming pools (commercial or
public)
2 per 100 square feet of pool
area, plus 1 per each employee
thereof
Golf courses 0.2 per each member
Playing fields and courts 1 for every three players, plus 1
for every 5 spectator seats
Industrial or manufacturing
establishment
1 for each four employees (based
upon the maximum number
employed at any one shift), plus 1
for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area in the buildings
for use by visitors to the building
or buildings
Building or use other than
specified above. For any building
or open area used for a purpose
not covered above
1 minimum for each 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area or lot
area, whichever is the greater,
except when otherwise
authorized as a special exception
consistent with the principles set
forth herein for comparable
buildings, but in no case shall
public streets be considered as
approved parking or holding
areas
§ 210-197 CONCORD CODE § 210-197
196:862
§ 210-198. Paving and curbing.
Outdoor parking or service areas for use open to the public and the
approaches thereto shall be paved according to Township specifications and
shall be graded, properly drained and maintained in good condition.
§ 210-199. Access.
USE Parking Space Required
Employee parking For every use, other than an
office building, for which there
are regular employees, there
shall be two parking spaces
provided for each three
employees on the largest shift in
addition to the above parking
requirements
Day-care and preschool centers 1 per each employee, plus 1 per
eight enrollees
Service centers such as massage
parlors, nonmedical treatment
establishments, tattoo parlors and
others of similar nature other than
indicated prior
3 per each 100 sq. ft. of
examination, treatment or
activity areas
Indoor recreational centers other
than indicated prior
1 per each 300 sq. ft. of gross
floor area
A. Provision shall be made for safe and efficient ingress and egress to and
from public streets and highways serving the development without
undue congestion to or interference with normal traffic flow. The
Planning Commission shall satisfy itself as to the adequacy of the
thoroughfare to carry the additional traffic engendered by the complex
as well as to the street frontage of the proposed district.
B. No plan or proposal shall be approved which is likely to create
substantial traffic hazards endangering the public safety. Safety
requirements which may be imposed where appropriate in such a
review shall include traffic control devices, acceleration or deceleration
lanes, turning lanes, traffic and lane markings and signs. The developer
shall be responsible for the construction of any necessary traffic control
devices or additional acceleration lanes required by the State
Department of Transportation and/or Township in the case of egress to
major thoroughfares.
C. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly upon an aisle
or a driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and efficient
means of vehicular access to such parking space in accordance with the
applicable standards.
§ 210-197 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-199
196:863
§ 210-200. Lighting.
D. Access to a nonresidential use and its related off-street parking shall be
from a street where over 50% of the frontage on both sides of a street is
nonresidential in use.
E. Where possible, exits shall be located on service streets and minor
highways rather than directly on major streets or highways.
F. Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to
proceed to and from the parking space provided for it without requiring
the moving of any other motor vehicle.
G. The interior circulation of traffic on a lot or tract shall be designed so
that no driveway or street providing parking spaces shall be used as a
through street. If parking spaces are indicated by lines with angles
other than 90°, then traffic lanes shall be restricted to one way to
permit head-in parking.
H. Interior drives providing access to each lot within the site shall be
designed with curvatures so as to prevent blockage of vehicles entering
or leaving the site. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
I. Parking, loading or service areas used by motor vehicles shall be
located entirely within the lot lines of the development and shall have
not more than two access roads to any one public street for each 500
feet of frontage.
J. All accessways to any public street or highway shall be located at least
200 feet from the intersection of any two street lines, and all vehicular
entrances and exits to parking areas shall be clearly designated for all
conditions.
K. The width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
(1) A maximum of 15 feet at the curbline for one-way use only.
(2) A maximum of 25 feet at the curbline for two-way use.
L. The width of interior drives leading from the public street to the
parking lot shall be as follows:
Type of Drive One Lane Two Lane
Right-of-way (where applicable) 40 feet 50 feet
Cartway 18 feet 24 feet
A. All driveways, aisles, maneuvering spaces, vehicular service areas or
spaces between or about buildings, other than those relating to a
dwelling, shall be adequately illuminated.
B. All outside lighting, including sign lighting, shall be directed in such a
way as not to create a nuisance in any agricultural, institutional or
§ 210-199 CONCORD CODE § 210-200
196:864
§ 210-201. Landscaping. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177;
1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221; 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231; 2-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 256]
Refer to standards set forth in § 160-50 of the Concord Township Code,
Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
residential district, and in every district all such lighting shall be
arranged so as to protect the street or highway and adjoining property
from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind. Any luminary
shall be equipped with a glare shielding device approved by the
Township Engineer. The height of any luminary must also be approved
by the Township Engineer and be less than 25 feet.
C. The parking and loading and ingress and egress of any use within every
zoning district shall be provided with a minimum of footcandle
illumination so that the average maintained footcandle level shall
conform to the lighting intensities listed in the Illuminating Engineering
Society of North America's latest volume for each type of area to be
illuminated, with site lighting luminaries provided and so spaced as to
provide an acceptable lighting environment for pedestrian safety.
[Amended 10-1-1996 by Ord. No. 204]
§ 210-200 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-201
196:865

ARTICLE XXIII
Sign Regulations
[Amended 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 140; 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221;
12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231; 12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 287; 9-4-2007
by Ord. No. 316]
§ 210-202. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Concord Township Sign Ordinance";
defining and regulating identification signs, illuminated signs, window
signs, temporary real estate signs, contractor signs, incidental signs,
temporary or seasonal signs, off-site signs, on-premises directional signs,
off-premises directional signs, billboards, and political signs; requiring
permits and charging permit and license fees and providing for
nonconforming signs, exemptions and notice of violations and penalties for
violations.
§ 210-203. Statement of purpose.
The purposes of this article shall be to prohibit all signs except signs
permitted by the provisions of this article; to coordinate the type, placement
and physical dimensions of signs within the land use zoning districts of
Concord Township; to recognize the commercial communication
requirements of all sectors of the business community; to encourage the
innovative use of design; to promote both renovation and proper
maintenance; to allow for special circumstances; and to guarantee equal
treatment under the law through accurate recordkeeping and consistent
enforcement. These purposes shall be accomplished by regulation of the
display, erection, use and maintenance of signs. The use of signs is
regulated according to zoning district. The placement and physical
dimensions of signs are regulated primarily by type and length of street
frontage.
§ 210-204. Scope.
This article shall not relate to building design and shall not regulate
government signs, the copy and message of signs, window displays, product
dispensers and point of purchase displays, scoreboards on athletic fields,
gravestones, barber poles, religious symbols, the display of street numbers,
commemorative plagues or any display or construction not defined herein
as a sign.
§ 210-205. Flag regulations. [Amended 8-25-2015 by Ord. No. 367]
Flags of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
Township of Concord, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the
United States, or any other flag adopted or sanctioned by the Board of
Supervisors, provided that such flag does not exceed 30 square feet in
area and shall be flown from a pole not more than 25 feet in height,
shall be permitted. All such applications, including the proposed number of
§ 210-202 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-205
196:867
flags, shall require the approval of the Board of Supervisors and are to be
accompanied by a site plan and sealed foundation plans.
§ 210-206. General sign regulations applicable in all zoning
districts.
A. Sign permit requirements. Unless otherwise provided by this article,
permits and payment of fees as described in this article shall be
required for the building, display or erection of all signs. No permit is
required for the maintenance of a sign or for a change of copy on
painted, printed or changeable-copy signs.
B. Signs not requiring permits. The following types of signs do not require
permits or permit fees but must be in conformance with all other
requirements of this article:
(1) Direction/informational signs not to exceed four square feet in
area, designed to direct and inform the public as to entry, exit,
service areas or loading or to give specific parking instructions,
other instructions or similar information. Four such signs are
permitted per property unless the Zoning Officer approves
additional signs.
(2) Signs advertising the sale of farm products/produce, provided that
the size of any such sign is not in excess of nine square feet and not
more than two signs are used on any one property. The signs shall
only be displayed for farm products/produce grown on the property
and only when such products/produce are on sale.
(3) Holiday or seasonal decorations, provided that they do not
advertise a product or establishment or rotate, are wind-driven or
have flashing lights or festoons.
(4) Incidental signs, not exceeding two square feet in size.
(5) Nameplates of four square feet or less.
(6) On-premises signs used by churches, synagogues, civic
organizations, schools, colleges, hospitals, sanitariums or other
institutions of a similar nature. Not more than one freestanding
sign, not to exceed 32 square feet in sign area per road frontage,
and two wall signs, not to exceed 50 square feet in total sign area,
may be used.
(7) Public signs or notices, or signs relating to an emergency condition.
(8) Public utility signs required in connection with the identification,
operation or protection of a public utility, provided that the area of
any one side of the sign does not exceed nine square feet.
(9) Traffic or other municipal signs: any sign erected by the Township
of Concord, Garnet Valley School District, Delaware County or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 210-205 CONCORD CODE § 210-206
196:868
(10) Trespass signs or signs indicating the private nature of a driveway
or property; such signs may not exceed two square feet in area.
(11)Window signs. Temporary window signs such as in the case of
merchandise sales or special announcements. Such signs shall be
located along the interior window surfaces and shall be limited to
30% of the glazed portion it occupies. Temporary window signs
may only be displayed during the period of the event or for a
maximum of 30 consecutive days, whichever is the lesser.
(12) Temporary signs:
(a) Signs announcing a political or similar campaign or event.
Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and shall be
removed immediately after the completion of such campaign
events.
(b) Signs announcing an educational, charitable, civic, or religious
event require the approval of the Township Manager prior to
any implementation. Such signs shall not exceed 12 square
feet in area. There shall not be more than four signs per event
and the signs shall be removed immediately after the
completion of such event.
(c) Yard or garage sale signs, provided that they do not exceed two
square feet and shall be removed 24 hours after such sales.
(d) Temporary real estate signs.
[1] Signs advertising the premises upon which they are
erected as "for sale," "sold," "for rent," or "rented" when
erected by the landowner, a broker or other person
interested in the sale or rental of such premises, provided
they:
[a] Do not exceed four square feet in area.
[b] Shall be removed within 48 hours after sale.
[c] Shall not have any decorations or attachments such as
streamers, flags or balloons.
[2] Any sign advertising a real estate open house or used as a
directional sign for a real estate open house. Such signs
shall be permitted only on private property and may not be
erected without the permission of the owner of the
property on which the sign is located. Real estate open
house or directional signs shall not exceed four square feet
in size and may not be displayed more than six hours
before the start of the open house time period and must be
removed within two hours after the end of the open house
time period.
§ 210-206 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-206
196:869
(e) Contractors' signs of six square feet or less. Such sign may be
placed upon the property where the work is under
construction, provided that the sign is removed within 30 days
after completion of the work.
C. Signs prohibited. The following types of signs are prohibited in all
zoning districts:
(1) Any sign which is not included under the types of signs permitted in
zoning district regulations or in the general regulations and which
violates the purpose and intent of this article.
(2) Any sign that revolves or has movable parts, wind-operated parts,
flashing lights or stringing or other utilization of light bulbs, or
which use reflectors, banners, pennants, festoons and searchlights.
(3) Portable signs, except as permitted in §§ 210-206G and 210-210H.
(4) Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or
signals.
(5) Signs placed, inscribed or supported upon the highest roofline or
upon any structure which extends above the highest roofline of any
building.
(6) Signs erected in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision
on any street or interfere with or obstruct the view of any traffic
signal or traffic road sign.
(7) Signs painted on an exterior wall surface of a building.
(8) Snipe signs attached to trees, telephone/utility poles, fences,
mailbox posts, public benches, or streetlights or placed on any
public property or public right-of-way.
(9) Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are parked or located for
the primary purpose of displaying the signs. This does not apply to
lettering on buses, taxis or vehicles operating in the normal course
of business.
(10) Temporary directional signs advertising a business or service,
indicating location and direction of premises available for sale, or
in the process of development, but not erected upon such premises.
(11) Except for traffic signs, no sign shall be installed within the rightof-
way of a public street unless specifically authorized by other
ordinances of Concord Township or other governmental agencies
having jurisdiction. Such signs when illegally placed shall be in
violation of the general regulations and intent of this article and
shall be immediately removed.
(12) Signs painted on the facade or roof of any building or structure.
§ 210-206 CONCORD CODE § 210-206
196:870
(13) Billboards and off-premises signs except as permitted in § 210-287
of this chapter. [Amended 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 344]
(14) Signs mounted on utility poles.
(15) Balloons or other inflated structures, whether or not tethered close
to the ground.
(16) Signs which emit smoke or vapors.
D. Sign maintenance requirements. All signs shall be properly maintained.
Exposed surfaces shall be clean and, if required, painted. Defective
parts shall be replaced. The Township shall have the right to order the
repair or removal of any sign which is defective, damaged or
substantially deteriorated pursuant to the provisions of the Township
Building Code regarding structures.270
E. Sign lighting requirements. Unless otherwise specified by this article,
all signs may be illuminated. However, no sign regulated by this article
may utilize:
(1) An exposed incandescent lamp with an external reflector and
without a sunscreen or comparable diffusion preventing direct light
or glare upon any adjoining highway.
(2) A revolving beacon light or flashing light of any type.
F. Height. No freestanding sign shall exceed 20 feet in height.
G. Changeable copy. Unless otherwise specified by this article, any sign
herein allowed may use manual or automatic changeable copy.
H. Abandoned signs.
(1) No abandoned sign shall be maintained or permitted to be
maintained on any premises. An abandoned sign for the purpose of
this article is a sign erected on and/or related to:
(a) The use of a property which becomes vacant and unoccupied
for a period of six months or more; or
(b) Any sign which was erected for a prior occupant or business;
or
(c) Any sign which relates to a time, event, or purpose which has
passed.
(2) Any such abandoned sign shall be removed within seven days of the
abandonment as described above.
I. Projecting sign. Any sign which is attached directly to the structure wall
and which extends more than 15 inches from the facade of such wall.
270. Editor's Note: See Ch. 91, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 210-206 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-207
196:871
§ 210-207. Permitted signs in all zoning districts.
Permitted signs in all zoning districts:
A. Signs enumerated in the general requirements (§ 210-206B).
B. Real estate signs. The following signs may be erected and maintained in
all zoning districts upon issuance of a permit, provided that such
permitted signs are located on the subject lot:
(1) Signs advertising the sale or construction of a subdivision or
development, provided:
(a) Not more than one sign is permitted per street entrance to the
subdivision or land development.
(b) The size of such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area.
Such signs may not be located higher than six feet above
ground level.
(c) Such signs shall not be erected until the subdivision or land
development plan has been approved by the Township and
recorded.
(2) Signs naming a subdivision or land development, provided:
(a) Not more than one sign is permitted at each street entrance to
the subdivision or land development and must be located on
the property to be subdivided or developed.
(b) The size of such signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in area.
Such signs may not be located higher than six feet above
ground level.
(c) Such signs are restricted to the development name.
(3) Signs advertising a commercial lot, building, or group of buildings
for sale or rent, provided:
(a) Not more than one sign is permitted, located so as to face each
street on which the property has frontage.
(b) The size of such signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in area.
Such signs may not be located higher than six feet above
ground level.
§ 210-207 CONCORD CODE § 210-207
196:872
§ 210-208. Permitted signs in single-family residence zoning
districts.
Permitted signs in single-family residence zoning districts:
§ 210-209. Permitted signs in multifamily residence zoning
districts.
Permitted signs in multifamily residence zoning districts:
§ 210-210. Permitted signs in commercial zoning districts.
Permitted signs in commercial zoning districts:
[Note: All signs permitted by Subsection B(1) and (3) above
shall be removed when all buildings, stores or lots on the
premises have been rented or sold, or within one year of the
date the applications for such signs were approved, whichever
occurs first. Such signs shall be permitted for an additional
period of six months upon application to the Township Zoning
Officer, provided that, at the time, less than 90% of the
buildings, stores or lots on the premises have been rented or
sold.]
(4) A land development sign is permitted for future development prior
to construction, subject to a permit and final approval. Such
erected signage shall be valid for a one-year period and must be
removed once the construction is started.
(5) One nonilluminated construction sign, not exceeding 20 square
feet in area, placed upon the property where the work is under
construction, provided that the sign is removed immediately upon
completion of the work.
A. Signs enumerated in the general requirements (§ 210-206B).
A. Signs enumerated in the general requirements (§ 210-206B).
B. One identification sign, not to exceed 24 square feet in sign area, per
road frontage per apartment or condominium complex.
A. Signs enumerated in the general requirements (§ 210-206B).
B. One freestanding sign not to exceed 50 square feet in size for each 200
linear feet of individual property frontage on a public road right-of-way.
A maximum of three such signs is permitted.
(1) A freestanding sign shall not be closer than 75 feet to another
freestanding sign along the same side of any street or highway.
C. One freestanding sign not to exceed 50 square feet in sign area per
public road frontage. Properties/buildings having more than three
§ 210-207 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-210
196:873
separate tenants are permitted an additional 15 square feet in sign
area, not to exceed 80 square feet in sign area.
D. A property consisting of 20 acres or more having a minimum of 500
linear feet of public road frontage shall be permitted one freestanding
sign per road frontage to a maximum of 80 square feet in sign area.
E. One wall sign not to exceed one square foot of sign area for each one
linear foot of building frontage on that portion of a building facing the
right-of-way and each side visible from the roadway; one additional wall
sign not to exceed 0.5 square foot of sign area for each linear foot of the
same building's sidewall perpendicular to and visible from the same
roadway.
F. Incidental sign(s) not to exceed six square feet in aggregate sign area.
G. Under-canopy sign(s) not to exceed 10 square feet in aggregate sign
area per tenancy or occupancy, not to exceed in total 40 square feet.
H. One portable temporary sign advertising a special event, not exceeding
32 square feet in total structure area, may be erected, provided:
(1) Such sign may be displayed two times a year with a maximum of 14
days display period for a total of 28 days in one year.
(2) Such sign must be so located as not to cause a hazard to pedestrian
or vehicular traffic.
(3) Mobile or movable signs with removable-type frontages shall have
enclosed, locked covers to prevent unauthorized access and must
be well secured. Displays that are illuminated, flashing, animated,
etc., are not permitted.
I. Neon-type signs or treatments installed within the interior of an
exposed window glazing shall be counted as part of the allowed wall
signage regulations of § 210-210E, but shall not exceed 10 square feet
maximum.
J. Canopy or awning signage. A canopy or awning may be erected along
the length of the building's or business' exposure.
(1) Use of a canopy or awning sign shall be limited to not more than
one per establishment.
(2) Where a wall sign already exists, the size of the canopy or awning
sign shall not exceed 14 square feet. Where no wall sign exists, the
size of the canopy or awning sign shall not exceed one square foot
of sign for each linear foot of building frontage. The sum of the
signage area in square feet shall not exceed the reciprocal length of
the respective frontage.
§ 210-210 CONCORD CODE § 210-210
196:874
§ 210-211. Signs permitted in nonresidence and noncommercial
zoning districts.
Signs permitted in nonresidence and noncommercial zoning districts:
(3) All canopy and awning signs shall have a setback of not less than
two feet from the curbline but may not extend more than five feet
from the building line.
K. Calculation of sign area. For the purposes of this section, "surface
display area" or "sign area" shall mean the entire area within a
continuous perimeter formed by straight lines joined at right angles
which enclose the extreme limits of the writing, background,
representation or display of the sign face. The supports, uprights or
structure on which any sign is supported shall not be included in
determining the surface display area unless such supports, uprights or
structure is designed in such a manner as to form an integral
background of the display or to convey meaning. For the purpose of
computing the allowable area of a double-faced sign, one sign face shall
be considered.
L. 271One digital sign, limited in size to the regulations of § 210-210E, but
not exceeding 10 square feet maximum sign board and restricted to
copy changes every 10 seconds. Digital signs may be installed as part of
a permitted freestanding sign.
M. Externally illuminated building decoration, e.g., lighted building wrap.
Such sign shall be considered in the sign area within § 210-210E as one
square foot per linear foot of said decoration.
N. Overhang signs.
(1) Overhang signs shall be allowed only in shopping centers.
(2) Such signs shall be suspended by the overhang which covers the
walkway in a shopping center.
(3) The size of such sign shall not exceed four square feet.
(4) There shall not be more than one overhang sign per establishment.
(5) The bottom of overhang signs must be located at least eight feet
above the walkway surface.
A. Signs enumerated in the general requirements (§ 210-206B).
B. One freestanding sign, not to exceed 50 square feet in sign area, per
road frontage. Properties/buildings having more than three separate
tenants are permitted an additional 15 square feet in sign area per road
frontage, not to exceed 80 square feet in sign area.
271. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection L, Billboards and off-premises signs, was repealed
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 344. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former
Subsections M, N and O as Subsections L, M and N, respectively.
§ 210-210 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-211
196:875
§ 210-212. Nonconforming signs.
§ 210-213. Sign illumination and electrical standards.
No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical means. Electrical
devices and wiring shall be installed in accordance with the requirements
of the National Electrical Code. All electrical sign components, connections
and installations shall conform to specifications of the National Electrical
Code and/or Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. A sign permit applicant must
present to the Zoning Officer an affidavit from a qualified electrical
inspection agency certifying to the compliance with these standards for
C. A property consisting of 20 acres or more having a minimum of 500
linear feet of public road frontage shall be permitted one freestanding
sign per road frontage to a maximum of 75 square feet in sign area. A
freestanding sign placed on a twenty-acre or larger parcel of ground
may be increased to 100 square feet in sign area, provided that the sign
is located no closer than 35 feet to a public road right-of-way.
D. One wall sign not to exceed one square foot of sign area for each one
linear foot of building frontage on that portion of a building facing or
visible from the right-of-way.
E. Incidental sign(s) not to exceed six square feet in aggregate sign area.
A. Determination of legal nonconformity. An existing sign which does not
conform to the specific provisions of the Sign Ordinance may be
designated "legal nonconforming" if:
(1) The Zoning Officer determines that such sign is properly
maintained and does not in any way endanger the public; and
(2) The sign was covered by a valid permit or variance or complied
with all applicable laws on the date of adoption of this article.
B. Loss of nonconforming status. A legal nonconforming sign may lose this
designation if:
(1) The sign is relocated or replaced; or
(2) The structure or size of the sign is altered in any way except
towards compliance with this article. This does not refer to change
of copy or normal maintenance.
(3) The current use of the property is terminated.
C. Maintenance and repair of nonconforming signs.
(1) The legal nonconforming sign is subject to all requirements of this
article regarding safety, maintenance and repair. However, if the
sign suffers more than fifty-percent appraised damage or
deterioration, as determined by the Zoning Officer, it must be
either brought into conformance with this article or removed.
§ 210-211 CONCORD CODE § 210-213
196:876
an illuminated sign. In no case shall any open spark or flame be used for
display purposes in locations outside of the fire limits unless specifically
approved by the Zoning Officer and appropriate Code Officer.272
§ 210-214. Administration and enforcement.
A. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Concord Township Board
of Supervisors and is authorized to process applications for sign
permits and enforce and carry out all provisions of the Sign Ordinance
both in letter and in spirit. The Zoning Officer is empowered, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter or inspect any building,
structure or premises in the Township for the purpose of inspection of a
sign and its structural and electrical connections to ensure compliance
with all applicable codes and ordinances. Such inspections shall be
carried out during business hours unless an emergency exists.
B. Application for permits. Application for a sign permit for the erection,
alteration or relocation of a sign shall be made to the Zoning Officer
upon a form provided by the Zoning Officer and shall include the
following information:
(1) Name and address of the owner of the sign.
(2) Street address or location of the property on which the sign is to be
located, along with the name and address of the property owner.
(3) The type of sign or sign structure as defined in this article.
(4) A site plan showing the proposed location of the sign along with the
locations and square footage areas of all existing signs on the same
premises.
(5) Specifications and scale drawings showing the materials, design,
dimensions, structural supports and electrical components of the
proposed sign.
C. Sign permit fees and annual license fees. All applications for permits
filed with the Zoning Officer shall be accompanied by a permit fee for
each sign and an annual permit fee according to a fee schedule as
established by resolution of the Concord Township Board of Supervisors
from time to time.
D. Issuance and denial. If a sign complies with this article, the Zoning
Officer shall issue a permit for the erection, alteration or relocation of
the sign within 30 days of receipt of a valid application. In all
applications involving a matter of interpretation, the more specific
definition or higher standard shall prevail. When the Zoning Officer
denies a permit, he shall give a written notice to the applicant along
with a brief statement of the reasons for denial. The Zoning Officer may
272. Editor's Note: See Ch. 91, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 210-213 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-214
196:877
suspend or revoke an issued permit for any false statement or
misrepresentation of fact in the application.
E. Permit conditions, refunds and penalties. If a permit is denied, the
permit fee will be refunded to the applicant. A permit issued by the
Zoning Officer becomes null and void if work is not commenced within
60 days of issuance or if the sign is not completed within 180 days of
permit issuance. If any sign is installed or placed on any property prior
to the receipt of a permit, the specified permit fee shall be doubled.
However, payment of the doubled fee shall not relieve any person from
complying with any other requirement or penalty prescribed in this
article.
F. Inspection upon completion.
(1) Any person installing, altering or relocating a sign for which a
permit has been issued shall notify the Zoning Officer upon
completion of the work. The Zoning Officer may require a final
inspection, including an electrical inspection and inspection of the
footings of freestanding signs.
(2) The Zoning Officer may require, in writing, upon issuance of a
permit, that he be notified for inspection prior to the installation of
certain signs.
G. Violations.
(1) When, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, a violation of this article
exists, the Zoning Officer shall issue a written order to the alleged
violator. The order shall specify those sections of this article of
which the individual may be in violation and shall state that the
individual has 10 days from the date of the order in which to
correct the alleged violation.
(2) If, upon inspection, the Zoning Officer finds that a sign is
abandoned or structurally, materially or electrically defective or in
any way endangers the public, the Zoning Officer shall issue a
written order to the owner of the sign and occupant of the premises
stating the nature of the violation and require the owner and
occupant to repair or remove the sign within three days of the date
of the order.
(3) In cases of emergency the Zoning Officer may, without notice,
cause the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign.
Signs removed in this manner must present a hazard to the public
health, welfare and safety.
H. Removal of signs by the Zoning Officer.
(1) The Zoning Officer may cause the removal of an illegal sign in cases
of emergency or for failure to comply with the written orders of
removal or repair. After removal or demolition of the sign, a notice
§ 210-214 CONCORD CODE § 210-214
196:878
§ 210-215. Compatibility with state and federal regulations.
In addition to complying with this article, all signs must comply with all
appropriate state and federal regulations. Should this article be in conflict
with any state and federal regulations, the more stringent regulations shall
apply.
§ 210-216. Liability for damages.
Provisions of this article shall not be construed to relieve or to limit in any
way the responsibility or liability of any person, firm or corporation who or
which erects or owns a sign for personal injury or property damage caused
by the sign, and the provisions of this article shall not be construed to
impose upon the Township, its officers or its employees any responsibility
or liability by reason of the approval of any sign under the provisions of this
article.
shall be mailed to the sign owner stating the nature of the work and
the date on which it was performed and demanding payment of the
costs as certified by the Zoning Officer.
(2) If the amount specified in the notice is not paid within 30 days of
the notice, it shall become an assessment upon a lien against the
property of the sign owner and will be certified as an assessment
against the property. The owner of the property upon which the
sign is located shall be presumed to be the owner of the sign
thereon unless facts to the contrary are brought to the attention of
the Zoning Officer, as in the case of a leased sign.
I. Appeal of Zoning Officer sign permit application denial. An applicant
whose application for a sign permit has been denied by the Zoning
Officer may submit to the Concord Township Zoning Hearing Board an
appeal and/or a petition for variance. The appeal or petition must be
filed with the Township not later than 30 days after the notice of denial.
§ 210-214 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-216
196:879

ARTICLE XXIV
General Regulations
§ 210-217. Corner sight.
On any corner lot, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected or
altered and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be maintained which
may cause danger to traffic on a street by obscuring the view.
§ 210-218. Fence openings.
No fence or wall (except a retaining wall or a wall of a building permitted
under the terms of this chapter) over five feet in height shall be erected
within any of the open space required by this chapter unless that portion of
the fence or wall which exceeds five feet in height shall contain openings
wherein equal to 50% or more of the area of said portion of the fence or
wall.
§ 210-219. Waste disposal.
In the case of any use other than a single-family or two-family dwelling,
all trash, rubbish and debris of every kind and nature shall be stored in
properly closed verminproof containers within an enclosure until such time
as it shall be scheduled for collection and disposal and shall be collected
and disposed of as often as may be necessary under the particular
circumstances.
§ 210-220. Fire protection.
An indicated in the regulations for certain multiple-family residential,
commercial and industrial zoning districts, general requirements for
protection from such catastrophes as fire, explosion or their results are
given below.
A. Water supply.
(1) The site must be in an approved fire-protected district (the
definition for which states the required adequacy of the water
supply and water storage facility in terms of rate of flow and water
pressure). See § 210-4.
(2) The submitted plan shall show existing mains and water supplies in
the immediate area, together with proposed mains and water
supplies to provide adequate fire protection to the proposed site.
(3) No structure needing fire protection shall be located more than 600
feet from a duly dedicated, accessible and improved public street.
B. Fire lanes.
(1) Fire lane. No structure to be protected shall be located more than
150 feet from a duly improved and accessible fire lane.
§ 210-217 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-220
196:881
(2) Fire lanes shall consist of an all-weather and well-drained surface
cartway and shall conform to Township prescribed standards and
specifications for new road construction in residential zoning
districts except that the cartway must be 20 feet, but does not have
to have rolled gutters.
(3) The extension of fire lanes shall begin from one or more existing
and improved public streets.
(4) Fire lanes which curve, turn or change directions shall have a
minimum radius of 55 feet at the inside edge of pavement. Fire
lanes containing reverse curves shall have a minimum center line
tangent length of 50 feet between curves.
(5) Dead-end fire lanes shall be terminated with an unobstructed
vehicular turnaround or cul-de-sac with a minimum right-of-way
radius of 45 feet and shall have a minimum surfaced radius of 35
feet. Dead-end fire lanes shall have a maximum length of 400 feet.
(6) The location of fire lanes shall conform to plans for the extension of
street, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers and other
drainage facilities and public utilities as contained in this chapter
and other ordinances of Concord Township and shall provide
adequate access to buildings by firemen and other emergency
services.
§ 210-220 CONCORD CODE § 210-220
196:882
ARTICLE XXV
Exception and Modifications to Existing Regulations
§ 210-221. Buildings not covered by ordinance.
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or
extension thereof used or to be used by a public utility corporation if, upon
petition of such corporation, the Pennsylvania Utility Commission shall,
after a public hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the
building in question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare
of the public; nor shall this chapter apply to any building of the Township
or extension thereof or to the use of any premises by the Township if the
Board of Township Supervisors shall, after a public hearing, decide that
such building or extension thereof or such use of any premises is reasonably
necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public, provided that any
municipal recreational building or use may be established by the Board of
Supervisors at any location in the Township without holding such public
hearing.
§ 210-222. Restrictions on projections on buildings.
A. No building and no part of a building shall be erected within or shall
project into the front yard except cornices, eaves, gutters or chimneys
projecting not more than 18 inches, bay windows not extending through
more than one story and not projecting more than five feet, one-story
open porches projecting nor more than 10 feet, steps and balconies.
B. No building and no part of a building shall be erected within or shall
project into the side yard except cornices, eaves, gutters or chimneys
projecting not more than 18 inches and steps, provided that an
accessory building may be built or constructed within one of the side
yards if entirely separated from the main building and located at least
10 feet farther back from the front street line than the rearmost portion
of the main building and at least five feet from the side line of the lot.
C. No building and no part of a building shall be erected within or shall
project into the rear yard except cornices, eaves, gutters and chimneys
projecting not more than 18 inches, bay windows not extending through
more than one story and not projecting more than five feet, one-story
open porches projecting not more than 10 feet, steps and balconies,
provided that any accessory building may be built or constructed within
the rear yard:
(1) If entirely separated from the main building.
(2) If located at least 10 feet farther back from the front street line
than the rearmost portion of the main building.
(3) If its width is not greater than 50% of the width of the lot.
(4) If located not less than five feet from all lot lines.
§ 210-221 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-223
196:883
§ 210-223. Reductions in lot size.
No lot area shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or the dimensions of
the open spaces shall be smaller than herein prescribed.
§ 210-224. Prohibited uses. [Amended 12-15-1998 by Ord. No. 231]
A. No building may be erected, altered or used, and no lot or premises may
be used, for the following:
(1) Acid manufacture.
(2) Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture.
(3) Asphalt manufacture or refining.
(4) Automobile grave yard or junk yard.
(5) Creosote treatment or manufacture.
(6) Disinfectants manufacture.
(7) Distillation of bones, coal or wood.
(8) Dyestuffs manufacture.
(9) Extermination and insect poison manufacture.
(10) Emery cloth and sand paper manufacture.
(11) Fat rendering.
(12) Fertilizer manufacture.
(13) Fish smoking and curing.
(14) Garbage storage, incineration or reduction.
(15) Gas manufacture or excessive storage.
(16) Glue, size or gelatin manufacture.
(17) Fireworks or explosive manufacture or storage.
(18) Lamp black manufacture.
(19) Match manufacture.
(20) Meat preservation or curing.
(21) Oil cloth or linoleum manufacture.
(22) Oiled or rubber goods manufacture.
(23) Ore reduction.
(24) Piggery.
§ 210-223 CONCORD CODE § 210-224
196:884
§ 210-225. Conversion of building/dwelling to professional office
use. [Amended 7-3-2001 by Ord. No. 260]
The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize as a special exception the
conversion of any building and/or dwelling existing on July 1, 2001, in the
(25) Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, or varnish manufacture.
(26) Petroleum refining and storage.
(27) Plating works.
(28) Potash works.
(29) Printing ink manufacture.
(30) Pyroxylin manufacture.
(31)Race tracks.
(32) Rubber, caoutchouc, gufta-percha manufacture or treatment.
(33) Salt works.
(34) Sauerkraut manufacture.
(35) Shoe blackening manufacture.
(36) Soap manufacture.
(37) Soda and compound manufacture.
(38) Slaughter house.
(39) Stockyards.
(40) Stove polish manufacture.
(41) Sulphuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture.
(42) Tallow, grease or lard manufacture or refining.
(43) Tanning, curing or storage of leather, rawhides or skins.
(44) Tar distillation or manufacture or refining.
(45) Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture.
(46) Vinegar manufacture.
(47)Wool pulling or scouring.
(48) Yeast plant.
(49) Airports.
(50) Bulk mulch processing and related storage.
§ 210-224 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-225
196:885
M/I Municipal/Institutional District to a professional office use, provided
that:
A. The proposed use shall comply with the requirements of the M/I
Municipal/Institutional District as to yard and area requirements,
special development regulations, landscaping regulations, sign
regulations, off-street parking and loading regulations and the site plan
review requirements, insofar as practicable.
B. No existing yards or required open space shall be reduced to less than
the requirements of the M/I Municipal/Institutional District.
C. No living accommodations or sleeping quarters shall be authorized
except such accessory use as is permitted in the M/I Municipal/
Institutional District.
D. The proposed reconstruction and conversion shall be in keeping with
the predominate character of the M/I Municipal/Institutional District
and shall not detract from the use of an adjoining property for any
permitted use.
§ 210-225 CONCORD CODE § 210-225
196:886
ARTICLE XXVI
Nonconforming Uses, Buildings, Lots
§ 210-226. Purpose.
§ 210-227. Continuation of lawful nonconforming condition or use.
§ 210-228. Extension or alteration.
A. Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that
may later be adopted there exist lots, structures, uses of land and
structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this
chapter was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited,
regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future
amendment.
B. The regulations governing existing nonconforming uses are set forth in
this article and are intended to provide a gradual remedy for the
incompatibilities resulting from such nonconforming uses. While such
uses are generally permitted to continue, these regulations are
designed to restrict further investment in such uses, thereby keeping
them from becoming more permanent establishments in inappropriate
locations.
C. These regulations are thus designed to preserve the character of the
districts established in this Zoning Code in the light of their peculiar
suitability to particular uses, and thus to promote and protect health,
safety and general welfare.
A. Any lawful nonconforming condition or use of a building or lot existing
at the effective date of this chapter (i.e., December 7, 1982) or any
subsequent amendment hereto or authorized by a building permit
issued prior to the adoption of this chapter (i.e., December 7, 1982),
may be continued, although such condition or use does not conform to
the provisions of this chapter, if all other requirements governing the
condition or use are complied with, and subject to the provisions of
§ 210-230 of the Zoning Ordinance. [Amended 6-4-1991 by Ord. No.
181]
B. Any lawful nonconforming condition or use of a building or lot existing
at the effective date of this chapter or any subsequent amendment
hereto or authorized by a building permit issued prior to the adoption of
this chapter may be continued, although such condition of use does not
conform to the provisions of this chapter, if all other requirements
governing the condition or use are complied with.
A. Nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use of a building or lot may be
extended or enlarged either within an existing building or by an
addition to it on the same lot, provided that:
(1) Such extension shall be permitted only by special exception.
§ 210-226 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-228
196:887
(2) The extension conforms to all district regulations for buildings and
lots.
(3) The part of the building into which the use is to be extended has
been manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time such
use became nonconforming.
(4) The part of the lot into which the use is to be extended was
reasonably held for future inclusion in such use at the time such
use became nonconforming.
B. Nonconforming lots.
(1) A building may be erected or extended on any lot or contiguous lots
held at the effective date of this chapter or any amendment thereto
in single and separate ownership, which lot is not of the required
minimum area or width or is of such unusual dimensions that the
owner would have difficulty in providing the required open spaces
for the district in which such lot is situated, provided that the
building shall comply with the front, side and rear yard
requirements of the district in which such lot is situated, unless
otherwise authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing
Board, and in any case where Zoning Hearing Board review is
required, the building shall comply with the yard requirements of
the district to the maximum extent practicable.
(2) When two or more nonconforming lots with contiguous frontage
are in single ownership, the Zoning Officer shall consider them a
single piece of land, and use of it, or any portion of it, shall be in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance then in existence.
C. Nonconforming buildings.
(1) If use is conforming:
(a) Nonconforming structures may be altered, reconstructed or
enlarged, provided that such alteration, reconstruction or
enlargement does not increase the extent of the nonconformity
existing on the effective date of this chapter.
(b) If a nonconforming structure is moved wholly or partially
within or off of the lot, the part moved must conform to the
regulations of the district where it is moved.
(2) If use is nonconforming:
(a) The extension or alteration in the structure must meet the
requirement for the extension or alteration of a nonconforming
use, as given in Subsection A(1), (2), (3) and (4). [Amended
3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177273]
273. Editor's Note: Original Section 6203.C.2.b, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221.
§ 210-228 CONCORD CODE § 210-229
196:888
§ 210-229. Restoration. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
A nonconforming structure that has been damaged by fire, wind, storm,
lightning or a similar cause may be rebuilt if certain qualifications listed
below are met; if the procedure listed below is followed; and if the criteria
listed below are conformed to.
§ 210-230. Abandonment or discontinuance. [Amended 3-5-1991 by
Ord. No. 177; 6-4-1991 by Ord. No. 181]
§ 210-231. Displacement. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use.
A. Qualifications.
(1) The cause of destruction or damage is beyond the owner's control
at the time of destruction or damage.
(2) Use may or may not be conforming.
(3) Damage in terms of replacement cost is 60% or less of the
replacement cost of the entire structure before damage.
B. Procedure to be followed in order to apply for restoration permission.
(1) Plans for rebuilding shall be handled as provided for in the case of
new construction, but before granting a building permit,
permission to rebuild must be sought from the Board of
Supervisors.
C. Criteria to be followed.
(1) If use is nonconforming, the reconstructed building cannot exceed
the height, area and volume of the building destroyed. If the use is
conforming, the reconstructed building may be built to any height,
area or volume, provided that Township ordinances and codes are
observed.
A. If a nonconforming lot or building is abandoned and not used for a
continuous period of one year or more, subsequent use of such lot or
building shall be in conformity with the then provisions of this chapter
governing the district in which the lot or building is located.
B. Abandonment of regulations shall not apply to agricultural uses.
C. All nonconforming junk storage areas, storage areas and similar
nonconforming use of open land, when discontinued for a period of 90
days, shall not be continued, repaired or reconstructed.
D. Abandonment of billboards and signs is covered in Article XXIII.
§ 210-229 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-232
196:889
§ 210-232. Applicability to approved nonconforming plans.
[Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in plans,
construction or designated use of a structure for which a building permit
was issued more than 30 days prior to the adoption of this chapter or
change in zoning district and the construction of which is begun within
three months after such adoption of change and diligently carried on.
The approved plans shall not be altered in any way to increase the
nonconformity.
§ 210-233. Violations. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
A nonconforming building altered or erected or a nonconforming use
created in violation of any previous provision shall be regarded as
continuing in such violation and shall not enjoy the privilege of legal
continuance conferred by this article upon other nonconforming buildings
and uses.
§ 210-234. Repairs and maintenance. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord.
No. 177]
§ 210-235. District changes. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another district of a different classification,
the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses or
structures existing therein.
A. On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive
months on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of nonbearing
walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 10% of
the current replacement cost of the nonconforming structure or
nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be, provided
that the cubic content existing when it became nonconforming shall not
be increased.
B. If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack
of repairs and maintenance and is declared by any duly authorized
official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall
not thereafter be restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with
the regulations of the district in which it is located.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to
be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon
order of such official.
§ 210-232 CONCORD CODE § 210-235
196:890
ARTICLE XXVII
Conditional Uses
§ 210-236. Purpose. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221; 1-4-2000
by Ord. No. 245]
§ 210-237. Procedure. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221;
1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 245]
A. Sections 210-236, 210-237 and 210-238 contain provisions for
conditional uses, as authorized by Act of 1968, P.L. 804, No. 247, as
reenacted and amended (the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, § 603 (C)(2) and (2.1) and § 913.2. The provisions consist of:
(1) The standards and criteria to be applied to the various conditional
uses in the review process.
(2) The procedure to be followed for review of the application.
B. The reason for a use being made conditional is the unusual impact it
may exert upon one or more of the following: the public health, safety,
morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical community
development, proper density of population, emergency management
preparedness and operations, airports and national defense facilities,
the provisions of adequate light and air, access to incident solar energy,
police protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation,
sewerage, schools, recreational facilities, public grounds, the provision
of a safe, reliable and adequate water supply for domestic, commercial,
agricultural or industrial use and other public requirements.
C. In addition, the purpose of the use being made conditional is to prevent
one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight, danger and
congestion in travel and transportation, loss of life, health or property
from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
D. In addition, the purpose of the use being made conditional is to
preserve the natural, scenic and historic value in the environment and
preserve forests, wetlands, acquifers and floodplains.
A. If, in reviewing an application for development, the Zoning Officer rules
that the processing of the application requires approval of a conditional
use, the Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the Board of
Supervisors and shall send copies to the Township Planning
Commission for review. The application shall be in such form and with
such supporting data as the Board of Supervisors may prescribe. The
appropriate application fee, prescribed by resolution of the Board of
Supervisors from time to time, shall be paid in advance.
B. Upon receipt of complete application and fees for conditional use, the
Planning Commission shall schedule it for preliminary consideration
and discussion at a regular or special meeting. The Planning
Commission shall advise the Board of Supervisors whether the general
§ 210-236 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-237
196:891
and specific standards and criteria are met and whether conditions and/
or restrictions should be attached to any approvals.
C. The Planning Commission shall be authorized to require of the
applicant such further engineering data, test reports, maps, surveys,
plot plans, landscape plans, technical information, offers of dedication,
bonds and other undertakings as may be necessary to determine and
ensure compliance with the standards and criteria hereinbefore and
hereinafter set forth.
D. If the application involves a land development, a detailed plan review
shall be required by the Township after the application of the
conditional use has been acted upon by the Board of Supervisors. This
review shall be in accordance with procedures outlined in the
Subdivision and land Development Ordinance. If the applicant wishes to
provide the necessary documentation, the Township may consider the
concurrent review of the conditional use requested and the detailed
plans for the development. Time limits for review of the detailed plans,
if necessary, will be governed by Chapter 160, Subdivision and land
Development provisions of the Township Code.
E. No conditional use shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors
unless, or except to the extent that, the general and specific standards
and criteria are met and appropriate conditions and restrictions are
attached to the approval to ensure continuing compliance therewith.
The general standards and criteria are set forth below.
(1) Taking into consideration the character and type of development in
the area surrounding the proposed conditional use, such use, as
permitted, shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and
shall not substantially injure or detract from the use of surrounding
property or from the character of the neighborhood.
(2) Existing public roads shall be adequate to serve additional traffic
reasonably likely to be generated by the proposed use.
(3) Development of the property for the proposed use shall promote or
be consistent with the coordinated and practical community
development, the provision of adequate public and community
services, the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
(4) If the proposed site would be created by subdivision of a larger
tract or parcel, the balance of such tract or parcel remaining shall
be adequate and appropriate for its existing and continuing use in
accordance with the foregoing standards.
(5) Development of the property for the proposed use shall, if
approved, be subject to and governed by the provisions of the
Concord Township Code, Subdivision and Land Development, as
amended,274 except as modified by this article and by the
274. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-237 CONCORD CODE § 210-237
196:892
requirements of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department
of Environmental Protection.
(6) Development of the site for the proposed use shall be susceptible of
regulation by appropriate conditions and restrictions to:
(a) Ensure compatibility of any building to be erected or altered
with the surrounding area in terms of size, shape, materials
and placement of structures; and preservation and restoration
of any historic buildings.
(b) Control traffic, noise, signs, lights, parking and other
anticipated activity upon the premises to avoid or minimize any
adverse effect upon the peace, quiet, privacy and the character
of the surrounding area.
(c) Require such additional landscaping pursuant to an approved
landscape plan for protective buffering and screening of
adjoining residential or other permitted uses, as specified in
Article XXI, § 210-193.
(d) Require, where appropriate, that the applicant enter into
agreements to impose upon the property such deed
restrictions as are, in the opinion of the Board of Supervisors,
necessary and reasonable to assure the continuation of
conditions imposed upon approval of the development.
(e) Require that the applicant make provision for the safe flow of
anticipated normal daily traffic in the immediate vicinity of the
development and and provide more than one means of ingress
and egress and adequate deceleration lanes.
(f) Permit staged development and set deadlines for such
development and staging and conditions for the proper
maintenance of that portion of the property not being
developed.
F. The Board of Supervisors shall conduct a full review of the application
and shall hold at least one public hearing thereon not later than 60 days
from the date of the applicant's request for a hearing. The cost of such
public hearings shall be borne by the applicant. Notice of the public
hearing shall be given to those persons and agencies who would be
entitled to notice if the same premises were the subject of an
application to the Zoning Hearing Board for special exception and to all
others who have registered their names with the Zoning Officer for that
purpose.
G. After a full review of the application, the Board of Supervisors shall
renter a written decision, or when no decision is called for, make
written findings on the application. Where the application is contested
or denied, the decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or
conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefor. Such
§ 210-237 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-237
196:893
§ 210-238. Special conditions for conditional uses.
decision or written findings shall be made by the Board of Supervisors
no later than 45 days after the last hearing.
H. The Board of Supervisors may attach reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may
deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
I. The Board of Supervisors shall approve or disapprove the application by
resolution and shall send a written notification to the applicant within
10 days of the decision.
J. The Board, as a condition of approval, may require the execution of a
developer's agreement containing the conditions and requirements of
the development.
K. Unless otherwise provided in the resolution of approval, the applicant
shall be entitled to proceed with the submission of either land
development or subdivision plans within a period of six months from the
date of approval. The Board, as a condition of approval, may require the
applicant to proceed with the submission of either land development or
subdivision plans within a period of six months of the date of approval.
A. The Township shall approve any conditional use proposed if it finds that
the use meets all the applicable objectives and requirements indicated
below, complies with all the site plan review criteria set forth in Chapter
160, Subdivision and Land Development, and complies with other
applicable provisions of this chapter. For certain conditional uses, the
criteria governing them appear in this section below instead of in the
article in which the use appears. A list of such conditional uses appears
below with a reference in each case to the subsection in which the
special conditions for that use begin. [Amended 6-4-1991 by Ord.
No. 180; 11-7-1995 by Ord. No. 200; 3-4-1997 by Ord. No. 210;
1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 245; 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255]
(1) Single-family detached dwelling, whenever five or more lots are
created, at Subsection B below.
(2) Cemetery, at Subsection C below.
(3) Bed-and-breakfast homestay, at Subsection D below.
(4) Adult entertainment uses, at Subsection E below.
(5) Personal care facility, at Subsection F below.
B. Single-family detached dwelling, involving five or more lots. [Amended
1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221; 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 245; 1-2-2001 by
Ord. No. 255]
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate that a conventional layout of oneacre
lots will have less environmental impact than a single-family
§ 210-237 CONCORD CODE § 210-238
196:894
cluster development in accordance with § 210-12A, in terms of
less wetland impact, and/or less floodplain impact, and/or less tree
removal impact, and/or less steep slope impact, and/or less wildlife
habitat impact, and/or less farmland displacement impact, and/or
less scenic resource impact, and/or less historic resource impact. If
the applicant cannot demonstrate that the conventional subdivision
lots will have less impact, then a cluster development plan in
accordance with § 210-12, 210-20 or 210-28 shall be prepared to
better conserve or preserve critical environmental and cultural
resources.
(2) Where development of less than the entire tract is intended, or
where the tract is intended to be developed at less density than
conventional one-acre lots would permit, the applicant may be
required to file a development plan for the entire parcel or may be
required to restrict further subdivision and/or development on the
remainder of the tract by recorded covenant or agreement.
C. Cemetery.
(1) Development standards. A cemetery use may be authorized an a
conditional use in accordance with the requirements and
procedures set out in this article, provided that such use, in order
to be authorized, shall meet the following development
requirements:
(a) No lot or tract of ground shall be authorized to be used as a
cemetery unless it shall be at least 50 acres in size and shall be
held in single and separate ownership.
(b) Accessory uses permitted in connection with cemetery use
shall be limited to:
[1] One memorial chapel.
[2] Buildings for the housing of maintenance equipment
required by the cemetery use.
[3] Facilities for caretaker and administrative offices as
required in support of the cemetery use.
[4] Parking.
[5] Signs.
(c) Building coverage. Not more than 3% of the total lot or tract
may be occupied by buildings.
(d) Setback and buffer areas.
[1] Highway or street frontage. There shall be a setback of at
least 75 feet between any grave site and/or any buildings
or other structure and any highway or street abutting a
§ 210-238 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-238
196:895
cemetery use. No roadway shall be placed or located in
said setback, except as may be necessary for ingress and
egress purpose.
[2] Adjoining properties. There shall be not less than 200 feet
between any grave site or building or other structure and
any boundary of the cemetery premises with any adjoining
residence district. No roadway shall be located within 150
feet of any such boundary.
[3] All boundaries of any lot or tract to be devoted to cemetery
use shall be planted with an appropriate screen of
evergreens and deciduous plantings for a depth of 25 feet
except for those areas to be used for ingress and egress.
No roadway shall be placed or located in said setback
except as may be necessary for ingress and egress
purposes.
(e) Parking. Approval of a cemetery use as a conditional use shall
be subject to the requirement that adequate parking space be
provided for employees, for chapel use and along the internal
roads to accommodate funeral use. Adequacy shall be
governed by the requirements of Article XXII, Off-Street
Parking and Loading Requirements.
D. Bed-and-breakfast homestay. [Added 6-4-1991 by Ord. No. 180]
(1) Conditions to meet for receipt of conditional use. A facility must
meet the following conditions:
(a) It shall be located in an existing structure determined to be of
historical significance to the Township or possessing unique
value and deserving of being preserved due to age,
architectural significance or association in the perception of
the public with a prominent person or family of the state,
county or Township. An inventory of such existing structures is
set forth in the Delaware County Historic Survey of June 1983
for Concord Township.
(b) The use shall be accessory to a main use of a private owneroccupied
residence that is permitted in the residential district
where the structure is located, and not operated primarily as a
business.
(c) The structure, except that portion used for the bed-andbreakfast
homestay facility, shall be occupied and used solely
by the residential occupant and members of his/her family.
(2) Standards of facility.
(a) No more than three guest rooms may be located in or used for
guests in any facility.
§ 210-238 CONCORD CODE § 210-238
196:896
(b) Each facility shall have at least two bathroom facilities for the
exclusive use of the guests, provided that a facility containing
only one guest room need only provide one bathroom facility.
The bathroom facility shall contain a toilet, wash basin and a
bath and/or shower, as certified and permitted by the Township
Plumbing Inspector.
(c) Each facility shall be serviced by an adequate sewage system
for both the main use and the accessory use, as certified and
permitted by the Township Sewage Enforcement Officer.
(d) Each facility shall provide on the premises a minimum of one
off-street parking space for each guest room, and one for each
employee on the shift having the greatest employment, in
addition to adequate and separate parking facilities for the
occupants/owners of the facility. Parking for guests and
employees shall be permitted only in the side or rear yard of
the facility, and such parking areas shall be screened by
appropriate plantings, at least five feet wide and eight feet
high, to buffer all adjacent properties zoned residential.
(e) The outside of the structure shall not be added to, altered or
changed to accommodate the facility, except as might be
required by state or local authorities for fire and safety
purposes.
(f) Any and all signs on the premises and/or the structure shall be
in accordance with Article XXIII of the Township Zoning
Ordinance and any applicable amendment thereto.
(g) The kitchen and eating area and facilities to be used in
providing food and beverage to the guests shall meet all
applicable health, safety and sanitary requirements of state
and local authorities. There shall be no separate kitchen or
cooking facilities in any guest room. Food service shall be
limited to breakfast and afternoon tea only.
(h) Each facility shall maintain a guest register which shall list the
name, address and motor vehicle make, model and license
number of each guest, which guest register shall be open for
inspection by proper local officials during normal business
hours.
(i) Guests shall not remain in the same bed-and-breakfast
homestay for more than 30 consecutive days in a twelve-month
period.
(3) Permits. In addition to any required building, zoning, plumbing
and/or sewage permits, each facility shall require an operations
permit issued by the Board of Supervisors of Concord Township. All
permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. Applications for
the initial permit and each renewal permit shall be on forms
§ 210-238 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-238
196:897
prepared by the Township, designed to assure that the facility will
be operated and maintained in accordance with the provisions of all
applicable ordinances of the Township and any conditions imposed
upon the grant of the conditional use. Each application for a permit
or a renewal permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee in an
amount as determined from time to time by the Township.
E. Adult entertainment uses. [Added 11-7-1995 by Ord. No. 200]
(1) Objectives.
(a) Because adult entertainment uses tend to bring with them
secondary concerns that impact on the health, safety and
general welfare concerns of Concord Township, the Township
desires to restrict or limit the location where such uses can
locate.
(b) The Township does not intend to affect or suppress any
activities protected by the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution, but instead address these secondary
effects. Neither is it the intent nor effect of these provisions to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
Neither is it the intent to permit any use which is prohibited by
the provisions of Ordinance No. 198 and Ordinance No. 199.275
(c) Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of
adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in
reports made available to the Board of Supervisors, and on
findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime
Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini
Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and Northend Cinema, Inc. v.
Seattle, 585 P.2d 1153 (Wash. 1978), and on studies in other
communities, including but not limited to Phoenix, Arizona;
Minneapolis, Minnesota; Saint Paul, Minnesota; Manatee
County, Florida; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana;
Amarillo, Texas; Los Angeles, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle,
Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and Beaumont, Texas,
and also on findings found in the Report of Attorney General's
Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented
Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Board of
Supervisors finds that:
[1] Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary
unlawful and unhealthy activities that may go uncontrolled
by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is
presently no mechanism to make the owners of these
establishments responsible for the activities that occur on
their premises.
275. Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Article I, Display, Sale and Distribution of Obscene Materials,
and Article II, Establishments Serving Alcoholic Beverages, respectively.
§ 210-238 CONCORD CODE § 210-238
196:898
[2] Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined
in this chapter as adult theaters and cabarets engage in
higher incidence of certain types of sexually oriented
behavior at these businesses than employees of other
establishments.
[3] Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral and anal sex,
occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those
which provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for
viewing films, videos or live sex shows, as defined under
this chapter as adult bookstores, adult novelty shops, adult
video stores, adult motion-picture theaters or adult
arcades.
[4] Offering and providing such space encourages such
activities, which create unhealthy conditions.
[5] Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades and
other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of
engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually
oriented businesses.
[6] At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by
activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses,
including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human
immunodeficiency virus infection (AIDS), genital herpes,
hepatitis B, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and
shigella infections.
[7] Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an
increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS
caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the
United States: 600 in 1982, 2,200 in 1983, 4,600 in 1984,
8,555 in 1985 and 253,448 through December 31, 1992.
[8] As of May 1, 1995, there have been 13,559 reported cases
of AIDS in the State of Pennsylvania.
[9] Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an
increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive
for the HIV antibody test in Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
[10] The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis
in the United States reported annually has risen, with
33,613 cases reported in 1982 and 45,200 through
November of 1990.
[11] The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States
reported annually remains at a high level, with over onehalf
million cases being reported in 1990.
§ 210-238 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-238
196:899
[12] The surgeon general of the United States, in his report of
October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that
AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual
contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected
blood and blood components and from an infected mother
to her newborn.
[13] According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV
infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally
transmitted by sexual acts.
[14] Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses
are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted
there are unhealthy and, in part, because of the
unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the
owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate
those activities and maintain those facilities.
[15] Numerous studies and reports have determined that
semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses
where persons view adult oriented films.
[16] The findings noted in Subsection E(1)(c)[1] through [15]
raise substantial governmental concerns.
(d) The purpose of these conditional use provisions is to minimize,
where conditions permit, the secondary concerns which
include difficulties for law enforcement, municipal
maintenance, trash, deleterious effects on business and
residential property values, increased crime, particularly
corruption of the morals of minors and prostitution, and
encouraging residents and businesses to move elsewhere.
(2) Yard and area regulations.
(a) In addition to the yard and area regulations applicable to all
uses permitted pursuant to the provisions of Article XVII, no
adult entertainment use shall be located:
[1] Within 1,000 feet of:
[a] A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building
which is used primarily for religious worship and
related religious activities;
[b] A public or private educational facility, including but
not limited to child day-care facilities, nursery schools,
preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools,
private schools, intermediate schools, junior high
schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational
schools, secondary schools, continuation schools,
special education schools, junior colleges and
§ 210-238 CONCORD CODE § 210-238
196:900
universities; "school" includes the school grounds, but
does not include the facilities used primarily for
another purpose and only incidentally as a school;
[c] A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the
alcoholic beverage control regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
[d] Any other adult entertainment use;
[2] Or within 800 feet of a boundary of a residential district as
defined in the Concord Township Zoning Code;
[3] Or within 500 feet of:
[a] A public park or recreational area which has been
designated for park or recreational activities,
including but not limited to a park, playground, nature
trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field,
basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths,
wilderness areas, or other similar public land within
the Township which is is under the control, operation
or management of the Township park and recreation
authorities, or other similar land within the Township
which is under the control, operation or management
of private parties and open and available for use by
the general public;
[b] An entertainment business which is oriented primarily
towards children and family entertainment;
[4] Or within 400 feet of the right-of-way line of U.S. Route 1
(Baltimore Pike), Wilmington-West Chester Pike (Route
202) or Pennsylvania highway Route 322 (Conchester
Highway).
(b) For the purpose of Subsection E(2)(a), Yard and area
regulations, of this section, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure
used as the part of the premises where a sexually oriented
business is conducted to the nearest property line of the
premises of a use listed in Subsection E(2)(a). Presence of a
municipal, county or other political subdivision boundary shall
be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the
distance requirements of this Subsection E(2).
(3) Screening and buffering. Any lot which is to be used for any adult
entertainment use shall contain screening and buffering along
property lines adjoining other zoning districts in accordance with
the provisions of Article XXI, Landscaping.
§ 210-238 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-238
196:901
(4) Data. Sufficient additional data shall be submitted to enable the
Planning Commission and the Board of Supervisors to determine
that the requirements of this chapter and other ordinances of the
Township relevant to the proposed use have been fulfilled and that
the owners and operators of proposed adult entertainment facilities
demonstrate a desire and ability to comply with the ordinances of
the Township and to prevent their establishments from being used
for any illegal activities.
F. Personal care facility. [Added 3-4-1997 by Ord. No. 210]
(1) Objectives: to set forth the criteria for the use of a property as a
personal care facility. Except where these criteria explicitly replace
the criteria for a conditional use in a C-2 Planned Business and
Commercial District, these criteria shall supplement those set forth
in Article XIV of the Zoning Ordinance of Concord Township. The
use shall meet all licensing and certification requirements of state
and other regulating agencies.
(2) Yard and area regulations.
(a) Lot and building area. The lot or group of lots on which the
personal care facility is to be located must have a total area of
at least five acres. The maximum percentage of the site area
covered by buildings shall not exceed 20%.
(b) Density. The number of beds permitted in the assisted care
facility shall not exceed 25 beds for every acre that comprises
the building development lot or group of lots on which the
facility is constructed. No more than two beds shall be
permitted in a residential living unit in the personal care
facility.
(c) Minimum building setback.
[1] Front yard. There shall be a building setback on each
street on which a site abuts which shall be not less than
100 feet in depth from the ultimate right-of-way line. The
front yard shall be planted with an all-season ground cover
not to exceed one foot in height, except as may be
otherwise mandated by any buffering requirements.
[2] Side yards. For each building or unified group of buildings
erected on a building development lot or group of lots
there shall be two side yards, neither of which shall be less
than 20 feet in width, provided further that the combined
width of both side yards shall total a minimum of 50 feet.
[3] Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard that shall not be less
than 75 feet in depth.
§ 210-238 CONCORD CODE § 210-238
196:902
[4] Minimum lot width at building line. The width of the
building development lot or group of lots on which a
personal care facility is to be erected must be at least 200
feet at the building line.
[5] Minimum lot width at street line. Where the building
development lot or group of lots on which a building is to
be erected fronts a public street, the lot must be at least
250 feet wide.
[6] Impervious coverage. The maximum percentage of the lot
covered by buildings, driveways, parking lot surfaces,
walkways and other impervious surfaces shall not exceed
40%.
[7] Minimum required frontage. The building development lot
or group of lots to be used as the site for a personal care
facility must have at least 200 feet of frontage on a public
principal arterial street or collector street, as defined in
the Concord Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance (§ 160-8) and mapped in Appendix G thereto.276
(3) Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(a) Residential living units, including a room, a group of rooms, an
apartment or other structure to be used as the residence of an
individual or a couple.
(b) The following accessory uses when provided for the exclusive
use of the residents, staff and guests:
[1] Common dining facilities and an associated kitchen or
kitchens.
[2] Activity, social, recreation and exercise facilities.
[3] Administrative and medical office facilities.
[4] Laundry and housekeeping.
[5] Chapel.
[6] Beauty salon.
(4) Utilities. A personal care facility must be served by public sewer
and public water.
(5) Construction and layout.
(a) Site layout. The buildings, streets, driveways and related
structures shall be laid out and constructed with the intent of
encouraging an attractive facility on a large site with the
276. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-238 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-238
196:903
buildings sited as compactly as is reasonably feasible and in
a manner intended to duplicate the appearance and feel of a
small, integrated community or village. The physical design of
the personal care facility and the appurtenant improvements
shall provide for adequate control of vehicular traffic, make
adequate provisions for public water, public sewer, erosion
and sedimentation control, stormwater management, fire
protection and other public services and further the amenities
of light, air and visual enjoyment.
(b) Physical appearance of buildings. The buildings comprising the
personal care facility shall be architecturally designed and
constructed so as to integrate to the extent that is reasonably
practical with the existing development and existing land use
adjacent to the site. If practical, the buildings shall be oriented
with a gable end facing a street frontage and shall appear to be
residential in nature. No building shall exceed three stories or
35 feet in height.
(c) Access. There shall be at least two separate means of access to
the personal care facility, each of which is of a sufficient size to
provide uninhibited ingress and egress to emergency vehicles
and which complies with Article XXIV, § 210-220. In addition,
street access that complies with Article XXIV, § 210-220, shall
be provided to the front, both sides and back of the personal
care facility.
(d) Loading and delivery areas. There shall be provided areas for
loading and unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles and
for servicing permitted establishments with refuse collection,
fuel and other service vehicles, which areas shall be located at
the side or rear of the buildings, shall be adequate in size, shall
be so arranged that they may be used without blockage or
interference with the use of the accessways or parking
facilities, shall be located as far as possible from the residential
areas of the personal care facility and shall be constructed so
as to be as unobtrusive as possible and screened from abutting
properties through landscaping, berming, fencing or other
appropriate measures. There shall additionally be at least one
entrance to which there is unobstructed access in accordance
with the provisions of Article XXIV, § 210-220, of the Zoning
Ordinance. The entrance shall be constructed so that when an
emergency vehicle such as an ambulance is parked at the
entrance, shelter from the weather is provided to a person who
is being loaded or unloaded at the personal care facility.
(e) Parking.
[1] Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio of 1/2
parking space per bed, plus one parking space for each
employee who works on the shift with the highest number
§ 210-238 CONCORD CODE § 210-238
196:904
of employees; provided, however, that only 75% of the total
number of spaces calculated under the formula set forth
above need be constructed at the time that occupancy of
the personal care facility first begins. The construction
of the remaining 25% of the total number of spaces
calculated under the formula set forth above may be
required at any later time at the sole discretion of the
Supervisors of Concord Township, upon a finding that the
parking required for the facility requires the extra spaces.
[2] Off-street parking for residents, employees and visitors
shall be placed in the rear or on the side of the facility and
shall be made as unobtrusive as possible through the use
of berming and landscaping that complies with Article
XXII, § 210-201, of the Zoning Ordinance of Concord
Township.
[3] Parking in the front yard shall be limited to spaces to be
used for visitors, resident pickup and dropoff and shall not
exceed, where possible, 25% of the total parking.
[4] All other aspects of off-street parking shall be governed by
Article XXII of the Zoning Ordinance of Concord Township.
(f) Pedestrian facilities. Pedestrian amenities shall be located
where appropriate around the personal care facility and the
building development lot or group of lots on which the facility
is located. These amenities may include, but are not limited to,
bus stop shelters, benches and sidewalks. Crosswalks shall be
line-striped across all streets in compliance with the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, § 160-42B,277 at
intersections; where street crossings are appropriate for the
safety of the personal care facility's residents; or where
sidewalks would otherwise extend across the street.
(6) Landscaping.
(a) All landscaping shall comply with Article XXI of the Zoning
Ordinance of Concord Township. The amount of landscaping,
berming and buffering may be enlarged as a condition to
granting the use approval where the Board of Supervisors
determines that it is reasonably necessary.
(b) The landscaping is encouraged to include vertical elements
such as hedges, fences, walls, pergolas, gazebos and pavilions.
(7) Signs. All signs associated with the personal care facility shall
comply with Article XXIII of the Zoning Ordinance of Concord
Township as it existed at the time the signs were installed or
otherwise erected.
277. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-238 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-238
196:905
(8) Procedure to obtain approval of use. The procedure for obtaining
approval for the use of a building development lot or group of lots
as the site for a personal care facility shall conform to the
procedure set forth in Article XXVII, § 210-237, of the Zoning
Ordinance of Concord Township, or any successor ordinance.
G. Power generation facility. [Added 7-5-2000 by Ord. No. 249]
(1) Any subdivision, land development or construction activity within
300 feet of a historic resource shown on the Historic Resources
Map shall be subject to the provisions of Article XIXA relating to
historic preservation.
(2) Such facility shall not exceed one acre in size.
(3) No more than one such facility may be constructed within a
contiguous Municipal/Institutional District.
(4) All buildings at such facility shall be limited to 30 feet in height.
(5) Such facility shall be set back at least 50 feet from all property
lines.
(6) All buildings at such facility shall be screened by evergreen trees of
at least 10 feet in height at the time of installation.
(7) The noise levels at the lot lines of such facility shall not exceed 57
decibels (dB) at any time.
H. Transfer of liquor license. [Added 1-2-2007 by Ord. No. 309]
(1) Any establishment that receives a transfer of a liquor license shall:
(a) Provide for adequate off-street parking, as required in Article
XXII.
(b) Provide for adequate loading and unloading, as required in
Article XXII.
(c) Provide for safe and convenient vehicular ingress and egress,
and mitigate any adverse traffic impacts that are created.
(d) Provide for the on-site safety and security of patrons.
(e) Submit a land development plan in accordance with the
Concord Township Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,278 and address all requirements pertaining to
sidewalks, parking lots, parking lot lighting and landscaping,
streetlights, street trees, screening and buffering, other
landscaping, stormwater management, soil erosion and
sedimentation control, and the like.
278. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-238 CONCORD CODE § 210-238
196:906
(f) Apply for and receive permits for any grading, building,
construction, signage, curb cuts, or other site conditions.
(g) Meet all yard and area regulations, including, but not limited
to, lot area, lot width, total impervious coverage, total building
area coverage, minimum structure setbacks, height, and the
like.
(h) Provide for 10 additional feet in width of a landscape screen or
buffer against any lot used or zoned for residential use, within
which a continuous row of evergreen trees at a minimum
height of eight feet shall be installed and maintained.
I. Transfer of development rights. [Added 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 311]
(1) Purpose. The primary purpose of transfer of development rights
(TDR) is to permanently preserve features such as prime farmland,
critical environmental areas, and open space that would be lost if
land were to be developed. In addition, this section is intended to
protect property rights by allowing landowners whose land is
proposed for preservation to transfer their right to develop to other
areas of the Township deemed appropriate for higher intensity
development based on the availability of infrastructure (public
water, public sewer, better roads). It is the particular intention of
this section that the transfer of development rights be utilized to
preserve and conserve the resources such as, but not limited to:
(a) Prime farmland soils and agricultural land.
(b) Woodland and forest resources.
(c) Stream valleys.
(d) Historic resources and places having unique historical,
architectural or patriotic interest or value (in accordance with
Section 605(2)(vi) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code279).
(2) Concept.
(a) The provisions of this section which permit transfer of
development rights allow landowners in areas of Concord
Township proposed for preservation and conservation, called
"sending areas," to sell the right to develop all, or a portion of
their land to landowners in areas of Concord Township
proposed for additional development, called "receiving areas."
The Transfer of Development Rights provisions set forth below
are specifically authorized under Section 603(c)(2.2) and 619.1
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,280 under the
279. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10605(2)(vi).
280. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10603(c)(2.2) and 10619.1.
§ 210-238 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-238
196:907
terms of which development rights are acknowledged to be
severable and separately conveyable from a sending area to a
receiving area.
(b) The sending areas shall be from the R-1, R-2, R-2D, or R-3
Districts, as limited by the sending area qualifications below.
(c) The receiving areas shall apply to the C-1 District portion of
the Concordville Village Overlay District, and as further limited
by the receiving area qualifications below.
(d) When landowners in a sending area sell their right to develop
all, or a portion of their land, they must create a restrictive
covenant or a conservation easement against any future
development on that portion of land from which development
rights are sold. However, the land may still be used for
purposes that do not involve development, such as agriculture
or forestry. When landowners in a receiving area buy the
development rights from landowners in a sending area, they
receive the right to build at a greater intensity or density on
their land than would otherwise be permitted if they had not
purchased development rights.
(e) Restrictive covenants or conservation easements imposed in a
sending area will not affect the landowner's ability to sell the
property after the development rights have been sold, although
such land cannot ever be used for development purposes. The
restrictive covenant or conservation easement on the land from
which the development rights have been sold shall run in favor
of the Township or an approved conservation organization.
(f) The owner of the tract in a sending area from which the
development rights are sold or any subsequent purchaser or
purchasers of the development rights may declare the
development rights for sale, may hold the development rights
or may resell the development rights. The only use which may
be made of the development rights is the ultimate transfer to a
developer with a tract in a receiving area. The Township shall
have no obligation to purchase the development rights which
have been sold from a tract in a sending area.
(3) Sending area qualifications and calculations. Owners of tracts
which meet the following requirements may sell their development
rights:
(a) Sending area qualifications.
[1] A sending area tract of land shall be located within the R-1,
R-2, R-2D, or R-3 Districts. The tract shall have a minimum
land area of 10 gross acres, and shall contain at least one
of the following resource features, such as, but not limited
to:
§ 210-238 CONCORD CODE § 210-238
196:908
[a] Prime farmland soils or agricultural land.
[b] Woodland and forest resources.
[c] Stream valleys.
[d] Historic resources and places having unique
historical, architectural or patriotic interest or value.
[2] By the time of sale of development rights from a sending
area tract, a minimum area of a sending area tract shall be
restricted from future development in accordance with
Subsection I(3)(c) and (d).
[3] The land within the sending area tract to be restricted
shall be contiguous, and shall be of a regular configuration
not less than 150 feet in width at the narrowest
dimensions, except where infeasible due to the preexisting
configuration of the tract.
[4] The portion of the sending area tract which will not be
restricted shall be usable for the exercise of the retained
development right(s) under the use, area, dimensional,
performance, and other applicable standards of the Zoning
Ordinance and the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.281
(b) Calculation of transfer of development rights.
[1] The total number of development rights which may be sold
shall be based upon the maximum number of single-family
detached dwellings which are permitted to be developed
on the net transferable area of a sending area tract under
the zoning regulations for the R-1, R-2, R-2D, or R-3
Districts.
[2] Net transferable area shall be measured in acres and shall
be determined by subtracting the following from the gross
tract acreage:
[a] The features excluded under the "lot area" definition.
[b] The number of existing dwelling units on the tract
multiplied by the minimum lot area required under the
R-1, R-2, R-2D, or R-3 District regulations.
[c] Land used for nonresidential purposes unless used for
agriculture, public parkland or similar use. The
amount of land subtracted for each nonresidential use
shall be at least as large as the minimum lot area
required under the R-1, R-2, or R-2D District
281. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-238 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-238
196:909
regulations and shall be large enough to fully contain
the use and all required yard setbacks for such use.
[d] Development rights previously sold or land previously
restricted from development by restrictive covenant,
or conservation easement, shall be subtracted from
any application of transfer of development rights to
the extent of the restriction(s) in force unless and until
such time as said restrictive covenant or conservation
easement is dissolved or rescinded with agreement of
all beneficiaries of such restrictive covenant or
conservation easement.
[3] The landowner shall produce calculations to indicate:
[a] The gross tract acreage of the sending area tract of
land.
[b] The acreages of the items set forth in Subsection
I(3)(b)[2] (re: calculation of net transferable area).
[4] The net transferable area, in square feet, shall then be
divided by the minimum required lot area for single-family
detached dwellings in the R-1, R-2, R-2D, or R-3 Districts
to produce the maximum number of dwellings permitted
on the tract and the maximum number of transfer of
development rights available on the sending area tract. (If
a fractional number results, then it should be rounded
down.)
[5] The maximum number of transfer of development rights
based on the number of lots or dwelling units feasible
under the base zoning district regulations shall be subject
to review by the Township to confirm that the indicated
number of lots is feasible in accordance with the
ordinances of Concord Township, and based on the
Township's geographic information system (GIS) mapping.
However, the Township reserves the right to request that
the landowner provide plans to determine development
feasibility if the analysis of GIS mapping needs to be
supplemented as determined by the Township Engineer.
(c) Sale of transfer of development rights.
[1] Transfer of development rights which have been severed
shall be conveyed by a deed of transferable development
rights duly recorded in the Office of the Delaware County
Recorder of Deeds. The deed of transferable development
rights shall specify the tract or tracts of land within
eligible receiving area(s) to which the rights shall be
permanently attached or that the rights shall be
§ 210-238 CONCORD CODE § 210-238
196:910
transferred to the Township, retained by the owner of the
sending area tract, or another person in gross.
[2] The deed of transferable development rights which
pertains to the sale of development rights from the
sending area tract(s) shall be accompanied by restrictive
covenants or conservation easements suitable in form and
substance to the Township Solicitor, which shall
permanently restrict future development of the sending
area tract(s) as provided in Subsection I(3)(d), and which
shall be recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds at
the time of, or prior to, the deed of transferable
development rights.
[3] All deeds of transferable development rights and
restrictive covenants or conservation easements shall be
endorsed by the Township prior to recording, which
endorsement shall not be unreasonably withheld. Deeds
submitted to the Township for endorsement shall be
accompanied by a title search of the sending area tract(s)
and a legal opinion of title affirming that the development
rights being transferred by the deed have not been
previously sold from, or prohibited upon, the sending area
tract. A title report should be prepared within 10 days
prior to submission of the deed, and the legal opinion of
title must meet the reasonable approval of the Township
Solicitor.
[4] The deeds and covenants or conservation easements shall
be accompanied by a map or plan of the sending area
tract, drawn to a scale of at least one inch equals 100 feet.
Such plan shall:
[a] Include a notation of the number of development
rights retained; and
[b] Graphically represent the geographic extent and
applicability of the conservation restrictions as well as
the general future location(s) available for the use of
any retained development rights.
[5] If less than all of the development rights eligible for
transfer hereunder are to be transferred, the applicant
shall indicate in the deed the disposition of the remaining
development rights.
(d) Sending area restrictive covenant or conservation easement.
Except for retained development rights (not to be transferred),
if any, a sending area tract shall be permanently restricted
from future residential, commercial, or other nonagricultural
development by a restrictive covenant or other conservation
easement which meets the following requirements:
§ 210-238 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-238
196:911
[1] Except where any retained development rights are
specified, the restrictive covenant or conservation
easement shall permanently restrict the land from future
development of any nonagricultural uses, except for public
parkland, conservation areas, and similar uses.
[2] The restrictive covenant or conservation easement shall be
approved by the Board of Supervisors, in consultation with
the Township Solicitor. Final plan approval will be
contingent upon the recording of the deed of transfer of
development rights, and the restrictive covenant or
conservation easement, at the Office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Delaware County.
[3] The restrictive covenant or conservation easement shall
designate Concord Township, and/or a bona fide
conservation organization acceptable to the Township at
its sole discretion, as the beneficiary/grantee, and may, if
the Township so elects, also designate both all future
owners of all or a portion of a sending parcel, and all
future owners of any portion of a receiving area parcel as
having separate and independent enforcement rights with
respect to the restrictive covenants or conservation
easements.
[4] The restrictive covenant or conservation easement shall
apply to a sending area tract of land from which
development rights are sold, and shall specify the number
of development rights to be transferred as well as any to
be retained based on the net transferable area of the tract.
No portion of the net transferable area to be transferred
shall be used to satisfy minimum yard setbacks or lot area
requirements for any development rights which are to be
retained, or for any other development.
(4) Receiving area qualifications and calculations. Owners of tracts
which meet the following requirements may use development
rights that are purchased from sending area landowners:
(a) Receiving area qualifications. The receiving area tract of land
shall be located in the portion of the C-1 District within the
Concordville Village Overlay District. The receiving area tract
shall possess all of the following attributes:
[1] A minimum land area of five gross acres.
[2] A public water system.
[3] A public sanitary sewerage system.
(b) Calculation of potential development at receiving area sites.
§ 210-238 CONCORD CODE § 210-238
196:912
[1] For each development right purchased and transferred
from the R-1, R-2, R-2D, or R-3 Districts sending area,
landowners in the C-1 Commercial District portion of the
Concordville Village Overlay District receiving area shall
have the right to build as a conditional use, five apartment
units in a live-work unit, subject to § 210-125.1D(4)(b) and
F.
(5) Plan submittal process. An applicant shall submit a preliminary
plan showing development with purchase of development rights.
This plan shall meet all requirements of the Concord Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.282 Along with the
preliminary plan, an applicant shall submit:
(a) An agreement of sale for all development rights proposed to be
purchased from the sending area site.
(b) A note on the plan showing the total number of lots or dwelling
units proposed on the receiving area site in the Concordville
Village Overlay District.
(c) A note on the plan showing the total number of lots or dwelling
units that could be built in the Concordville Village Overlay
District when development rights are purchased, the number
of lots or dwelling units that can be built under base density,
and the difference between the two. This difference represents
the number of additional lots or dwelling units that could be
constructed on the site.
(d) A plan of the sending area site(s) from which the applicant
proposes to purchase development rights. This plan shall show
all information needed to determine the number of
development rights which may be sold, as shown in Subsection
I(3). In addition, the plan shall be accompanied by a metes and
bounds description of the property(s), as well as each
property's parcel number, and owner name. If the applicant is
purchasing development rights from a portion of a sending
area site, this portion shall be shown on the plan and described
with metes and bounds.
(e) In order to receive final plan approval, the applicant shall
agree to record restrictive covenants or conservation
easements for all sending area land whose development rights
are being used by the applicant. The restrictive covenant or
conservation easement on the sending area land shall be
recorded first, followed by a deed of transfer, in accordance
with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended, which transfers the development rights
from a sending area landowner to a receiving area landowner.
282. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 210-238 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-238
196:913

ARTICLE XXVIII
Zoning Hearing Board - Variances, Special Exceptions, Appeals
§ 210-239. Establishment of Board. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No.
221; 2-2-1999 by Ord. No. 237; 12-5-2000 by Ord. No. 253]
The Board of Supervisors shall appoint a Zoning Hearing Board consisting
of five residents of the Township. The terms of office of the five-member
Board shall be five years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of
one member shall expire each year, beginning the first Monday of January
2000. The Board shall promptly notify the governing body of any vacancies
which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired
portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in
the municipality. The word "Board," when used in this section, shall mean
the Zoning Hearing Board, and the term "Planning Code" shall refer to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.283 Members of the Board shall
receive compensation for attending hearings and for the performance of
their duties at a rate not to exceed $900.00 per annum, payable quarterly at
the rate of $225 or at such compensation rate as may be established from
time to time by the Concord Township Board of Supervisors by resolution.
§ 210-240. Removal of members. [Amended 12-5-2000 by Ord. No.
253]
Any Board member may be removed for failure to attend hearings and
meetings of the Board by a majority vote of the Board of Township
Supervisors, taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice
of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection with
the vote if the member shall request it, in writing.
§ 210-241. Election of officers. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve
annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any
hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be not less than a
majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board may appoint a
hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its
behalf and the parties may waive further action by the Board as provided
in § 210-243. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the municipality and laws of the
commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business and
shall submit a report of its activities to the governing body once a year.
§ 210-242. Powers of Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the following powers:
A. Appeals from the Zoning Officer. The Board shall hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that the Zoning Officer or
283. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-239 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-242
196:915
the person who administers the Concord Township Zoning Ordinance
had failed to follow prescribed procedures or had misinterpreted or
misapplied any provision of a valid ordinance or map or any valid rule
or regulation governing the action of the Zoning Officer or the person
who administers the Concord Township Zoning Ordinance.
B. Challenge to the validity of any ordinance or map. The Board shall hear
challenges to the validity of this chapter or to the Zoning Map which
properly comes before the Board in accordance with the code and shall
take evidence, decide contested questions, make findings on all
relevant issues of fact and make a record thereof, as prescribed by said
code and by this chapter.
C. Variances.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant.
(2) A variance from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted by
the Board unless and until a written application for a variance is
submitted by the applicant who shall have the burden of
establishing that:
(a) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape or exceptional topographical or other physical
conditions peculiar to the particular property, and that the
unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance in the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located.
(b) Because of such physical circumstances or conditions there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and
that the authorization of the variance is therefore necessary to
enable the reasonable use of the property.
(c) Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(d) The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property
is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be
detrimental to the public welfare.
(e) The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
§ 210-242 CONCORD CODE § 210-242
196:916
(3) In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code284 and the zoning
ordinance of Concord Township.
D. Special exceptions.
(1) Where the Board of Supervisors in the Zoning Ordinance has stated
special exceptions to be granted or denied by the Board pursuant to
express standards and criteria, the Board shall hear and decide
requests for such special exceptions in accordance with such
standards and criteria. In granting a special exception, the Board
may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition
to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance and the
Municipalities Planning Code.285
(2) An applicant for a special exception shall have the burden of
establishing both:
(a) That his application falls within the provision of this chapter
which accords to the applicant the right to seek a special
exception; and
(b) That allowance of the special exception will not be contrary to
the standards of law.
(3) In determining whether the allowance of a special exception or a
variance is contrary to the standards of law, the Board shall
consider whether the application, if granted, will:
(a) Substantially increase traffic congestion in the streets.
(b) Increase the danger of fire or panic or otherwise endanger the
public safety.
(c) Overcrowd the land or create an undue concentration of
population.
(d) Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.
(e) Be consistent with the surrounding zoning and uses.
(f) Adversely affect the Comprehensive Plan of the Township.
(g) Unduly burden water, sewer, school, park or other public
facilities.
(h) Otherwise adversely affect the public health, safety, morals or
general welfare.
284. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
285. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-242 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-242
196:917
§ 210-243. Public hearings.
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the following requirements:
E. General requirements; variances and special exceptions.
(1) In all cases, the applicant's burden of proof shall include the duty of
presenting credible evidence sufficient to persuade the Board that
applicant has satisfied the criteria set forth in Subsections C(2) and
D(2). In any case where the Board requests that the applicant
produce evidence relating to the criteria set forth in Subsection
D(3) of this section or any other party opposing the application
shall have established by evidence the possibility that an allowance
of the application will have any of the effects listed in Subsection
D(3) of this section, the applicant's burden of proof shall include
the burden presenting credible evidence sufficient to persuade the
Board that allowance of a special exception or variance will not
violate the Zoning Ordinance with respect to the criteria so placed
in issue. [Amended 3-5-1991 by Ord. No. 177]
(2) Standards for specific uses. In addition to the general requirements
and standards set forth in § 210-242A through E, the Supervisors of
Concord Township may from time to time create additional
conditions, requirements and standards for specific uses which
may be allowed by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(3) Expiration of special exceptions and variances. Unless otherwise
specified by the Zoning Hearing Board, a special exception or
variance shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building
permit within six months from the date of authorization thereof.
A. Notice shall be given to the public, the applicant, the Delaware County
Planning Commission, the Zoning Officer or the person who
administers the Concord Township Zoning Ordinance and to any person
who made timely request for the same. Notices shall be given at such
time in such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the Board.
Reasonable fees, based on cost, are to be paid by the applicant and by
persons requesting any notice not required by ordinance established by
the Board of Supervisors. In addition to the notice provided herein,
notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected
tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.286
B. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint
any member as a hearing officer. The decision or, where no decision is
called for, the findings shall be made by the Board, but the parties may
waive decision or findings by the Board and accept the decision or
findings of the hearing officer as final.
286. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-242 CONCORD CODE § 210-243
196:918
C. The parties to the hearing shall be the Township of Concord, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of record
before the Board and any other person, including civic and community
organizations, permitted to appear before the Board. The Board shall
have power to require that all persons who wish to be considered
parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for
that purpose.
D. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
E. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
F. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
G. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings, and a transcript of the
proceedings and copies of graphic or written material received in
evidence shall be made available to any party at cost.
H. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda or other materials unless the parties are afforded an
opportunity to contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the
site or its surroundings with any party or his representative unless all
parties are given an opportunity to be present.
I. Decision.
(1) The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or hearing officer. Each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provisions of the state code or of any Township ordinance, rule or
regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and
the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light
of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer,
and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are
final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days and the parties shall be
entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board prior
to final decision or entry of findings, and the Board's decision shall
§ 210-243 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-243
196:919
§ 210-244. Appeals.
be entered no later than 30 days after the decision of the hearing
officer. Where the Board fails to render a decision within the period
required by this subsection or fails to hold the required hearing
within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request for a
hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in
favor of the applicant, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing,
to an extension of time.287
(2) When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant
because of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as
herein provided, the Township shall give public notice of said
decision within 10 days in the same manner as provided in
Subsection A of this section. Nothing in this subsection shall
prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to urge
that such decision is erroneous.
J. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day
of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail, or otherwise, brief
notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which
the full decision or findings may be examined.288
A. Appeals before the Zoning Board and to court. All appeals, applications
or challenges which properly come before the Board in accordance with
the requirements of the Planning Code and all appeals to court shall be
subject to the time limitations and requirements of Article X 289and any
other applicable provision of said Code. The proceedings set forth in
said Article X shall constitute the exclusive mode for securing review of
any ordinance, decision, determination or order of the Board of
Township Supervisors, its agencies or officers adopted or issued
pursuant to the Planning Code. Appeals to court shall be taken to the
Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County.
B. Unified appeals. Where the Board has jurisdiction over a zoning matter
pursuant to § 210-242A through D, the Board shall also hear all appeals
which an applicant may elect to bring before it with respect to any
municipal ordinance or requirement pertaining to the same
development plan or development. In any such cases, the Board shall
have no power to pass upon the nonzoning issues, but shall take
evidence and make a record thereon as provided in § 210-243. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall make findings on all relevant
issues of fact which shall become part of the record on appeal to the
court.
287. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
288. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
289. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 11001 et seq.
§ 210-243 CONCORD CODE § 210-244
196:920
C. Parties appellant before Zoning Board. Appeals under § 210-242A and
proceedings to challenge an ordinance under § 210-242B may be filed
with the Board, in writing, by any officer or agency of the Township or
any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance under § 210-242C and
for special exception under § 210-242D may be filed with the Board by
any landowner or any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
D. Time limitations. The time limitations for raising certain issues and
filing certain proceedings with the Board shall be the following:
(1) No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board
later than 30 days after any application for building permit or any
other application has been approved or rejected by an appropriate
Township officer, agency or body if such proceeding is designed to
secure reversal or to limit the approval in any manner unless such
person alleges and proves that he had not notice, knowledge or
reason to believe that such approval had been given. If such person
has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall be bound
by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest.
(2) The failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an
adverse decision on a tentative or preliminary plan pursuant to
Section 709 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code290 or
from an adverse decision by a zoning officer on a challenge to the
validity of an ordinance or map pursuant to Section 916.2 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code291 shall preclude an
appeal from a final approval except in the case where the final
submission substantially deviates from the approved tentative or
preliminary approval. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
E. Stay of proceedings. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to
§ 210-244C of this chapter and during its pendency before the Board,
all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or
approval of the Zoning Officer or the person who administers the
Concord Township Zoning Ordinance or of any agency or body and all
official action there under shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or
any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property,
in which case the development or official action shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the
Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition
after notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body.
When an application for development, preliminary or final, has been
duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the
approval are filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant,
the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to continuing
the proceedings before the Board. After the petition is presented, the
290. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10709.
291. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 210-244 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-244
196:921
§ 210-245. Compliance with Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
It is the intent of the Supervisors of Concord Township that the provisions
of this Article XXVIII comply with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code as the same exists from time to time.292
Therefore, any amendment to the provisions of the Planning Code or any
inconsistency between the provisions of the Planning Code and the
provisions of this Article XXVIII shall be resolved by applying the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code as the same may then
exist, and such provisions shall be deemed to supersede any inconsistent or
contrary provision of this Article XXVIII.
court shall hold a hearing to determine if the filing of the appeal is
frivolous. At the hearing, evidence may be presented on the merits of
the case. After consideration of all evidence presented, if the court
determines that the appeal is frivolous and is for the purpose of delay,
it shall grant the petition. The right to petition the court to order the
appellants to post bond may be waived by the appellee, but such waiver
may be revoked by him if an appeal is taken from a final decision of
the court. The question whether or not such petition should be granted
and the amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the
court. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
292. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 210-244 CONCORD CODE § 210-245
196:922
ARTICLE XXIX
Amendments
§ 210-246. Grant of authority.
The Board of Township Supervisors may from time to time amend,
supplement, change, modify or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning
Map.
§ 210-247. Public hearing required.
Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Board of Township
Supervisors shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice.
§ 210-248. Initiation of amendments.
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance may be initiated by the Township
Planning Commission, the Township Board of Supervisors or a landowner in
the Township.
§ 210-249. Revisions after amendments.
If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment in revised or further revised to include land previously not
affected by it, the Board of Township Supervisors shall hold another public
hearing, pursuant to public notices, before proceeding to vote on the
amendment.
§ 210-250. Public notice. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 221]
Public notice of hearings for amendments to the Zoning Ordinance,
proceedings of the Zoning Hearing Board or applications for development
for which a hearing is required shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township. The notice shall be published once each week
for two successive weeks and shall state the time and place for the hearing
and the particular nature of the matter to be discussed. The first publication
shall be not more than 30 days nor fewer than seven days from the date of
the hearing.
A. In the case of all proposed amendments, a copy shall be submitted to
the County Planning Commission not less than 30 days prior to the
hearing by the Board of Supervisors.
B. In the case of amendments other than those initiated by the Township
Planning Commission, the proposal shall be submitted to the Township
Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing to provide
the Planning Commission with an opportunity to submit comments and
recommendations.293
293. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, concerning amendments submitted by landowners
being processed as curative amendments, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 341.
§ 210-246 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-250
196:923

ARTICLE XXX
Enforcement
§ 210-251. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-5-1998 by Ord. No.
221]
§ 210-252. (Reserved)
§ 210-253. (Reserved)
§ 210-254. (Reserved)
§ 210-255. (Reserved)
§ 210-256. (Reserved)
§ 210-257. (Reserved)
§ 210-258. (Reserved)
§ 210-259. (Reserved)
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted a violation of this Zoning Ordinance shall, upon being found
liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Township, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Township as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice.
If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Township may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to
have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation by the District
Justice, and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorney fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid
over to the Township.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Township the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 210-251 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-259
196:925

ARTICLE XXXI
PBPD Planned Business Park District
[Added 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 225]
§ 210-260. Purpose.
It is the purpose of the Planned Business Park District to provide for
the combining of offices, stores and shops, service establishments, hotels
and inns, conference facilities and limited industrial uses in a planned
development alongside the principal arterial streets within the Township,
which are U.S. Route 1, PA Route 202 and PA Route 322. It is the purpose of
these regulations to encourage a diversification of uses in a unified project
and, through interrelationship of uses and structures, to promote innovative
design, efficient and effective circulation systems and to encourage the
conservation of land and energy resources, minimization of auto travel and
the location of employment, hotels and inns and retail centers in proximity
to one another. In addition, the specific intent of the district is:
A. To encourage the development of land and buildings along U.S. Route 1,
PA Route 202 and PA Route 322 for a variety of uses, either individually
or within the same building, for compatible mixed-use developments.
B. To permit the development of functionally related land uses in a manner
that is more efficient, environmentally sensitive and mutually
supporting than conventional lot-by-lot independent development of
each use.
C. To minimize potential traffic hazards along U.S. Route 1, PA Route 202
and PA Route 322 by encouraging planned, physically integrated,
multiple-use facilities which are easily accessible from those principal
arterial streets and which utilize a reduced number of access driveways
along those principal arterial streets when compared to conventional
strip-type development.
D. To minimize auto travel by maximizing opportunities for pedestrian
movement and patronage of multiple facilities in a development which
emphasizes the interrelationship of uses and structures.
E. To establish a procedure that provides for:
(1) The overall design and approval of the roads, streets, sewer, water,
stormwater control facilities and common open space to be
included in a planned business park at the inception of the business
park; and
(2) The phased design, approval and construction of some or all of the
buildings to be included in the planned business park at a later date
or dates.
§ 210-260 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-261
196:927
§ 210-261. Use regulations.
A building or combination of buildings may be erected, altered or used
and a lot may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes or a
combination of the following purposes:
A. Uses by right.
(1) Hotel, motel or inn.
(2) Conference facility.
(3) Restaurant.
(4) Retail shops and services; however, such uses shall not be
permitted at a distance in excess of 1,000 feet from U.S. Route 1,
PA Route 202 and PA Route 322 unless permitted as a conditional
use subject to the provisions of Article XXVII.
(5) Bank or financial institution.
(6) Office building or buildings; offices for administrative, executive,
professional or similar use.
(7) Governmental or public service corporation building, grounds or
facility or any other similar use, including utility office.
(8) Health center, health club or juvenile or adult day-care facility.
(9) Light industrial uses permitted by right in the LI Light Industry
District pursuant to § 210-152A of the Township Code, Zoning;
provided, however, that all such light industrial uses shall be set
back at least 600 feet from U.S. Route 1, PA Route 202 and PA
Route 322.
(10) Parking structures which are accessory to the principal use or uses
of the property.
(11) Independent living facilities. [Added 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 364]
B. Uses by special exception. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255]
(1) Any nonresidential use of the same character as any of the uses
herein before specifically permitted.
(2) Outside treatment or storage of materials or waste products, where
such materials are adequately enclosed by a fence erected of
substantial materials conforming to the design of the building and
where such use is accessory to a permitted use.
(3) Commercial greenhouse or nursery.
(4) Motor vehicle sales/rental.
(5) Cellular towers.
§ 210-261 CONCORD CODE § 210-261
196:928
§ 210-262. Yard and area regulations.
(6) Religious institution.
(7) Educational institution.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article XXVII. [Amended
1-2-2001 by Ord. No. 255]
(1) Indoor or outdoor place of amusement, recreation or assembly (not
including drive-in theater).
(2) Drive-through restaurants.
(3) Adult entertainment uses as permitted in § 210-152C of Chapter
210, Zoning, of the Township Code, Zoning.
(4) Retail shops and services in excess of 1,000 feet from U.S. Route 1,
PA Route 202 and PA Route 322.
(5) Any establishment that receives a transfer of a liquor license.
[Added 1-2-2007 by Ord. No. 309]
D. Prohibited uses. Gasoline service stations.
A. Tract area: the minimum size of a tract for which the Planned Business
Park District may be used shall be 25 acres.
B. Minimum tract frontage on U.S. Route 1, or PA Route 322: 1,000 feet.
C. Maximum building coverage: not more than 30% of the area within a
planned business park may be occupied by buildings.
D. Maximum impervious surface coverage: not more than 70% of the area
within a planned business park may consist of impervious surface
coverage.
E. Minimum setbacks from streets:
(1) Any building face to a principal arterial street: 75 feet; except that
all building adjacent to U.S. Route 1, PA Route 202 or PA Route 322
shall be set back at least 100 feet from said principal arterial
streets.
(2) Any building face to a collector street located at the perimeter of
the tract: 60 feet.
(3) Any building face to a private street located in the interior of a
tract: 15 feet.
(4) Any building face to a parking space: 10 feet.
(5) Surface parking areas to a principal arterial street: 40 feet; except
that all parking adjacent to U.S. Route 1, PA Route 202 or PA Route
§ 210-261 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-262
196:929
§ 210-263. Performance requirements.
See § 210-154.
§ 210-264. Waste storage and disposal.
See § 210-155.
§ 210-265. Other development requirements.
322 shall be set back at least 50 feet from said principal arterial
street.
(6) Surface parking areas to a collector street: 30 feet.
(7) Surface parking areas to a private street: 15 feet.
F. Minimum setback requirements for buildings and park, structures,
measured from the tract perimeter: any building or parking structure
shall be set back at least 50 feet from the tract boundary; except where
the tract boundary abuts a residential district, in which case the
building or parking structure setback requirement shall be increased to
150 feet.
G. Minimum setback requirements for surface parking areas and interior
roads, measured from the tract perimeter: any surface parking area or
interior road shall be set back at least 30 feet from the tract boundary;
except where the tract boundary abuts a residential district, in which
case the setback requirement shall be increased to 50 feet.
H. Minimum distance between buildings: all buildings shall be arranged in
a group or groups of buildings, and the distance, at the closest point
between any two buildings, or groups of attached buildings shall be not
less than 25 feet, except where such auxiliary building shall be used for
housing a transformer(s), tank(s) or is to be used as a hose house or for
other items which are to be used within the building it serves.
I. Maximum heights: no building shall exceed 40 feet in height; except
that the building setback from the right-of-way line of a street shall be
increased by four feet for every one foot of building height above 40
feet, up to a maximum height of 84 feet.
A. All spaces between buildings and all parking, loading and unloading,
access and service areas shall be adequately illuminated at night. Such
illumination, including sign lighting, shall be arranged so as to protect
the surrounding streets and adjoining property from direct glare or
hazardous interference of any kind.
B. On fire protection, requirements of Article XXIV, § 210-220, shall be
met.
C. Water towers, storage tanks, processing equipment, stand fans,
skylights, cooling towers, vents and any other structures or equipment
§ 210-262 CONCORD CODE § 210-265
196:930
§ 210-266. Landscaping regulations.
A landscape plan prepared by a registered landscape architect shall be
submitted with each plan application. The plan shall identify existing and
proposed trees, shrubs, ground cover, natural features such as rock
outcroppings and other landscaping elements. The plan shall show the
planting and/or construction details. When existing natural growth is
proposed to remain, the applicant shall include in the plans proposed
methods to protect existing trees and growth during and after construction.
Other regulations that apply are:
which rise above the roof line shall be architecturally compatible or
effectively shielded from view from any public street by an
architecturally sound method to be submitted by the developer. In
addition, any satellite dishes, whether mounted on the ground or
rooftop, shall be architecturally compatible or effectively shielded from
view from any public street by an architecturally sound method to be
submitted by the developer.
D. Interior drives providing access to each building within a planned
business park shall be designed with a minimum paved width of 24 feet
and with curvatures so as not to prevent blockage of vehicles entering
and leaving the site.
E. All utility lines servicing the buildings shall be placed underground
within the lot lines of the property.
F. All trash, garbage, rubbish and debris of every kind shall be stored
within the building in fire-proofed rooms or containers, or in a screened
and shielded courtyard area, and shall be collected and disposed of on a
frequent basis as acceptable to the Township Code Enforcement
Official, by private collectors and at no cost to the Township. Refuse
collection containers shall be provided at each bus stop within the
proposed development.
G. Sewage disposal: see § 210-156J. In addition, sewage disposal is to be
provided by an off-site facility acceptable to Concord Township.
A. Areas to be landscaped. All areas of the site not occupied or to be
occupied by buildings and required improvements shall be landscaped
by the planting of grass or other ground cover, shrubs and trees.
B. Landscape provisions: the landscape provisions of the Concord
Township Zoning Ordinance, §§ 210-192, 210-193 and 210-201, as well
as the landscaping provisions in § 160-50 of the Concord Township
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, shall apply to this
zoning district.
C. Tract buffer: along all tract perimeter boundary lines which abut any
residential district, buffers shall be provided in accordance with the
following regulation:
§ 210-265 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-266
196:931
§ 210-267. Permitted signs.
In any Planned Business Park District signs shall be permitted subject to the
following regulations:
(1) The owner shall place and maintain a planting area 25 feet in width
containing hedge, evergreens, shrubbery or suitable vegetation of
sufficient planted density to produce a visual screening appropriate
to the topography, the existing vegetation and the use of adjacent
land. Whenever possible the owner shall make every effort to retain
existing natural screening, such as vegetation and topography.
Earth berms and/or fencing may be used in combination with
vegetation to achieve the buffer, but may not be used alone.
(2) As an alternative to the possibly linear appearance of the minimum
requirements above, applicants are encouraged to provide
innovative, freeform buffers which need not be located entirely
within the minimum-required 25 feet width. Such alternative
buffers shall be subject to approval by the Board of Supervisors,
who may seek the advice of technical experts in the review of the
alternative plans.
A. Entrance signs: entrance signs displaying the name of the planned
business park development, developer, owner or operator, but not
building tenants, shall be permitted at the intersection of an entrance
drive and a public right-of-way or two public rights-of-way, provided
that the following regulations are met:
(1) The maximum surface display area of the sign shall not exceed 75
square feet on any one face.
(2) The maximum height shall not exceed 20 feet.
(3) The sign shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the existing
curb line or edge of paving of the entrance drive or public roadway
(not right-of-way), measured from the vertical plane established by
the leading edge of the sign. In no event shall the sign overhang
any parking area, drive or pedestrian walkway or be closer than
five feet to a public street right-of-way or be installed in sight
triangles necessary for the clear view of traffic.
B. Freestanding signs for individual buildings or tenants or multiple
tenants: freestanding signs identifying individual buildings, individual
tenants or multiple tenants within a planned business park
development or portion of a planned business park development shall
be permitted subject to the following regulations:
(1) One freestanding sign shall be permitted for each individual
building within a planned business park development.
§ 210-266 CONCORD CODE § 210-267
196:932
(2) The maximum surface display area of any one face of the sign shall
not exceed 50 square feet, unless there are three or more
occupants, in which case 80 square feet shall be permitted.
(3) The maximum height shall not exceed 25 feet.
C. Wall signs: signs mounted on the walls or facades of a building shall be
permitted, provided that the following regulations are met:
(1) The total area of all wall signs may not exceed one square foot of
sign area per linear foot of wall, including windows, doors and
cornices.
(2) Wall-mounted signs shall be installed parallel to the supporting
wall and project no more than 18 inches from the face of such wall
and shall not extend above the roof line of such building. Chimneys,
spires, towers, elevator penthouses and similar projections shall be
considered above the roof line of buildings.
D. Under-canopy signs: under-canopy signs not to exceed 10 square feet in
aggregate sign area per tenancy or occupancy shall be permitted.
E. Parking structure signs: no exterior signs identifying or advertising the
name of the building, the name of the development, owner, operator or
principal user of the building shall be permitted on any parking
structure, excepting directional signs for traffic control.
F. Directory signs: at each of the major entrances to the tract signs for the
direction of traffic to, or identification of individual buildings or tenants
within the development shall be permitted, provided that the following
regulations are met:
(1) The maximum surface display area of each sign shall not exceed 40
square feet on any one face.
(2) The maximum height shall not exceed 12 feet.
(3) Each sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the curb
line or edge of paving of any public or private drive or collector
drive, measured from the vertical plane established by the leading
edge of the sign. In no event shall the sign overhang any parking
area, public right-of-way or pedestrian walkway or be installed in
sight triangle necessary for the clear view of traffic.
(4) Any directory sign may identify only the development's sub-area
name, building name and/or tenants.
G. Traffic-control and directional signs: signs for the control of vehicular
traffic shall be permitted, provided that the area of each sign shall not
exceed four square feet in size. Except for street signs approved for use
on public streets by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, no
sign shall exceed three feet in height.
§ 210-267 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-267
196:933
§ 210-268. Off-street parking and loading requirements.
H. Flags: flags of the United States of America, other sovereign nations,
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Delaware County, Concord
Township and the corporate flags of the planned business park
development or its tenants shall be permitted, provided that the total
number and location of such flags shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Board of Supervisors.
I. Calculation of sign area: for the purposes of this section, "surface
display area" or "sign area" shall mean the entire area within a
continuous perimeter formed by straight lines joined at right angles
which enclose the extreme limits of the writing, background,
representation or display of the sign face. The supports, uprights or
structure on which any sign is supported shall not be included in
determining the surface display area unless such supports, uprights or
structure is designed in such a manner as to form an integral
background of the display or conveys meaning. For the purpose of
computing the allowable area of a double-faced sign, one sign face shall
be considered.
A. Every planned business park shall provide adequate parking facilities,
including but not limited to accessways, driveways, drive aisles,
collector drives, loading areas, parking spaces, parking structures and
pedestrian walkways to ensure the efficient circulation of vehicles and
pedestrians in conformance with the requirements of this section.
Where the permitted use of the development contains more than one
parking use category, the parking requirements shall be the sum of the
individual uses computed separately in accordance with this section.
The number of parking spaces that shall be required is as follows:
(1) Retail sales and service uses: 5.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
(2) Office uses: five spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
(3) Restaurant uses: one space for each 50 square feet dedicated to
patron use.
(4) Hotel uses: 1.1 spaces for each rental room or suite. If a restaurant
in connection with such a use is open to the public, the off-street
parking facilities for such restaurant shall not be less than those
required for a restaurant.
(5) Conference facilities: one parking space for every four persons who
may legally be admitted therein at one time under the State Fire
Prevention Laws.
(6) Light industrial uses: 1.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
§ 210-267 CONCORD CODE § 210-268
196:934
§ 210-269. Special development regulations.
(7) Entertainment uses: one space for every three fixed seats or, where
capacity is not determined by the number of fixed seats, four
spaces for each 1,000 square feet of floor area devoted to patron
use.
(8) Other uses not specified herein: four parking spaces for each 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
(9) Independent living facility: 0.6 spaces per independent living unit.
[Added 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 364]
B. Each surface parking space shall consist of a rectangular area having
dimensions not less than nine feet in width and 18 feet in length. Aisles
serving such surface parking areas shall have a minimum width of 24
feet.
C. In addition to the required off-street parking areas, there shall be
provided off-street areas for the loading and unloading of delivery
trucks and for the servicing of the buildings by refuse collection, fuel
and other service vehicles, which areas shall be located at the side or
rear of the building, shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged
that each may be used without blockage or interference with the use of
the accessways or the automobile parking facilities.
A. Unified plan. Any development in a planned business park development
shall consist of a unified, harmonious grouping of buildings, service and
parking areas and landscaped spaces, planned and designed as an
integrated unit.
B. Ownership. The tract of land to be developed shall be in one ownership
or shall be the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of the
entire tract, and in which it shall be agreed that the tract will be
developed under single direction in accordance with an approved
master development plan.
C. Preliminary master development plan. The initial application for the
approval of the development of a planned business park shall be
accompanied by a preliminary master development, plan, or plans,
containing all of the information required for preliminary land
development plan submission under § 160-12 of the Concord Township
Code, Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development. The
preliminary master development plan shall depict the proposed road
network; accesses to the proposed business park; off-site improvements
(including the timing of such improvements); sewer collection,
transportation and treatment facilities; water facilities; fire-protection
facilities; stormwater control facilities; site landscaping; and common
open space, if any. The preliminary master development plan may, but
shall not be required to, show the location of proposed buildings on the
site, but shall show the location of any existing buildings.
§ 210-268 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-269
196:935
D. Application and review of preliminary master development plan. The
preliminary master development plan shall be prepared, submitted,
reviewed and acted upon in accordance with the procedures set forth in
§ 160-12 of the Concord Township Code, Chapter 160, Subdivision and
Land Development.
E. Application and review of final master development plan.
(1) Within one year after the date of approval of the preliminary master
development plan, the applicant shall file a final master
development plan and all supplementary information, data and
documents required by § 160-13 of the Concord Township Code,
Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land Development. The final master
development plan shall conform in all respects to the preliminary
master development plan.
(2) The final master development plan shall be prepared, submitted,
reviewed and acted upon in accordance with the procedures set
forth in § 160-13 of the Concord Township Code, Chapter 160,
Subdivision and Land Development.
(3) Where the construction of the proposed planned business park is to
take place over a period of time, the Board of Supervisors shall
authorize submission of the final master development plan by
section or stages of development, subject to the requirement that
improvements in future sections or stages of development shall be
constructed at the same time as the phase(s) for which such
improvements are essential to the proper functioning of any aspect
of a finally approved earlier section of the planned business park
development.
F. Application and review of land development plans for buildings within
the planned business park.
(1) Prior to the construction of any new buildings within a planned
business park, the applicant shall file and obtain approval of a final
land development plan depicting the location of such new building
or buildings and all improvements associated with such new
building or buildings, including landscaping. All final land
development plans for buildings within the planned business park
shall conform in all respects to the final master development plan.
(2) Each final land development plan shall be prepared, submitted,
reviewed and acted upon in accordance with the procedures set
forth in § 160-13 of the Concord Township Code, Chapter 160,
Subdivision and Land Development; except that the requirements
for submission of final plans set forth in § 160-13A, B, and C of the
Concord Township Code, Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land
Development, shall not be applicable to final land development
plans submitted for a building or buildings within a planned
business park.
§ 210-269 CONCORD CODE § 210-269
196:936
G. Further subdivision of tract. After the Board of Supervisors approves
the final development plan for the development of a lot in the planned
business park containing approval for the construction of more than
one building, the subsequent division of that lot into a separate lot for
each building for purposes of financing and/or conveyancing shall be
permitted and is exempted from additional plan review requirements
and/or the lot design criteria requirements of the Concord Township
Code, Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land development; provided that
the deeds conveying such separate lots for each building depicted on
said final development plan contain covenants requiring the purchasers
to, at all times, operate and maintain such lots in good order and repair
and in a clean and sanitary condition; that cross-easements for parking
areas and all appurtenant ways, pedestrian access and utilities shall be
maintained between such lots; and that such covenants shall be subject
to the approval of the Township Solicitor. The purchaser of any such lot
shall so covenant and agree thereby to be bound by such conditions as
set forth herein.
§ 210-269 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-269
196:937

ARTICLE XXXII
Open Space Provisions
[Added 1-4-2000 by Ord. No. 245]
§ 210-270. Purpose. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
The overall intent of these open space provisions is to identify those zoning
districts where the designation of open space is explicitly applicable and
further to identify related use regulations, locational criteria, performance
standards and ownership and maintenance requirements for land to be held
for recreational use, and/or for conservation, preservation or enhancement
of natural and cultural resources and amenities. These provisions are
designed to:
A. Provide an effective means for identifying, organizing and maintaining
open space.
B. Provide for necessary active and passive recreation areas to
complement existing open space and recreational uses.
C. Preserve natural, geological and environmental resources and maintain
ecological stability by:
(1) Encouraging the preservation of land floodplains and thus to
supplement Floodplain Conservation District regulations.
(2) Limiting the development of steep and very steep slopes.
(3) Protecting the quality of existing watercourses, ponds, lakes and
other water bodies, including riparian buffers, wetlands, and
wetland margins.
(4) Encouraging the preservation of groundwater resources through
the provision of open space areas for groundwater recharge.
(5) Avoiding the disruption of woodland and forest areas, for the
purpose of protecting vegetation and related wildlife habitat.
D. Encourage the preservation of existing and potential agricultural land
through the identification and use of open space lands which are suited
for agricultural production, particularly prime agricultural land.
E. Preserve historic resources by:
(1) Promoting the preservation of significant historic resources as
open space.
(2) Protecting the character of historic resources by encouraging the
designation of surrounding land as open space.
F. Preserve scenic resources.
G. Aid in the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan and the
attainment of the goals, objectives and strategies contained therein.
§ 210-270 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-271
196:939
§ 210-271. Applicable districts. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No.
255; 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
Although open space is encouraged to be maintained, organized and
designated everywhere in the Township, the provisions of this article are
particularly applicable to:
§ 210-272. Use regulations. [Amended 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
A. The R-1 District, Article III, involving cluster development in
accordance with § 210-12.
B. The R-2 District, Article IV, involving cluster development in
accordance with § 210-12.
C. The R-2D District, Article V, involving cluster development in
accordance with § 210-12.
D. The R-A Residence - Garden Apartment District, Article VII.
E. The R-AH Residence - High-Rise Apartment District, Article VIII.
F. The Planned Residential Development Districts, Articles X, XI and XII.
A. Permitted principal uses.
(1) Active and passive recreational uses, including parks, playgrounds,
playfields, trails, and structures related thereto.
(2) Conservation uses to preserve woodland and forest areas, lakes,
ponds, streams, and related landscape features.
(3) Agricultural uses which do not require structures.
(4) Planted areas used for buffering and screening purposes and noise
control.
(5) Structures presently existing in areas to be designated as open
space.
(6) Municipal use.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Uses customarily incidental to the principal uses permitted in
§ 210-272A, unless specified otherwise in § 210-272C.
(2) Signs which are customarily incidental to the principal uses
permitted in § 210-272A, and in accordance with Article XXIII.
C. Conditional uses.
(1) The following uses and their related accessory uses, provided that
a satisfactory environmental impact assessment report is prepared
§ 210-271 CONCORD CODE § 210-272
196:940
§ 210-273. Determination of open space areas. [Amended
12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
Locational criteria. Any lands within the Township may be designated as
open space. However, in planning for land uses within the applicable
districts as referenced in § 210-271, the following shall be considered most
appropriate for designation as open space:
as set forth in Article XI, Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(a) Parking which is customarily incidental to the principal uses
permitted in § 210-272A, and in accordance with Article XXII.
(b) Bridges.
(c) Boundary fences and walls.
(d) Agricultural uses which require structures.
D. Prohibited uses and activities.
(1) Structures other than those associated with § 210-272A, B, or C
above.
(2) Soil, rock or mineral extraction and/or removal, other than in
association with any uses related to § 210-272A, B, or C above.
(3) Removal of topsoil other than in association with any uses related
to § 210-272A, B, or C above.
(4) Cutting and removal of live trees or other flora, except where such
vegetation must be cut or removed to accommodate uses
associated with any uses related to § 210-272A, B, or C above, and
in accordance with Article VIII, Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(5) Storage of materials that may be hazardous to the health, safety
and general welfare of the Township.
A. Conservation areas. Conservation areas as depicted in the
Comprehensive Plan, including:
(1) Floodplain areas and flood-prone areas, as set forth in Article XX
and depicted in the Floodplain Conservation District Map.
(2) Areas of steep slope and very steep slope.
(3) Surface water resources such as lakes, ponds, streams, springs,
wetlands and riparian buffers.
B. Other resources.
(1) Historic resources as regulated in Article XIXA.
§ 210-272 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-273
196:941
§ 210-274. Calculating open space areas. [Amended 12-22-2015 by
Ord. No. 370]
(2) "Important farmlands," as defined by the United States Department
of Agriculture (USDA), Soil Conservation Service, including prime
farmlands and additional farmlands of statewide importance.
(3) "Tree masses," as defined herein, and areas supporting stands of
trees wherein the majority are 12 inches DBH or greater.
(4) Wildlife habitats such as deer wintering areas, nesting areas for
terrestrial and aquatic wildlife and the like.
(5) Groundwater resources and recharge areas.
(6) Lands to be used and maintained as buffers for screening purposes,
noise control and other safeguards.
(7) Lands to be used for various recreational opportunities and
pursuits.
(8) Scenic areas.
A. When computing open space areas for purposes of determining
compliance with open space standards, the following shall not be
counted as open space:
(1) Rights-of-way or easements proposed for dedication (except for
Concord Township Sewer Authority easements).
(2) Areas to be used for permanent soil erosion and sedimentation
control and areas for stormwater or drainage management
structures or basins.
(3) Areas used for retail sales of agricultural products or areas of uses
accessory thereto.
(4) Parking areas, streets, driveways and parking lots.
(5) Lot areas for existing or proposed dwelling units.
(6) Perimeter buffers up to 25 feet in width.
(7) Areas that have not been permanently protected by deed
restriction, private conservation easement, or grant of fee title to
the Township pursuant to § 210-276 of this Code.
B. No more than 1/2 of the required open space shall consist of a singular
type of resource, such that no more than 50% of the open space can be
comprised by the flood plain conservation areas and/or wetlands; or, no
more than 50% of the open space can be comprised by steep and very
steep slopes.
§ 210-273 CONCORD CODE § 210-275
196:942
§ 210-275. Performance standards. [Amended 1-2-2001 by Ord. No.
255; 8-25-2015 by Ord. No. 367; 12-22-2015 by Ord. No. 370]
A. Minimum contiguous area. Land designated as open space shall have a
contiguous area of not less than one acre, except for the open space
area within a parklet or green which shall be in the range of 1,000 to
6,500 square feet.
B. Minimum width. The configuration of any open space land shall provide
for a minimum width of 250 feet, except for the open space of a parklet
or green which shall not be less than 60 feet in width.
C. Maximum impervious surface coverage. Not more than 5% of the total
area of designated open space shall be covered by impervious surfaces;
and not more than 1/2 of any individual parcel of open space shall be
covered by impervious surfaces, including buildings.
D. Minimum setback.
(1) Any buildings within the designated open space shall be located no
less than 100 feet from the perimeter property lines; and no less
than 50 feet from any new lot line created within a tract.
(2) Any structures within the designated open space shall be located
no less than 50 feet from the perimeter property lines; and no less
than 25 feet from any new lot line created within a tract, except for
signs, boundary fences, walls and the like.
E. Area configuration.
(1) The open space designated within a development area shall not be
merely leftover or unusable land. It shall be laid out to the
satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors according to sound site
design principles providing a maximum of accessibility to the
residents of a development area.
(2) At least 25% of the required open space shall be made usable and
physically prepared for playgrounds, playfields and/or other active
recreation activities and/or facilities, unless the applicant proposes
to pay the recreation fee-in-lieu, subject to the approval of the
Board of Supervisors.
(3) The open space designated within a development area shall be
arranged so as to encompass a single land parcel to the maximum
extent possible, linked by a common means of circulation and
access; and it shall be contiguous to the developed area and not
separated from it by existing roads unless safe pedestrian access
can be demonstrated.
(4) The designated open space shall be arranged to maintain
contiguity with other designated open space areas or similar areas
on adjacent lands, either by direct contact or some common means
of circulation and access. If the open space area is owned by the
§ 210-275 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-275
196:943
§ 210-276. Ownership and maintenance of restricted open space.
Township, open space areas shall be designed to accommodate
pedestrian pathways to be available for general public use in order
to ensure the potential for a contiguous open space network
throughout the Township.
(5) All designated open space shall be accurately and conspicuously
delineated, depicted and otherwise noted on a map of the subject
tract in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 160,
Subdivision and Land Development; such open space shall be
differentiated as to its type and area.
(6) No dimension of open space shall be less than 75 feet in width,
except as required for trail connections.
A. Except to provide for permitted recreational and open space uses,
designated open space shall be restricted from further subdivision or
land development by deed restriction, conservation easement or other
agreement in a form acceptable to the Township and duly recorded in
the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County. Subject to such
permanent restrictions, any of the following methods and no other may
be used, either individually or together, to preserve, own and maintain
open space:
(1) Dedication in fee simple.
(2) Homeowners' association.
(3) Condominium agreement.
(4) Dedication of easements.
(5) Transfer of fee simple title or development rights and easements to
a private conservation organization.
B. The following specific requirements are associated with each of the
various methods:
(1) Fee simple dedication.
(a) The Township may, but shall not be required to, accept an offer
of a deed of dedication provided that:
[1] Such land is accessible to the residents of the Township.
[2] There is no cost of acquisition other than any costs
incidental to the transfer of ownership, such as title
insurance and recording fees.
[3] The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such
lands.
§ 210-275 CONCORD CODE § 210-276
196:944
(b) Where the Township accepts dedication of restricted open
space land that contains improvements, the Board of
Supervisors may require the posting of financial security to
ensure structural integrity of said improvements, as well as the
functioning of said improvements for a term not to exceed 18
months from the date of acceptance of dedication. The amount
of financial security shall not exceed 15% of the actual cost of
installation of said improvements.
(2) Homeowners' association. The restricted open space land and
associated facilities may be held in common ownership by a
nonprofit homeowners' association. If a homeowners' association is
formed it shall be governed according to the following regulations:
(a) The landowner or developer shall provide the Township with a
description of the organization, including its bylaws and
methods for maintaining open space, which shall be acceptable
to the Township Solicitor.
(b) The organization is to be organized by the landowner or
developer and operating with financial subsidization by the
landowner or developer, if necessary, before the sale of any lots
within the development.
(c) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all
purchasers of dwelling units therein and their successors. The
conditions and timing of transferring control of the association
from developer to homeowners shall be identified.
(d) The association shall be responsible for maintenance and
insurance on common open space land, enforceable by liens
placed by the homeowners' association. Maintenance
obligations also may be enforced by the Township which may
place liens to recover its costs. Any governmental body with
jurisdiction in the area where the development is located may
place liens on the owners of the open space to collect unpaid
taxes.
(e) The members of the organization shall share equitably the
costs of maintaining and developing open space, in accordance
with procedures established by them. Shares shall be defined
within the association bylaws. If a member fails to pay his
prorata share, then a lien against an individual property may
be made in accordance with the provisions for same in the
bylaws of the organization. Association dues shall be
structured to provide for both annual operating costs and to
cover projected long-range costs relating to the repair of any
capital facilities (which shall be deposited in a sinking fund
reserved for just such purposes).
(f) The organization shall be responsible for maintenance of and
insurance and taxes on open space.
§ 210-276 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-276
196:945
(g) In the event of a proposed transfer, within the methods here
permitted, of common open space land by the homeowners'
association or of the assumption of maintenance of such land
by the Township, notice of such action shall be given to all
property owners within the development.
(h) The organization shall have or hire adequate staff to
administer common facilities and maintain the open space to
the satisfaction of the Board of Supervisors.
(i) The homeowners' association may lease open space lands to
any other qualified person or corporation for operation and
maintenance of such lands, but such a lease agreement shall
provide:
[1] That the residents of the development shall at all times
have access to open space lands contained therein (except
that access to land that is actively farmed shall be limited
to times of the year when the fields are fallow);
[2] That the common open space land to be leased shall be
maintained for the purposes set forth in this article; and
[3] That the operation of open space facilities may be for the
benefit of the residents only or may be open to the
residents of the Township, at the election of the developer
and/or homeowners' association, as the case may be.
(j) The lease shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Supervisors and any transfer or assignment of the lease shall
be further subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors.
Lease agreements so entered upon shall be recorded with the
Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County within 30 days of their
execution, and a copy of the recorded lease shall be filed with
the Township Secretary.
(k) Homeowners' association documentation demonstrating
compliance with the provisions herein shall be filed with the
final subdivision and land development plans. At the time of
preliminary plan submission, the applicant shall provide a draft
homeowners' association documentation with sufficient detail
to demonstrate feasible compliance with this section.
(3) Condominium agreement. The restricted open space land and
associated facilities may be held in common through the use of
condominium agreement(s) approved by the Board of Supervisors.
Such agreements shall be in conformance with the Uniform
Planned Community Act, as may be amended.294 All open space
land shall be held as common elements or limited common
elements. To the degree applicable, condominium agreement(s)
294. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101.
§ 210-276 CONCORD CODE § 210-276
196:946
shall comply with the provisions of § 210-276B(2) for homeowners'
associations. Condominium agreement(s) shall be filed with the
final subdivision and land development plans. At the time of
preliminary plan submission, applicant shall provide draft
condominium agreement(s) with sufficient detail to demonstrate
feasible compliance with this section.
(4) Dedication of easements. The Township may, but shall not be
required to, accept easements for public use of any portion of open
space land, the title of which is to remain in common ownership by
condominium or homeowners' association, provided that:
(a) Such land is accessible to the residents of the Township.
(b) There is no cost of acquisition other than any costs incidental
to the transfer of ownership, such as title insurance.
(c) A satisfactory maintenance agreement is reached between the
developer, condominium or homeowners' association and the
Township.
(5) Transfer to a private conservation organization. With permission of
the Township, the landowner or developer may transfer either the
fee simple title with appropriate deed restrictions running in favor
of the Township or the development rights or easements to a
private, nonprofit organization among whose purposes is to
conserve open space land, provided that:
(a) The organization is acceptable to the Township and is a bona
fide conservation organization with perpetual existence.
(b) The organization is chartered under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to administer deed restrictions
limiting eventual disposition of such property for the purposes
stated in its articles of Incorporation.
(c) The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper
reverter or retransfer in the event that the organization
becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its
functions.
(d) A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Township is
entered into by the landowner or developer and the
organization.
(6) In the event of any proposed transfer of open space within the
methods permitted in this section or of the assumption of
maintenance of open space land by the Township as hereinafter
provided, notice of such action shall be given to all affected
property owners.
C. In the event that the organization established to own and maintain open
space or any successor organization shall at any time after designation
§ 210-276 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-276
196:947
fail to maintain the open space in reasonable order and condition
in accordance with any and all approved plans, the Township may
serve written notice upon such organization or upon the residents and
owners setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to
maintain the open space in reasonable condition, and said notice shall
include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within
30 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon
which shall be held within 14 days of the notice.
(1) At such hearing the Township may modify the terms of the original
notice as to the deficiencies and may give an extension of the time
within which they shall be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in the
original notice or in the modifications thereof shall not be cured
within said 30 days or any extension thereof, the Township, in order
to preserve the taxable values of the properties and to prevent the
open space from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said
open space and maintain the same for a period of one year at the
expense of the organization. The cost of any such maintenance
shall be borne by the owners of lots within the development from
which the open space was derived. Said entry and maintenance
shall not vest in the public any rights to use the open space except
when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by the
residents and owners.
(2) Before the expiration of said year, the Township shall, upon its
initiative or upon the request of the organization responsible for
the maintenance of the open space, call a public hearing upon
notice to such organization or to the residents and owners of the
project to show cause why such maintenance by the Township shall
not, at the election of the Township, continue for a succeeding year.
If the Township shall determine that such organization is ready and
able to maintain said open space in reasonable condition, the
Township shall cease to maintain said open space at the end of said
year. If the Township shall determine such organization is not ready
and able to maintain said open space in a reasonable condition, the
Township may, in its discretion, continue to maintain said open
space during the next succeeding year and subject to a similar
hearing and determination in each year thereafter. The decision of
the Township in any such case shall constitute a full administrative.
decision subject to judicial review at the expense of the
homeowners' association.
(3) The cost of such maintenance by the Township shall be assessed
ratably against the properties within the project that have a right of
enjoyment of the open space and shall become a municipal lien on
said properties. The Township, at the time of entering upon said
open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of
such lien in the office of Judicial Support of Delaware County upon
the properties affected.
§ 210-276 CONCORD CODE § 210-276
196:948
§ 210-277. (Reserved)
D. The landowner of any subdivision or land development which is
proposed to contain open space or common open space shall arrange
with the Delaware County Board of Assessment, when applicable, a
method of assessment of the open space which will allocate to each tax
parcel in the subdivision a share of the total assessment for such open
space. Where this alternative is to be utilized, the method of allocation
shall be approved by the Board of Supervisors.
§ 210-276 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-277
196:949

ARTICLE XXXIII
Continuing Care Retirement Community Overlay District
[Added 12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 285]
§ 210-278. Purpose; legislative intent.
The Continuing Care Retirement Community Overlay District is designed to
promote a campus-setting continuing care retirement community (CCRC)
use on tracts of a minimum of 75 acres, as an overlay to certain portions
of the PIP Planned Industrial Park District and incorporating a small area
of the adjacent R-2 Residence District. Section 605 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code permits additional classifications to be made
within any district for the purpose of making transitional provisions at and
near boundaries of districts [Section 605(1)] and for the regulation of uses
and structures at, along or near major thoroughfares, their intersections
and interchanges and transportation arteries [Section 605(2)(i)]. The
Township of Concord has determined that there exists a need within the
Township to provide for a campus-setting CCRC use, consisting of mixeduse
housing and associated services for seniors, with integrated
independent apartment living, assisted living and skilled nursing
alternatives, in close proximity to the retail and commercial uses located
along Route 1 and to major transportation thoroughfares such as Route
1 and Route 322, in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of
the community, including the easing of traffic congestion along arterial
roads and the providing of housing and health-care alternatives for seniors,
and to locate such CCRCs as a transitional use between the significantly
higher-density commercial and retail uses along Route 1 and the nearby
low-density residential housing. The overlay district is designed to provide
regulations and controls relative to size, density and other area and bulk
requirements.
§ 210-279. CCRC use regulations.
Buildings and lots may be used or occupied for the following uses:
§ 210-280. Yard and area regulations.
A. Uses permitted by right:
(1) Continuing care retirement community (CCRC).
(2) CCRC independent living units.
(3) CCRC assisted living facilities.
(4) CCRC skilled care nursing facilities.
B. Accessory uses:
(1) CCRC accessory uses.
(2) Off-street parking and loading.
§ 210-278 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-280
196:951
A. Continuing care retirement community (CCRC). The regulations set
forth in this § 210-280 shall govern continuing care retirement
community (CCRC) use and development. The provisions of Article
XVIII, PIP - Planned Industrial Park District and Article IV, R-2
Residence District, shall not apply to continuing care retirement
community (CCRC) use and development.
(1) Height requirements: The maximum height of any building of a
continuing care retirement community (CCRC) shall be 70 feet;
provided, however, that no building shall be taller than 45 feet or
four stories, unless such building is set back at least 300 feet from
the cartway of any public streets other than Route 1, Route 202,
Route 322, Brinton Lake Road or any public street or roadway on
which the CCRC has direct access.
(2) Yard, area and density requirements:
(a) Minimum tract size: 75 acres. Calculation of tract size for
purposes of determining compliance with minimum tract size
requirements shall include the gross lot area of the tract,
including but not limited to areas of easement, areas of steep
slope and very steep slope, areas of floodway and floodplain
and floodprone areas (hereinafter "gross tract size"). The
minimum tract size for development of a CCRC shall not
prevent the development from proceeding in sections or
stages.
(b) Density. The maximum permitted density in a CCRC shall be 18
CCRC independent living units per gross acre of the gross tract
size, calculated on a minimum of 75 acres. In addition to and in
conjunction with the CCRC independent living units, the CCRC
may also contain up to 0.25 units or beds in the CCRC assisted
living facilities and the CCRC skilled nursing facilities for each
approved CCRC independent living unit in the CCRC.
(c) Impervious coverage. CCRCs shall be designed so that total
impervious coverage shall not exceed 40% of the gross tract
size.
(d) Maximum building coverage. CCRCs shall be designed so that
building coverage shall not exceed 15% of the gross tract size.
(e) Minimum front yard: 55 feet.
(f) Minimum side yard: 85 feet.
(g) Minimum rear yard: 120 feet.
(h) Special setback applicable to buildings containing residential
units adjacent to Township roads. All buildings containing
CCRC independent living units shall be set back at least 200
feet from the cartway of any public road other than U.S. Route
§ 210-280 CONCORD CODE § 210-280
196:952
§ 210-281. Sign regulations.
All campus signs are subject to the approval of the Board of Supervisors at
the time of final plan approval.
1, Route 322, Brinton Lake Road or any public street or
roadway on which the CCRC has direct access.
(3) Special design standards; open space. Special conditions. The
following design criteria shall apply to CCRCs, and to the extent a
particular matter is not addressed specifically below, CCRCs shall
also be subject to other standards generally applicable to all zoning
districts pursuant to other provisions of the Concord Township
Zoning and/or Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance:
(a) Distance between buildings. All principal building structures
shall be set back at least 25 feet from other principal
structures. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all buildings may
be connected by covered/enclosed walkways within the areas
separating principal buildings.
(b) Parking and loading requirements applicable to CCRC uses.
The total required minimum number of parking spaces shall be
1.1 parking spaces per CCRC independent living unit, which
requirement shall be inclusive of all staff, resident and visitor
parking and inclusive of CCRC assisted living facilities and
CCRC skilled care nursing facilities within the CCRC. The
required number of loading spaces shall be one per community
building over 40,000 square feet.
§ 210-280 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-281
196:953

ARTICLE XXXIV
RMO Route 202 Median Overlay District
[Added 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 344]
§ 210-282. Purpose; legislative intent.
The Route 202 Median Overlay District is designed to provide additional
opportunities for commercial development of properties located within the
median of Wilmington-West Chester Pike (U.S. Route 202, S.R. 202) where
Route 202 is physically divided by land and private property. The properties
subject to the Route 202 Median Overlay District are uniquely affected
because of their location between the northbound and southbound lanes of
Wilmington-West Chester Pike, a principal arterial highway in the Township,
and the impact that existing and required future rights-of-way for principal
arterial highways, as applied through the Code of Concord Township and
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation's rules and regulations,
have on the development potential of those properties. Provisions are made
for allowance of billboards, off-premises signs, and certain convenience
stores or mini-markets between northbound and southbound lanes of
Wilmington-West Chester Pike, consistent with the safety of the traveling
public and the health and welfare of adjacent property owners.
§ 210-283. Use regulations.
A building may be erected or used, and a lot may be used or occupied, for
any one or a combination of the following uses and no other, and subject
to § 210-224 dealing with prohibited uses and performance standards,
provided that the use and conversion of any existing dwelling shall comply
with the provisions of Article XXV, Chapter 210, § 210-225, and provided
that the demolition of, or special exception or conditional use for, an historic
resource shown on the Historic Resources Map, or any subdivision, land
development or construction activity within 300 feet of an historic resource
shall be subject to the provisions of Article XIXA, Chapter 210, Historic
Preservation, relating to historic preservation, and further provided that the
use shall comply with the provisions of Article XX, Chapter 210, Floodplain
Conservation District.
A. Uses by right in Route 202 Median Overlay District.
(1) The principal uses permitted by right in the underlying zoning
district(s) applicable to the property shall be permitted by right.
(2) Billboards and off-premises signs in accordance with standards and
criteria set forth in § 210-287.
B. Accessory uses.
(1) The accessory uses permitted in the underlying zoning district(s)
applicable to the property shall be permitted as set forth in the
underlying zoning district(s).
§ 210-282 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-283
196:955
§ 210-284. Yard and area regulations.
C. Uses by special exception, when authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
(1) The uses permitted by special exception in the underlying zoning
district(s) applicable to the property shall be permitted by special
exception.
D. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article XXVII, Chapter
210.
(1) Convenience store or mini-market of 4,000 square feet or more,
including the sale of gasoline as an accessory use, provided:
(a) Said use is designed for commercial goods and hours of
operation which encourage short stops for specific items
rather than extensive shopping trips;
(b) The lot on which said use is established shall not be less than
three acres in size unless an applicant can demonstrate that:
[1] Its property has frontage on two principal arterial
highways situated within the Township, which require a
greater allocation of right-of-way than other street
classifications in the Township;
[2] The maximum total impervious coverage, maximum total
building coverage, minimum structure setbacks and
parking of the underlying zoning district(s) applicable to
the property can be met; and
[3] Safe and efficient access to the property can be provided,
in which case the lot area may be reduced to not less than
1.25 acres in size; and
(c) The lot on which such use is established shall be located at a
highway intersection with the lot containing frontage on two
highways classified as principal arterial highways and/or
collector highways by Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land
Development.
A. The calculation of lot area and net lot area shall be inclusive of any
existing road rights-of-way and additional road rights-of-way required
by the Code of Concord Township, Chapter 160, Subdivision and Land
Development, or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
B. The minimum lot area, the minimum lot width, total impervious
coverage, total building area coverage, minimum structure setback and
height applicable to the use as set forth in the underlying zoning
district(s) applicable to the property, as modified by this Article XXXIV,
shall apply.
§ 210-283 CONCORD CODE § 210-285
196:956
§ 210-285. Special development regulations.
Special development regulations are as follows:
§ 210-286. Landscaping regulations.
Landscaping regulations are as follows:
§ 210-287. Sign regulations.
A. The special requirements prescribed for the underlying zoning
district(s) applicable to the property shall apply.
A. See Article XXI of Chapter 210. The requirements of the underlying
zoning district(s) applicable to the property shall apply.
A. Sign regulation shall be controlled by Article XIII of Chapter 210,
except for billboards and off-premises signs which shall be controlled by
the following:
(1) Billboards and off-premises signs shall not be permitted except
within the Route 202 Median Overlay District in areas only
between the northbound and southbound lanes of Wilmington-West
Chester Pike and shall meet the following criteria and be required
to adhere to the following regulations:
(a) Only one billboard or off-premises sign may be erected,
constructed or maintained on any premises.
(b) All billboards or off-premises signs shall be demonstrated to be
oriented toward the road upon which the billboard or offpremises
sign fronts or faces to cause the least impact upon
neighboring properties.
(c) Billboards or off-premises signs shall be constructed in
accordance with all applicable Township codes and
regulations.
(d) The sign face of a billboard or off-premises sign shall not
exceed 12 feet in height and 42 feet in length.
(e) Billboards or off-premises signs shall have a maximum sign
face area of 490 square feet.
(f) The maximum height of the highest point of a billboard or offpremises
sign, or any part thereof, including its support
structure, shall not exceed 42 feet, as measured from the grade
of the road surface to which the sign is intended to be viewed
immediately adjacent to the base of the sign.
(g) The bottom edge of any billboard or off-premises sign face may
not be located higher than 20 feet above the final grade of the
road surface from which the sign is intended to be viewed.
§ 210-285 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-287
196:957
(h) Billboards or off-premises signs may have two sign faces if both
faces would be readily viewable to traffic traveling in multiple
directions.
(i) No billboard or off-premises sign may be closer than 1,250 feet
to any other billboard or off-premises sign on either the same
or opposite side of the street, as measured between the closest
points of each sign, including its supporting structure. This
includes billboards and off-premises signs located in other
townships and municipalities.
(j) No billboard or off-premises sign shall be located within 250
feet of the center of any intersection of two or more streets, as
measured horizontally from the nearest edge of the sign face to
the center of the intersection.
(k) No billboard or off-premises sign shall be located within 200
linear feet of any residential zoning district, as measured
horizontally in all directions from the nearest edge of the sign
face. This includes residential zoning districts located in other
townships and municipalities.
(l) The nearest part of a billboard or off-premises sign that is
closest to the edge of the right-of-way to which the billboard or
off-premises sign is intended to be viewed from shall be no
further than 20 feet from the ultimate right-of-way.
(m) A billboard or off-premises sign face shall be independently
supported and have vertical supports of metal, which are
galvanized or otherwise treated to prevent rust and corrosion.
(n) A billboard or off-premises sign structure shall be capable of
withstanding a minimum wind load of 100 miles per hour or the
wind load standard as set forth in the ICC Building Code as
currently adopted, whichever is greater.
(o) The entire base of a billboard or off-premises sign structure
shall be permanently landscaped with suitable shrubbery and/
or bushes of minimum height of five feet placed in such a
manner as to screen the foundation of the structure. A
landscaping plan shall be submitted for review by the
Township landscaping consultant and approval by the Code
Enforcement Officer as part of the billboard or off-premises
sign permit application. The owner shall maintain said
landscaping in an attractive and healthy manner in accordance
with accepted conservation practices. Landscaping shall form
a base and backdrop to a monopole billboard or off-premises
sign when practical.
(p) No bare cuts are permitted on a hillside, and all cuts or fills are
to be permanently seeded or planted.
§ 210-287 CONCORD CODE § 210-287
196:958
(q) External illumination of any billboard or off-premises sign face
shall be shielded to prevent the light source from being seen
from any direction.
(r) No illumination of any billboard or off-premises sign shall
occur between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(s) billboards or off-premises signs are an additional principal use
that is permitted regardless of whether there is an existing
principal use on the same lot.
(2) Automatic changeable copy sign face display.
(a) Automatic changeable copy sign is a sign face type whose
content may be changed by electronic process through the use
of intermittent light(s), including light-emitting diodes (LED),
liquid crystal display, and plasma image display. Sign faces
whose copy changes through the physical movement of
mechanical parts shall not be permitted.
(b) Automatic changeable copy signs shall not change sign face
display or copy more frequently than once every six seconds.
(c) The automatic changeable copy sign face display shall not
fade, twinkle, scroll, dissolve, increase in intensity or include
moving pictures or animation.
(d) The change of any automatic changeable copy sign face display
shall occur uniformly across the face of the sign and shall occur
in one second or less.
(e) Flashing, sudden bursts of light, animation, noise, streaming
video, text or copy movement is prohibited.
(f) An automatic changeable copy sign face display shall have a
maximum nits level of 7,500 nits; provided that the brightness
of the sign face shall not exceed 0.3 footcandles of light above
the normal ambient light levels. The sign luminance shall be
determined by a footcandle metering device held at a height of
five feet and aimed toward the sign face from a distance of 250
feet from a location perpendicular to the sign face center as a
white screen as seen in plain view. Automatic changeable copy
sign faces shall utilize ambient light sensors to automatically
reduce the intensity of the LED illumination during periods of
darkness.
(g) Billboards or off-premises sign structures supporting
automatic changeable copy sign faces are only permitted
where they are the only principal use on the lot.
(h) Billboards or off-premises sign structures supporting
automatic changeable copy sign faces shall only be
constructed on lots having a minimum size of one-half acre.
§ 210-287 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-287
196:959
(i) Billboards or off-premises sign structures supporting
automatic changeable copy sign faces shall only be
constructed on lots having a minimum street frontage of 550
linear feet along the roadway from which the sign is intended
to be visible.
(j) Billboards or off-premise signs that support automatic
changeable copy sign faces shall not be located within 500 feet
of any residential zoning district. This includes residential
zoning districts located in other adjacent municipalities.
(k) No internal illumination or lighting of any changeable copy
sign face shall occur between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(3) Installation and maintenance of billboards and off-premises signs.
(a) A permit application for a billboard or off-premises sign shall
be accompanied by a site plan addressing all of the applicable
requirements as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance, as
amended, pertaining to a billboard or off-premises sign.
(b) An application for a billboard or off-premises sign shall be
accompanied by certification, under seal and signature by a
professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, that the plan conforms with the applicable
requirements of the Concord Township Zoning Code and that
the existence of the off-premises sign or billboard, as proposed,
shall meet all construction standards as set forth in the
Township building codes.
(c) No billboard or off-premises sign may be located on a roof of
any building.
(d) Any illumination of a billboard or off-premises sign shall not
directly or indirectly spill over, encroach or trespass upon
adjacent properties and roadways or the night sky.
(e) Any billboard or off-premises sign structure shall be entirely
repainted at a minimum of once every five years.
(f) Every three years, the owner of any billboard or off-premises
sign structure shall have a structural inspection made of the
sign structure by a qualified Pennsylvania-registered structural
engineer and shall provide the Township with a certificate from
the engineer or architect certifying that the sign structure is
structurally sound.
(g) Annual inspections of a billboard or off-premises sign shall be
conducted by the Township Code Enforcement Officer to
determine compliance, and billboards or off-premises signs
found to be in violation shall be brought into compliance within
30 days of notice.
§ 210-287 CONCORD CODE § 210-287
196:960
§ 210-288. through § 210-289. (Reserved)
(h) Any abandoned billboard or off-premises sign must be removed
within 30 days after notice. A billboard or off-premises sign is
considered to be abandoned if no advertising copy has been
displayed on the billboard for one year and the owner of the
billboard has not expressed their written intent to the
Township to continue to advertise on the billboard after
nonusage of the billboard for one year; or the billboard
structure or any part thereof has been removed by the
operator without the intention to replace the billboard or offpremises
sign. If the owner fails to remove an abandoned sign
or any supporting structures within 30 days, the Township may
remove the sign and/or shrubs at the owner's expense. A bond
or escrow of $50,000 will be posted at the time the sign
application is granted to insure that adequate funds are
available for removal of the sign and restoration of the
property.
§ 210-287 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-288
196:961

ARTICLE XXXV
Accessory Buildings
[Added 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 350]
§ 210-290. Accessory buildings in residential districts.
The following regulations shall be observed in all residential districts in
Concord Township, including the R-1, R-2, R2-D, R-3, R-4, R-A Residential,
R-AH Residential, R-MHD, R-PRD-1, R-PRD-2 and R-PRD-3 districts where
applicable.
§ 210-291. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BATHROOM — A room containing a lavatory sink and a toilet.
FULL-USE BATHROOM — A bathroom containing a shower and/or tub
along with a lavatory sink and toilet.
LOFT — An intermediate platform area between the main floor and the
roof/ceiling area typically converted for storage, open to the floor below,
reachable from within by a ladder or stairs, which serves as an extra floor
area in a high-ceilinged structure.
§ 210-292. Accessory buildings on residential properties.
A. A proposed garage or accessory structure shall be in keeping with the
character of the primary residence and the surrounding neighborhood.
B. No accessory building of any kind, other than a private garage, shall
exceed one story or 12 feet in height. Private garages may not exceed
one story or 15 feet in height from the floor/slab to the highest point of
the roof for flat roofs, or to the deck of mansard roofs. The following
height limitations shall apply to gable, hip and gambrel roofs:
(1) A garage with a total width of 18 feet or less shall not exceed 15
feet in height as measured from the floor/slab to the top of the
ridge.
(2) A garage with a width exceeding 18 feet shall be permitted to
increase the height of the garage up to a maximum of 18 feet,
provided that the garage shall not exceed one story in height, but
may contain a loft area not exceeding 30% of the base floor area.
(3) No garage or accessory building shall exceed the height of the
existing residence.
(4) No bathroom or no full-use bathroom shall be permitted.
§ 210-290 WATER CONSERVATION § 210-292
196:963
§ 210-293. Garages and other accessory buildings.
(5) A garage in excess of 18 feet in height will be permitted only when
authorized as a conditional use by the Board of Supervisors where
the proposed garage is:
(a) Accessory to a permitted church, school, or other
nonresidential building, provided that the lot area, setbacks,
building and impervious surface regulations of the underlying
district have all been met, in the same regard as with the
principal use structure.
A. A proposed garage or accessory structure shall be in keeping with the
character of the primary residence and the surrounding neighborhood.
B. No private garage or other accessory structure shall be erected or
placed within a front yard, and all such structures must be at least 10
feet farther back from the front street line than the rearmost portion of
the main residence.
C. A garage door may not exceed eight feet in height and 16 feet in width.
D. Private garages larger than 700 square feet shall not be permitted in
any residential district and in no event shall any private garages exceed
75% of the first floor area of the residence for which the garage is an
accessory use.
E. No garage or accessory building shall be used at any time as part of a
permitted home occupation or for overnight accommodations or
sleeping quarters.
F. No new road openings may be made in conjunction with any new
accessory structure.
§ 210-292 CONCORD CODE § 210-293
196:964
Chapter 214
ZONING USE APPROVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult entertainment — See Ch. 70.
Building construction — See Ch. 87.
Fire hydrant districts — See Ch. 104.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 148.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 166.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A225.
§ 214-1. Definitions.
The term "building," as used in this chapter, shall include any structure
which is intended for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattels or property of any kind.
§ 214-2. Determination of permitted uses.
Prior to the occupancy, use or change in use of land and prior to the
occupancy, use or change in use of any building or portion thereof, there
shall be a determination by the Concord Township Zoning Officer that the
intended use of the land and/or building or portion thereof is a permitted
use pursuant to the terms and provisions of Chapter 210, Zoning, as
amended from time to time, as regards use regulations, yard, area and
height regulations, special regulations, special development regulations,
landscaping regulations, sign regulations, off-street parking and loading
requirements, performance requirements and waste storage and disposal
requirements; provided, however, that this chapter shall not apply to any
land or building located within any residential zoning district pursuant to
Chapter 210, Zoning, as amended from time to time.
§ 214-3. Issuance of zoning use approval.
A. Upon written request by the owner of any land or building and the
payment of the required fee, the Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning use
approval for any land or building or portion thereof which complies with
the requirement of § 214-2 of this chapter.
B. All written requests for zoning use approval shall be accompanied by a
permit fee in the amount as set forth from time to time by resolution of
the Board of Supervisors.295
C. A zoning use approval required by this chapter shall be in addition to
any and all other approvals required by the ordinances of the Township
295. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 210-293 ZONING USE APPROVAL § 214-3
214:965
§ 214-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-3-1996 by Ord. No.
206]
Appendix
Chapter A225
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
Zoning — See Ch. 210.
Zoning use approval — See Ch. 214.
§ A225-1. Franchise.296
In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the terms,
conditions and reservations hereinafter specified, the Board of Supervisors
of the Township of Concord, hereinafter referred to as "township," grants
a nonexclusive franchise to Suburban Cable TV Co., hereinafter referred to
as "company," to install, construct, own, operate and maintain a community
antenna cable television system, said entire system to have two-way
transmission capabilities as hereinafter set forth, and to erect, maintain
and operate television transmission and distribution facilities and additions
thereto in, under, over, along, across and upon the streets, lanes, avenues,
of Concord prior to the occupancy, use or change in use of any land or
building or portion thereof.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or who
permits the violation of any provision of this chapter shall pay a fine of
$600.
B. Each violation for each separate day and each violation of any provision
of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by Concord Township, pay the fine prescribed
by this chapter, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees,
incurred by Concord Township.
D. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the Township
Manager, Zoning Officer, Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector or Fire
Marshal, as appropriate, who shall follow the enforcement procedure
set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties.
296. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 214-3 CONCORD CODE § A225-1
A225:966
sidewalks, alleys, bridges and other public places in the Township of
Concord, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, for the purpose of the
transmission and distribution of audio and visual impulses and television
energy in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States
of America and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, appropriate agencies
and the Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations and the
ordinances and regulations of the Township of Concord now in effect or
hereafter enacted. The company shall observe the following conditions and
terms.
A. No poles or wires shall be erected, constructed or maintained by the
company along public highways which contain neither aerial telephone
nor aerial electric facilities or from which both aerial telephone and
aerial electric facilities are hereafter removed. Where all other utilities
are underground, the company's cable facilities shall be placed
underground.
B. Where the wires and other aerial facilities of the company are erected,
constructed, maintained or operated along or over public highways
which contain an aerial electric or telephone pole line or a joint-use
electric and telephone pole line, the wires and other facilities of the
company shall be supported by attachment to such pole line, but
nothing in this paragraph shall relieve the company of the duty of
securing the consent of such attachment of the owner of such pole line.
C. Poles, ducts and other facilities of the company shall be so erected,
constructed and maintained as not to interfere with the traffic over the
public highways. No new poles shall be erected without prior approval
of the Township of Concord, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld. No new poles of the company shall be located upon private
property and no damage shall be inflicted to private property without
the knowledge and consent of the private property owner.
D. Poles, lines, cables, ducts and other facilities of the company shall be
removed by the company when no longer used or useful for their
intended purpose or whenever required by the township in connection
with any public improvements or other reasonable cause at the the
company's expense.
E. Any public highways, sidewalks and abutting property disturbed or
damaged in the erection, construction, maintenance or operation of the
facilities of the company shall be promptly repaired by the company to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Township Engineer.
F. The company's rights and privileges shall be subordinated to any prior
lawful use or occupancy of the streets or other public property and shall
be so exercised as not to interfere with existing improvements or with
new improvements the township may deem proper to make or to hinder
or obstruct the lawful use of the streets, alleys, bridges or other public
property. In the event that any equipment or facilities of the company
shall so interfere with any such existing improvement or improvement
§ A225-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A225-1
A225:967
§ A225-2. Commencement of work.
The company shall commence installation of its equipment and facilities
within the township within 90 days of the effective date of this ordinance
and shall substantially complete the installation of its equipment and
facilities within the township within 12 months thereafter. An energized
trunk cable shall be extended to at least 20% of the franchised area within
four months of the effective date of this ordinance and shall be extended
to an additional 20% of the franchised area within each two month period
thereafter, with the entire franchised area being so extended to all township
residents within 12 months of the effective date of this ordinance.
§ A225-3. Term.
The duration of the rights, privileges and authorities hereby granted shall
be 15 years from the date of adoption of this ordinance. The company shall
have the option of extending this franchise for an additional period of five
intended to be made by the township, the company shall, upon notice
from township, forthwith relocate said equipment and facilities at the
company's expense so as to eliminate said interference.
G. Construction and maintenance of the transmission distribution system
shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical
Safety Code, Sixth Edition, or any amendments or revisions thereof and
in compliance with any applicable rules, regulations or orders now in
effect or hereafter issued by any federal or state commission or any
other public authority having jurisdiction.
H. All installations of equipment shall be durable and of a permanent
nature and shall be installed in accordance with good engineering
practices as outlined by the National Bureau of Standards, American
Institute of Electrical Engineers and American Society of Mechanical
Engineers. The company shall comply with all federal and state laws
and ordinances and regulations of the township now existing or
hereafter enacted and so as not to interfere with the rights of the public
of individual property owners and so as not to unduly interfere with the
rights of the public during the construction, repair or removal of its
equipment.
I. In the installation of its equipment and the maintenance thereof and in
the operation of its business, the company shall comply with all
requirements of the township ordinances, resolutions, rules and
regulations heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. The
township shall have the right, at the expense of the company, to employ
experts of its selection to determine the company's compliance with the
installation and maintenance requirements of this ordinance.
J. The granting of the franchise by this ordinance does not eliminate the
necessity for the company to secure any other franchise, license or
permit which may be required by law or ordinance or regulation.
§ A225-1 CONCORD CODE § A225-3
A225:968
years upon application by the company not later than one year prior to the
expiration date of the initial fifteen-year franchise, unless the township shall
have given to the company at least one year's written notice of its intent
not to renew this franchise. The renewal of this franchise is specifically
conditioned upon review and approval by the Township of Concord at a
public proceeding of the company's qualifications and performance, the
adequacy of the franchise provisions and its consistency with the rules
and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and any other
regulatory body.
§ A225-4. Acceptance of franchise.
This franchise is conditioned and contingent upon the company filing with
the township its unconditional acceptance of this franchise as set forth in
this ordinance and the company's promise to comply with and abide by all
the provisions, terms and conditions of this ordinance and the execution
by the company of a franchise agreement acceptable to the township. Such
acceptance and promise and agreement shall be in writing, duly executed
and sworn to by and on behalf of the company before a notary public or
other officer authorized by law to administer oaths and delivered to the
Secretary of the township within 30 days after passage of this ordinance.
§ A225-5. Liability and indemnification.
A. The company shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the township,
its agents, officers, servants and employees from and against any and
all costs, expenses (including reasonable counsel fees), liabilities,
losses, damages, suits, actions, fines, penalties, claims or demands of
any kind asserted by or on behalf of any person or governmental agency
or authority arising out of or in any way connected with any of the
following, and the township, its agents, servants, officers and
employees shall not be liable to the company on account of any of the
following:
(1) Any failure by the company to abide by, keep or perform any of the
terms, conditions or provisions of this franchise.
(2) Any failure by the company to comply with any statutes,
ordinances, regulations or orders of any governmental authority.
(3) Any bodily injury (including death) or property damage arising out
of the installation, operation or maintenance of the equipment or
the facilities of the company or out of the conduct of its community
antenna cable television system.
(4) Any act or activity relating to the granting of this franchise to the
company or to the operations conducted thereunder.
(5) The granting of this franchise.
B. In connection with any suit or other proceeding, in which the township,
its agents, servants, officers and employees shall be made a part,
§ A225-3 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A225-5
A225:969
involving this franchise or any act, omissions or activity conducted
thereunder or relating thereto and which may have any direct or
indirect effect upon the township, its agents, servants and employees,
the company, upon the written request of the township, shall appear in
and defend such suit on behalf of the township, its agents, servants and
employees and shall bear all of the costs and expenses relating thereto
and shall pay any verdict or judgment rendered or settlement arrived
at.
C. Insurance.
(1) The company shall provide and continuously maintain throughout
the term of this franchise and any renewals thereof general liability
insurance insuring the township and the company with regard to all
liabilities and contingencies mentioned in Subsection A herein in
the minimum amounts of:
(a) $800,000 for bodily injury or death to any one person.
(b) $500,000 for personal injury in any one single accident.
(c) $200,000 property damage for any one single accident.
(d) Excess liability coverage, either straight excess or umbrella
excess, covering excess of Subsection C(1)(a), (b) and (c)
above, to be maintained in force so that the total coverage
available under each of the aforementioned subsections,
including this subsection, is not less than $1,000,000 for any
one occurrence and $1,000,000 in the aggregate per annum
for personal injury and $1,000,000 for any one occurrence and
$1,000,000 in the aggregate per annum for property damage
and $1,000,000 for any one occurrence and $1,000,000 in the
aggregate per annum for copyright infringement.
(2) All such policies shall provide, to the extent obtainable, that
coverage shall not be reduced or canceled without 30 days prior
written notice to the township.
(3) The township shall have the right, from time to time, to employ an
Insurance Consultant. The policies of insurance required by this
section shall be in such amounts and contain such provisions as
comply with the requirements of this section or as shall have been
recommended, in writing, by the Insurance Consultant, if higher.
D. The company shall maintain throughout the term of this franchise a
performance bond in favor of the township, with a good and sufficient
surety approved by the township, in the sum of $50,000 conditioned
upon the company's well and truly performing its several obligations as
set forth in this franchise and providing that in the event of any failure
by the company to so perform, the township may proceed against the
surety either to obtain proper performance of such obligations of the
§ A225-5 CONCORD CODE § A225-5
A225:970
§ A225-6. Operation and maintenance of system.
§ A225-7. Special service.
The company agrees and, upon request of the township or the institution
involved, shall extend without charge one primary or standard line and
monthly service to each fire station, police station, public school, private
school, parochial school, public library, municipal building and such public
auditorium and institutions as are requested by the township in the
township. Such service shall consist of one television outlet within the
company or to be recompensed for the failure of the company to render
such proper performance.
E. The insurance policies and bond obtained by the company in
compliance with this section shall be issued by responsible insurance or
fidelity bonding companies, acceptable to the township and any
Township Insurance Consultant qualified to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and qualified under the laws of the
commonwealth to assume risks covered by such policies or bond, and
shall be nonassessable and must be approved by the township, which
approval shall not unreasonably be withheld. Such insurance policies
and bond shall be filed and maintained with the township during the
term of this franchise.
F. Neither the provisions of this section nor any bond accepted by the
township pursuant thereto shall be construed as excusing faithful
performance by the company or as otherwise limiting the liability of the
company under its franchise.
A. The company shall so operate its equipment and facilities as to produce
a television picture that is undistorted, free from ghost images and
accompanied with proper sound and as good as the state of the art
permits. The company shall transmit signals of adequate strength to
produce said pictures and sound at all home outlets without interfering
with other electrical or electronic systems or equipment or with
television reception in existence in the area.
B. The company shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and
interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall
occur during minimum use of the system. Upon receipt of a complaint of
the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters, the
company shall promptly investigate such complaints. Where possible,
the company shall investigate such complaints within 24 hours of their
receipt. Resolution of such service complaints shall be made promptly.
For the purpose of investigation and resolution of regular service
complaints, the company shall maintain an agent or a local business
office convenient to the township and in operation during normal
business hours. In addition, the company shall maintain a toll-free
business telephone for the receipt of complaints and requests for
repairs or adjustment.
§ A225-5 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A225-7
A225:971
building or, in the case of a group of buildings, within the main building of
the group, providing service to one television receiver. The company shall
not be required to install additional outlets at its expense but shall, at the
request of the township, install such additional outlets or other facilities as
may be requested, and the township or the institution involved shall pay the
company on a time and material basis for such additional installation and
shall pay the company in accordance with its schedule of rates as set forth
in this ordinance for such additional service.
§ A225-8. Safety requirements.
A. In the use and occupation of the surfaces, subsurfaces, space above,
below and adjoining the streets, public ways and places of the township,
the company's equipment and plant and their construction, operation
and maintenance shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
following:
(1) The National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters, Sixth Edition, or any amendments or revisions
thereto.
(2) The Standards and Practices Code of the National Cable Television
Association; and
(3) Such applicable ordinances, codes, laws and regulations of the
Township of Concord, County of Delaware, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and the United States of America which are now in
effect or hereafter enacted.
B. The company's equipment and plant shall be kept and maintained in a
safe, suitable and substantial condition and in good order and repair so
as not to endanger the lives or interfere unreasonably with the rights of
persons or to cause physical damage to property or to interfere with
improvements the township may deem proper or to hinder or obstruct
unnecessarily pedestrian or vehicular traffic on streets, public ways and
places.
C. Where the township or a public utility serving the township desires to
make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the company
but agreement therefor with the company cannot be reached, the
township may require the company to permit such use for such
consideration and upon such terms as the township shall determine to
be just and reasonable if it is determined by the township that the use
would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere
with the company's operations.
D. The company shall, upon not less than 72 hours' advance notice,
temporarily raise, lower or relocate its wires and cables to permit the
moving of buildings or any other item of bulk, and the expenses
incurred by the company in such raising, lowering or relocation shall be
paid, in advance, by the person or concern requesting the same.
§ A225-7 CONCORD CODE § A225-8
A225:972
§ A225-9. New developments.
It shall be the policy of the township to liberally amend this franchise,
upon application of the company, when necessary to enable the company
to take advantage of any developments in the field of television and radio
signals which will afford it an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently
or economically service its customers; provided, however, that this section
shall not be construed to require the township to make any amendment or
to prohibit it from unilaterally changing its policy stated herein.
§ A225-10. Removal or abandonment of property of the company.
E. The company shall, at its own cost and expense, replace, restore or
repair any private property, street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved
area destroyed or damaged by the company or its agents, employees or
servants.
F. If at any time during the term of this franchise the township shall elect
to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public way or when required by reason of traffic conditions, public
safety, street vibration, freeway and street construction, installation of
sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines and tracks or any
other type of structure or improvements, when acting in a
governmental or proprietary capacity, the company, upon reasonable
notice by the township, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own
cost and expense.
A. In the event that:
(1) The use of any part or all of the community antenna cable television
system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 12
months;
(2) Such system or property has been installed in any street or public
places without complying with the requirements of this franchise;
or
(3) The franchise shall have been terminated, canceled or expired for
any reason, the company, upon notice, shall promptly remove from
the streets or public places all such property and poles of such
system other than any which the township may permit to be
abandoned in such place and shall also remove house distribution
cables and connections. In the event of such removal, the company
shall promptly restore the street or other areas from which such
property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the
township.
B. Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the company shall
promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of
such subscriber upon his request, without charge to the subscriber.
§ A225-8 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A225-11
A225:973
§ A225-11. Failure to perform street work.
The company shall abide by all applicable ordinances of the township
relating to street and sidewalk work and shall make application
accompanied by the required fees for permits to perform any and all such
work before commencing the same. Upon failure of the company to
complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this ordinance
to be done in any street within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction
of the township, the township may cause such work to be done, and the
company shall pay to the township the cost thereof, in the itemized amounts
reported by the township to the company, within 30 days after receipt of
such itemized report.
§ A225-12. Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited.
The company shall not, as to rates, charges, service, facilities, rules,
regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any preference to
advantage to any person nor subject any person to any prejudice or
disadvantage.
§ A225-13. Assignment/transfer of franchise.
§ A225-14. Filing and communications with regulatory agencies.
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the
company to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and
Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission
or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting community
antenna cable television operations authorized pursuant to this franchise
shall be made available to the township at the time of filing or receipt.
§ A225-15. Township rights in franchise.
A. The franchise right given to the company is a privilege to be held in
personal trust by Suburban Cable TV Co., the original grantee. It may
not be transferred, leased, assigned, sold or disposed of as a whole or in
part by forced sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise without the
prior consent of the township expressed by ordinance and, in such
event, only in accordance with such conditions as may be therein
prescribed. Such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.297
B. Any transfer attempted by the company in the absence of such consent
shall be ineffective, and the right given hereby shall thereby be
rendered null and void.
A. The right is hereby reserved to the township to adopt, in addition to the
provisions contained herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such
additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the
police power.
297. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ A225-11 CONCORD CODE § A225-15
A225:974
§ A225-16. Charges.
The company's charges for installation of all television cable connections
and services for all cable service shall be as established by the township
from time to time and specified in written agreement between the township
and the company.
§ A225-17. Fee to township.
B. The township shall have the right to inspect the books, records, maps,
plans and other like materials of the company at any time during
normal business hours.
C. The township shall have the right, during the term of this franchise, to
install and maintain, free of charge, upon the poles of the company, any
wire and pole fixtures necessary for a police/fire alarm system or
lighting fixtures or any other proper township purpose on the condition
that such wire and pole fixtures do not interfere with the community
antenna cable television operation of the company.
A. For the use of the street and other facilities of the township for the
operation of the community antenna television system and for the
municipal supervision thereof, the company shall pay to the township
annually during the term hereof that amount of money which is equal to
5% of the gross revenues received by said the company and derived
from the operation of the cable system under this franchise, including
any and all revenues from advertising and from shopping commissions.
The term "gross revenues" shall include any and all compensation and
other consideration received by the company from subscribers from the
sale of its services and facilities within the limits of the township and
shall include the original installation charges, reconnection charges,
service charges and charges for inspection, repair or modification of
installations and any and all revenues from advertising and from
shopping commissions. [Amended 6-7-1988 by Ord. No. 167]
B. The company shall file with the township, within 90 days after the
expiration of any fiscal year of the company during the term of this
franchise, a gross receipt report certified by an independent certified
public accountant, in accordance with Statement on Auditing Standards
#14, as issued by the Auditing Standards Executive Committee of the
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, showing in
appropriate detail the total gross receipts, as defined herein, of the
company, its successors or assigns during the preceding fiscal year. It
shall be the duty of the company to pay to the township within 15 days
after the time for filing such statements the balance of the specified
sum due for the fiscal year covered by such statement. The auditor of
the township or his authorized agent or other authorized representative
of the township shall have the authority to examine the books and
records of the company to verify the accuracy of the payments made
hereunder.
§ A225-15 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A225-17
A225:975
§ A225-18. Township's rights of intervention.
The company agrees not to oppose intervention by the township in any
suit or proceeding to which the company is a party and which may have a
substantial adverse effect on the company's operations within the township.
§ A225-19. Channels and programs.
The company shall provide a minimum service offering as follows:
C. The company shall file with the township quarterly reports within 15
days of the end of each quarter and a gross receipt report, certified by a
the company officer, showing in appropriate detail the total gross
receipts, as defined herein, of the company, its successors or assigns
during the preceding quarter. It shall be the duty of the company to pay
to the township within 15 days after the time for filing such statement a
sum equal to 90% of the fee due the township for that quarter, and each
successive quarterly fee shall include the 10% not paid the previous
quarter.
A. Channel capacity. The company shall construct a system with a
minimum channel capacity of 35 television channels and shall maintain
a plant having technical capacity for nonvoice return communications.
B. Signals to be carried. The company shall carry on its system the signals
of all stations significantly viewed in the Township of Concord,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, including all local network and
educational VHF stations and local UHF stations, and the signals of no
fewer than two distant independent commercial stations, as well as the
signals of such distant educational stations as may be feasible and
permitted under the rules and regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission.
C. Access channels. The company shall maintain all access channels as
required by the Federal Communications Commission. As a minimum,
however, unless prohibited by law, the company shall provide separate
public, governmental and educational channels to the township not to
be shared by others.
D. The company shall not engage in the sale or rental of television or radio
receivers, the furnishing of television or radio receiver repair service or
the solicitation or referral to particular persons or classes of persons for
such sale, rental or service. The facilities of the company shall not be
constructed or operated so as to necessitate the use of a receiver of a
unique type for optimum reception of signals. However, nothing
contained herein shall be interpreted to prohibit the use of converters
or descramblers on the community antenna television system.
E. Program origination. The grantee shall conduct program origination
cable casting as required by the Federal Communications Commission.
§ A225-17 CONCORD CODE § A225-20
A225:976
§ A225-20. Regulatory action.
§ A225-21. Right of revocation.
§ A225-22. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is a vital and necessary term or provision of the grant of the
franchise, and if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion
of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, then in such event the entire ordinance
shall be considered invalid and the franchise granted hereby shall be
automatically terminated.
A. The performance by the company hereunder is subject to the
limitations, restrictions or requirements now existing or which may
henceforth be imposed by law, rules or order of the Federal
Communications Commission or any other government, board,
commission or authority of any kind.
B. Should the Federal Communications Commission modify or amend the
provisions of Section 76.31 of its rules and regulations entitled
"Franchise Standards," such modifications or amendments shall be
incorporated into this franchise within one year of the adoption of the
modification or amendment.
A. The township shall have the right to rescind or revoke the rights herein
granted upon any violation by the company of any of the obligations and
requirements contained herein after written notice by the township to
the company.
(1) Such written notice to the company shall specify the manner in
which the company is in violation, failure or default with respect to
the franchise.
(2) The notice given by the township shall give the company a
specified, reasonable amount of time within which to correct
violation, failure or default, but in no event shall the time period be
less than 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice to the
company.
B. The township shall have the right to rescind or revoke the rights herein
granted in the event that the company becomes insolvent, unable or
unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged a bankrupt.
C. The company agrees that it does hereby release the township from any
and all claims the company might have against the township by reason
of the rescission or revocation of this franchise.
§ A225-20 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A225-23
A225:977
§ A225-23. Implementation of ordinance.
The township and the proper officers of said township and the departments
and bureaus of the township shall issue to the company, in the name of the
township, all permits necessary or convenient to evidence the grant of the
franchise herein and to implement the provisions of this ordinance.
§ A225-24. Permits.
The company shall make application to the township and pay all fees for any
and all street work permits as required by township ordinances.
§ A225-25. Certification.
The company shall supply the township annually with a letter signed by
the president of the company, certifying compliance with Federal
Communications Commission regulations and with this ordinance.
§ A225-26. Effective date.
This ordinance and the rights granted to the company hereunder shall
become effective upon the execution of a written agreement by and between
Concord Township and the franchisee providing for the implementation of
the provisions of this ordinance.
§ A225-27. Ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
218 10-7-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
219 1-5-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
220 1-5-1998 Taxation amendment Ch. 170, Art. IV
221 1-5-1998 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. 1
222 3-3-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
223 7-7-1998 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 160
224 9-1-1998 Building construction Ch. 82
§ A225-23 CONCORD CODE § DL-1
A225:978
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
225 10-13-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
226 10-13-1998 Zoning Map amendment NCM
227 12-1-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
228 12-1-1998 Zoning Map amendment NCM
229 12-8-1998 Nonelectoral debt NCM
230 12-15-1998 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 160
231 12-15-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
232 12-15-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
233 1-12-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
234 1-12-1999 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 160
235 12-15-1998 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 160; Ch.
210
236 1-12-1999 Water connection required
for Conestoga Farm
Subdivision
NCM
237 2-2-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
238 3-2-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
239 Loan application NCM
240 7-6-1999 Pensions: municipal
retirement system
Ch. 45, Art. I
241 7-6-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
242 7-6-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
243 10-5-1999 Zoning Map amendment NCM
244 10-5-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
245 1-4-2000 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 160; Ch.
210
246 6-6-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
247 6-6-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
248 7-5-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
249 7-5-2000 Subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 160; Ch.
210
250 7-5-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
251 11-7-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A225:979
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
252 11-7-2000 Zoning Map amendment NCM
253 12-5-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
254 12-5-2000 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 82
255 1-2-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
256 2-6-2001 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 160; Ch.
210
257 4-3-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
258 5-1-2001 Taxation: tax exemptions
for improvement
Ch. 170, Art. VI
259 7-3-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
260 7-3-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
261 7-3-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
262 7-17-2001 Administrative NCM
263 9-4-2001 Administrative NCM
264 10-2-2001 Noise disturbance Ch. 124
265 12-4-2001 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 160; Ch.
210
266 1-7-2002 Appointment of delinquent
tax collector
NCM
267 4-2-2002 Vehicles and traffic:
Township roads with
maximum speed limit of 25
miles per hour amendment
Ch. 185, Art. I
268 4-2-2002 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 112
269 4-2-2002 Administrative NCM
270 10-1-2002 Massage and massage
establishments
Ch. 120
271 12-3-2002 Certificates of use and
occupancy
Ch. 90
272 7-1-2003 Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Ch. 172
273 9-2-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
274 11-5-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
275 2-3-2004 Vehicles, use of engine
brakes
Ch. 187
§ DL-1 CONCORD CODE § DL-1
A225:980
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
276 5-4-2004 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 112
277 6-1-2004 Uniform construction
codes
Ch. 91
278 6-8-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
279 6-8-2004 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 160
280 6-8-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
281 7-13-2004 Fire prevention code Ch. 112, Art. I
282 7-13-2004 Chester Creek stormwater
management plan
Ch. 148, Part 2
283 7-13-2004 Open space proposed tax
question for 2004 ballot
NCM
284 8-5-2004 Operation and
maintenance of sanitary
sewers
Ch. 136, Art. I
285 12-7-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
286 12-14-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
287 12-28-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
288 12-28-2004 Occupational privilege tax
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. III
289 1-3-2005 Amusement tax
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. IV
290 3-1-2005 Property maintenance Ch. 127
291 3-1-2005 Certificates of use and
occupancy amendment
Ch. 90
292 6-7-2005 Bond NCM
293 6-7-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
294 9-8-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
295 11-9-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
296 1-4-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
297 1-4-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
298 1-17-2006 Emergency and municipal
services tax amendment
Ch. 170, Art. III
299 4-4-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
300 4-4-2006 Stormwater management
amendment
Ch. 148
301 5-2-2006 Building code amendment Chs. 91; 130
(repealer only)
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A225:981
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
302 5-2-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
303 8-29-2006 Bond NCM
304 11-08-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
Township roads with
maximum speed limit of 25
miles per hour amendment
Ch. 185, Art. I
305 12-5-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
306 12-5-2006 Outdoor and seasonal
sales
Ch. 132
307 12-5-2006 Special events Ch. 144
308 1-2-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
309 1-2-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
310 5-1-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
311 5-1-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
312 5-29-2007 Residency restrictions for
sex offenders
Ch. 138, Art. I
313 6-5-2007 Vehicle engine brakes
amendment
Ch. 187
314 6-5-2007 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 127
315 6-5-2007 Household pets in
residential and apartment
districts
Ch. 115
316 9-4-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
317 10-2-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
318 12-4-2007 Zoning Map amendment NCM
319 12-4-2007 Taxation: local services tax
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. III
320 12-4-2007 Building construction fees
amendment
Ch. 82
321 5-6-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
322 6-3-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
323 8-26-2008 General obligation term
loan
NCM
324 9-2-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
325 11-5-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
326 12-23-2008 Per capita tax repealer Ch. 170, Art. I,
Editor's Note
only
§ DL-1 CONCORD CODE § DL-1
A225:982
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
327 2-3-2009 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 91
328 3-3-2009 Rental and commercial
property licensing and
inspection
Ch. 128
329 9-1-2009 Vehicles and traffic: trafficcalming
measures
Ch. 185, Art. II
330 10-6-2009 Local services tax
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. III
331 1-4-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
332 6-1-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
333 1-3-2011 Bond NCM
334 3-1-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
335 4-5-2011 Weapons: firearms
amendment
Ch. 204
336 5-10-2011 Rental and commercial
property licensing and
inspection amendment
Ch. 128
337 8-23-2011 Bond refinancing NCM
338 11-1-2011 Certificates of use and
occupancy amendment
Ch. 90
339 12-6-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
340 4-3-2012 Stormwater runoff, erosion
and sedimentation
regulations amendment
Ch. 148, Part 1
341 5-1-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
342 10-2-2012 Solid waste: precollection
and post-collection
regulations for trash and
recycling collection
Ch. 142, Art. IV
343 10-2-2012 Bamboo Ch. 79
344 12-18-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
345 12-18-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
346 2-19-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
347 3-5-2013 Pensions amendment Ch. 45, footnote
only
348 6-4-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
349 6-4-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
350 9-3-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A225:983
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
351 9-3-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
352 9-24-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
353 9-24-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
354 10-1-2013 Dogs running at large
amendment
Ch. 76, Art. I
355 3-4-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
356 Number not
used
357 Number not
used
358 Number not
used
359 7-28-2014
(approved
11-4-2014)
Election of Government
Study Commission
NCM
360 12-16-2014 Amusement tax
amendment
Ch. 170, Art. IV
361 1-5-2015 Intergovernmental
cooperation: PSATS
Unemployment
Compensation Group Trust
Ch. 21, Art. I
362 1-5-2015 Intergovernmental
cooperation: Pennsylvania
Townships Health
Insurance Cooperative
Trust
Ch. 21, Art. II
363 6-9-2015 General obligation note NCM
364 6-16-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
365 7-7-2015 Planning Commission
amendment; numbering of
buildings amendment;
uniform construction
codes amendment;
precollection and postcollection
requirements
for trash and recycling
collection amendment
Ch. 53; Ch. 87;
Ch. 91; Ch. 142,
Art. IV
366 7-21-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
367 8-25-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
§ DL-1 CONCORD CODE § DL-1
A225:984
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
368 9-1-2015 Solid waste: solid waste
disposal amendment;
registration of collectors
amendment; recycling
amendment
Ch. 142, Art. I;
Ch. 142, Art. II;
Ch. 142, Art. III
369 10-6-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
370 12-22-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 210
371 12-22-2015 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 160
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A225:985

ORDINANCE NO. 377
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF CONCORD, BY
AMENDING CHAPTER 210 ZONING, ARTICLE I, SECTION 210-4 DEFINITIONS
TO EXPAND THE DEFINITIONS OF ACCESSORY BUILDING, ACCESSORY
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY USE, GARAGE -PRIVATE, GARAGE -PUBLIC, AND TO
ADD THERETO AND DEFINE THE FOLLOWING TERMS: ATTACHED, DETACHED,
STRUCTURE AND SURVEY; AND TO AMEND ARTICLE XXXV ACCESSORY
BUILDINGS, SECTION 210-
291 DEFINITIONS BY ADDING THERETO AND DEFINING THE FOLLOWING
TERMS:
HALF -BATHROOM, FULL -USE BATHROOM AND LOFT AND BY REPEALING AND
REPLACING SECTION 210-292 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS ON RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTIES, AND SECTION 210-293 GARAGES AND OTHER ACCESSORY
BUILDINGS I N THEIR ENTIRETY; AND ADDING A NEW SECTION 210- 294
PLAYSETS, RECREATION AND ATHLETIC EQUIPMENT, ANTENNAS,
ENCLOSURES AND SIMILAR STRUCTURES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
Section 1: The Council of Concord Township, Delaware County, desirous of preserving and
protecting the quality of life and safety of the citizens of Concord, hereby amends the following
provisions of Article I and Article XXXV of the Code of Concord Township, Chapter 210
Zoning, to read as
follows:
ARTICLE I Purpose, Objectives and Definitions
210- 4.
Definitions
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this chapter,
have the meanings herein indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING -An attached and/ or detached building subordinate to the
principal permitted building on a lot, and used for purposes customarily incidental to
those of the principal permitted building. This definition includes Private Garage for all
purposes herein.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE- An attached and/ or detached structure located on the
same lot with the principal permitted building or structure, but subordinate or incidental
to such building or structure.
ACCESSORY USE -A use conducted on the same lot with the principal permitted use,
but subordinate and incidental to such use.
PRIVATE GARAGE (See " garage, private")- A building designed or used primarily for
shelter or storage of vehicles or boats, personally owned by the occupant of the principal
building, but not airplanes, or aircraft, located on the same building site as a single family
or duplex residence. This definition shall also include carports used primarily for the
storage of vehicles or boats, but not airplanes or aircraft. Where any business involving
any vehicles or boats, such as those being equipped for operation, repaired, kept, or
otherwise dealt with for remuneration, hire or sale, the term " private garage" does not
apply. The term " garage" shall not include agricultural buildings. Garages shall be
designated as "attached" when they share the principal building' s roof and wall structures.
Attached garages may also provide entry into the principal building.
ATTACHED -An accessory structure, building, carport, or garage is attached when it
shares a common roof and one or more structural walls with the principal permitted
building. 
Ordinance No. 377
Enacted August 1, 2017
Page 2 of 5
DETACHED - An accessory structure, building, carport, or garage is detached when it
does not share a common roof and one or more structural walls with the principal permitted
building. Connections such as breezeways, decks, roof, walkways, and the like shall not
constitute attachment.
STRUCTURE -Any man- made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in
land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SURVEY- A written report by a licensed surveyor that sets forth the exact form,
boundaries, topographical features, location and position of existing and proposed
improvements on a parcel of real estate.
ARTICLE XXXV Accessory Buildings
210-290. Accessory buildings in residential districts.
The following regulations shall be observed in all residential districts in Concord Township,
including the R- 1, R-2, R2 -D, R- 3, R-4, R -A Residential, R -AH Residential, R- MHD, R -PRD -1, R -
PRD -2 and R -PRD -3 districts where applicable.
210-291. Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HALF -BATHROOM: A room containing a lavatory sink and a toilet.
FULL -USE BATHROOM: A room containing a shower and/or tub along with a
lavatory sink and toilet.
LOFT: An intermediate platform area between the main floor and the roof/ceiling area,
typically converted for storage, open to the floor below, reachable from within by a ladder
or stairs, which serves as an extra floor area in a high- ceilinged structure.
210- 292. Accessory Buildings or Structures in residential districts.
A. All proposed accessory buildings or structures shall be in keeping with the character of the
primary residence and the surrounding neighborhood.
B. No accessory building or structure of any kind, other than as permitted in § 210-293, shall
exceed one story or the height of the existing residence, and in no event be greater than
fifteen ( 15) feet high.
C. A survey shall be required as part of any application for the construction, restoration, or
modification of an accessory building greater than two hundred and fifty ( 250) sq. ft.
D. No accessory building on a property of less than three ( 3) acres shall exceed seven hundred
and fifty ( 750) sq. ft. in area.
E. No accessory building or structure shall be erected or placed within a front yard, and all such
structures or buildings shall be at least ten ( 10) feet farther back from the front street line than
the rear most portion of the main residence, which shall also include attached decks. 
Ordinance No, 377
Enacted August 1, 2017
Page 3 of 5
F. Not more than one detached accessory building shall be located on any property of less
than three ( 3) acres.
G. In no event shall the sum total of the base floor area of any accessory buildings, including
detached garages, exceed severity five percent ( 75%) of the first floor area of the primary
residence.
210-293. Private Garages in residential districts.
A. All proposed garages shall be in keeping with the character of the primary residence and
the surrounding neighborhood.
B. No private garage or other accessory structure or building shall be erected or placed
within a front yard, and all such structures or buildings shall be at least ten ( 10) feet
farther back from the front street line than the rearmost portion of the main residence
which shall also include attached decks.
C. A garage door shall not exceed eight ( 8) feet in height and sixteen ( 16) feet in width.
D. Private garages may not exceed one story or twelve ( 12) feet in height from the floor/slab
to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, or to the deck of mansard roofs. The following
height limitations shall apply to gable, hip mansard, and gambrel roofs:
I) A private garage with a total width of eighteen ( 18) feet or less shall not exceed
fifteen ( 15) feet in height as measured from the floor/slab to the top of the ridge.
2) A private garage with a width exceeding eighteen ( 18) feet shall be permitted to
increase the height of the garage up to a maximum of eighteen ( 18) feet, provided that
the garage shall not exceed one story in height, but may contain a loft area not
exceeding thirty percent (30%) of the base floor area.
3) No private garage or other accessory building shall exceed the height of the existing
residence.
4) No full -use bathroom shall be permitted.
5) No kitchen equipment, such as stoves, dishwashers, or ovens shall be permitted.
6) A private garage in excess of eighteen ( 18) feet in height may be permitted only
when authorized as a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board where the
proposed garage is:
a) Accessory to a nonresidential use permitted by special exception, provided that the
lot area, setbacks, building coverage and impervious surface coverage regulations
of the underlying district have all been met, in the same regard as with the
principal use structure building. 
Ordinance No. 377
Enacted August 1, 2017
Page 4 of 5
E. A detached private garage or other detached accessory building greater than two hundred
fifty (250) square feet in area shall be located within the setbacks of the principal
permitted building, but shall not be located within the front yard.
1) A private garage or other accessory structure building less than two hundred fifty (250)
square feet in area may be located within the side yard setbacks of the principal
permitted building, but shall not be located within the front yard.
2) A private garage or other accessory structure building less than two hundred and fifty
250) square feet in area if located within the rear yard may be located at a ten ( 10)
foot setback from property lines.
F. Private garages larger than seven hundred and fifty ( 750) square feet shall not be permitted
on any property less than three ( 3) acres in any residential district, and in no event shall
any detached private garage exceed fifty percent (50%) of the first floor area of the
residence for which the garage is an accessory use. The requirements of Section D, supra
shall apply.
G. Private garages not exceeding one thousand two hundred ( 1200) square feet shall be
permitted only on properties greater than three ( 3) acres. Where a property is greater than
three ( 3) acres, the private garage's height shall be limited to eighteen ( 18) feet and
associated door height may not exceed eight (8) feet. In such instance, the private garage
shall be located within the setbacks of the principal permitted building, and shall not be
located within the front yard. As a further limitation to the foregoing, the square footage of
the private garage shall not exceed fifty percent ( 50%) of the existing dwelling' s footprint,
and its height shall not exceed the height of the existing dwelling.
I. No new road openings shall be made in conjunction with construction of any new
accessory structure.
J. No more than one detached garage shall be located on any property less than three ( 3)
acres.
K. No detached garage shall be used at any time as part of a permitted home occupation or
home professional office, nor shall it be used for overnight accommodations or sleeping
quarters.
L. In no event shall the sum total of the base floor area of any accessory buildings including
detached garages, exceed seventy five ( 75%) of the first floor area of the primary
residence.
210-294. Playsets, Recreation and Athletic Equipment, Antennas, Enclosures, and
Similar Structures in Residential districts.
The following shall apply in all residential districts:
A. Any structure such as a playset, swing set, playhouse, recreation or athletic equipment
such as trampoline, pitching net, etc., or antenna, animal enclosure, fire pit, fire place, a
hot tub, or other structure, shall be located in the rear yard only. 
Ordinance No. 377
Enacted August 1, 2017
Page 5 of 5
B. All such structures shall be located at least ten ( 10) feet from any property line.
C. No such structure may be taller than twelve ( 12) feet nor more than one hundred ( 100)
square feet.
D. Any such structures shall comply with all storm water regulations and shall not be
placed in any steep or very steep slope area.
E. Any supporting utility conduits or wiring shall be placed underground and comply
with all codes and standards.
Section 2: Repealer. All ordinances or part of ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
Section 3: Severability. Shall any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a Court
of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining provisions or any part thereof.
Section 4: Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective five ( 5) days after adoption.
ENACTED and ORDAINED this
1st
day of August, 2017.
Attest:
Brenda L. Lamanna,
Township Manager
CO RD TOWNSHIP COUNCIL
Dominic A. Pileggi, dent
John J. Gillespie, Vice President
Elizabeth A. Salvucci
Tomas J. Mahoney

ORDINANCE NO. 378
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF CONCORD, BY
AMENDING CHAPTER 210, ZONING: ARTICLE I — PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND
DEFINITIONS SECTION 210- 4 HOME OCCUPATION TO DEFINE THE TERM HOME
OCCUPATION AND ARTICLE III RESIDENCE DISTRICT SECTION 210- 10 USE
REGULATIONS AND SPECIFY USE REGULATIONS USES BY RIGHT.
210- 4. Definitions.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, have the meanings herein indicated:
HOME OCCUPATION
An occupation for gain, profit or support conducted only by members of a family residing on the
premises and conducted entirely within the dwelling, provided that no article is sold or
physically offered for sale except such as is produced on the premises by members of the
immediate family residing thereon.
1) Home occupations shall include the following:
a) Artists and sculptors;
b) Authors and composers;
c) Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors;
d) Home crafts;
e) Office use, provided that no retail or wholesale transactions are made upon the premises.
2) Permitted home occupations shall not in any event be deemed to include the following:
a) Antique shops, gift shops, restaurants and other commercial retail uses involving the sale
of articles and products produced off the premises or food items meant for on or off -
premises consumption, except as provided in § 210.A (3) ( 2);
b) Barbershops and beauty parlors;
c) Medical or dental clinic or hospital;
d) Tea-room, coffee shop, and similar establishments;
e) Renting of trailers;
f) Riding or boarding stable or kennel;
g) Tourist home, rooming, boarding or lodging house;
h) Veterinary clinic or hospital;
i) Industrial uses;
j) Massage parlors.
k) Nonresidential school of special education whose enrollment does not exceed five pupils
at any given time;
1) Family day-care homes limited to not more than five children residing off the premises.
3) In addition to the use limitations applicable in the zoning district in which located, all home
occupations shall be subject to the following use limitations:
a) The home occupation shall be carried on wholly indoors and within a dwelling. 
Ordinance No. 378
Enacted August 1, 2017
b) There shall be no use of show windows or display or advertising visible outside the
premises to attract customers or clients other than an accessory sign, as permitted;
c) There shall be no exterior storage of materials, equipment, or supplies.
d) No articles shall be sold or physically offered for sale, except for those produced upon the
premises;
e) Servicing by commercial vehicles for supplies and materials shall not be permitted, except
for mail and package delivery.
f) The floor area devoted to a home occupation and the storage of materials and supplies
connected with the home occupation shall not be more than 25% of the ground floor area
ofthe principal residential structure, or 400 square feet, whichever is less.
g) The occupation shall not change the essential residential character of a dwelling.
210- 10. Use regulations.
A. Uses by right.
1) Home occupation, as defined in § 210- 4, and subject to the following special requirements in
addition to all other applicable requirements of this chapter for the residential district in
which the use is located:
a) Such occupation shall be located in the dwelling in which the person resides.
b) No one shall be engaged or employed in a home occupation unless he/ she is a resident of
the dwelling.
c) The area used for the home occupation shall not exceed 25% ofthe total floor area of the
first floor of the principal permitted dwelling unit or 400 square feet, whichever is less.
d) No external alterations inconsistent with the residential use ofthe dwelling shall be
permitted, and there shall be no exterior display, sale or storage of materials, products,
equipment or refuse related to the conduct of the home occupation.
e) There shall be no sign visible from outside the building except for a name sign as
permitted in the sign regulations, outside a dwelling. (See Article XXIII.)
f) No more than one business vehicle may be parked on the property on a regular basis. Any
trucks, vans or other business vehicles shall have loading capacities not exceeding one
ton. The business vehicle shall be parked in an enclosed structure or in an area screened
from view from neighboring properties and streets through the use of a fence, wall, hedge,
or other landscape material. Any sign or advertisement on a vehicle associated with the
occupation shall be included in calculating compliance with sign regulations.
g) No goods or services shall be physically offered for sale or lease to the general public on
the premises, except that business conducted primarily by mail, telephone, e- mail, telefax,
or Internet shall be permitted.
h) No additional traffic and/ or parking demand shall be generated by such home occupation
beyond that which would normally occur at the dwelling unit in accordance with Article
VOL
i) No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off
the lot ifthe occupation is conducted in a single-family residence. In the case of electrical
interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible
interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in
line voltage off the premises.
j) No bulk sale or storage for sale of chemicals or biological agents shall be permitted. 
Ordinance No. 378
Enacted August 1, 2017
k) All home occupations shall be registered with the Zoning Officer and such registrations
shall be kept on file by the Zoning Officer. No registration shall be approved until the
Zoning Officer has determined that the proposed home occupation complies with all the
regulations of this chapter. The person conducting the home occupation shall be
responsible for applying for the annual use permit, utilizing forms available from the
Township. The fee for the application shall be set by resolution by the Board of
Supervisors.
1) Upon the approval of the plans and the proposed home occupation use by the Zoning
Officer, one application shall be returned to the applicant and one application filed with
the Township by the Zoning Officer.
m) Ifthe home occupation shall cease to be conducted in compliance with these regulations,
the home occupation registration shall be revoked. The Zoning Officer may inspect the
premises at any time upon reasonable notice to deteimine compliance with this chapter
and the home occupation registration.
n) If the occupant moves from and sells the dwelling and a new home occupation is started, a
new home occupation registration shall be submitted to the Township and obtained prior
to the conduct of any new home occupation.
Section 4: Effective Date.
This Ordinance shall become effective five (5) days after adoption.
ENACTED and ORDAINED this 1St. day of G{
Attest:
CONCORD TO
C • . 1 CIL
t , 2017.
SHIP
Dominic A. Pile resident
John J. Gillespie, Vice President
Eliza• eth a. Salvucci
omas Y Mahoney
Brenda L. Lamanna, Secreta

ORDINANCE NO. 380
AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF CONCORD, DELAWARE COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA,
AMENDING CHAPTER 210 ZONING, ARTICLE XXIII, SIGN REGULATIONS, BY REMOVING ALL
REFERENCES TO THE BOARD OF SUPERVISORS, BY AMENDING CERTAIN RESTRICTIONS ON
SIZES, TYPES, LOCATIONS AND DURATIONS OF PERMISSIBLE SIGNS IN ALL ZONING
DISTRICTS AND BY PROVIDING METHODS FOR CALCULATING PERMISSIBLE SIGN SIZES
Section 1: The Council of Concord Township, Delaware County, desirous of preserving and protecting
the quality of life of the citizens of Concord, hereby amends the following provisions of Section 210,
Zoning, Article XXIII, Sign Regulations, of the Code of Concord Township, to read, after amendment,
as follows:
210-205. Flag Regulations.
Flags of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Township of Concord, foreign
nations having diplomatic relations with the United States, or any other flag adopted or sanctioned by
the Township Council, provided that such flag does not exceed 60 square feet in area and shall be
flown from a pole not more than 25 feet in height, shall be permitted. All such applications, including
the proposed number of flags, shall require the approval of the Township Council.
210-206. General sign regulations applicable to all Zoning Districts.
B. Signs not requiring permits. The following types of signs do not require permits or permit fees but
must be in conformance with all other requirements of this article:
7) Public signs or notices, or signs relating to an emergency condition, erected by the
Township or other governmental entity.
10) No -Trespass signs or signs indicating the private nature of a driveway or property; such
signs may not exceed two square feet in area, and no more than two signs shall be permitted
on any property.
12) Temporary signs:
a) Signs announcing a political campaign or event. Such signs shall not
exceed 12 square feet area and shall be removed within forty-eight ( 48)
hours after the completion of such campaign events or the election date for
which they are erected. 
Ordinance No.
September 5, 2017
Page of
b) Signs announcing an educational, charitable, civic, or religious event. Such
signs shall not exceed three ( 3) square feet in area. There shall not be more
than one sign per event on any one property. Such signs may be erected four
4) weeks prior to the scheduled event and shall be removed immediately after
the completion of such event.
c) One yard or garage sale sign may be placed on the property hosting such
sale no more than one week before the commencement of the sale, provided it
does not exceed three ( 3) square feet. Such sign shall be removed immediately
after the sale concludes.
d) Temporary real estate signs.
1] Signs advertising the premises upon which they are erected as " for sale,"
sold," " for rent," or "rented" when erected by the landowner, a broker or other
person interested in the sale or rental of such premises, provided they:
a] Do not exceed four (4) square feet in area.
b] Shall be removed within 48 hours after sale or rental of the premises.
c] Shall not have any decorations or attachments such as streamers, flags
or balloons.
d] Shall be limited to a single sign per property frontage.
2] Any sign advertising a real estate open house or used as a directional
sign for a real estate open house. Such signs shall be permitted only on
private property and may not be erected without the permission of the
owner of the property on which the sign is located. Real estate open
house or direction signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size and
may not be displayed more than six (6) hours before the start of the open
house time period and must be removed within two hours after the end of
the open house time period.
a] Contractors' signs of four square feet or less. Such sign may be placed
upon the property where the work is under construction, provided that the
sign is removed within 30 days after completion of the work.
b] Shall be limited to a single sign per property frontage. 
Ordinance No.
September 5, 2017
Page of
210-209. Permitted signs in multifamily residence zoning districts.
Permitted signs in multifamily residence zoning districts:
A. Signs enumerated in the general requirements (§210-206B), except 210-206(B)( 11).
B. One identification sign, not to exceed 24 square feet in sign area, per road frontage per
apartment or condominium complex.
210-210. Permitted signs in commercial zoning districts.
Permitted signs in commercial zoning districts:
C. One freestanding sign not to exceed 50 square feet in sign area per public road frontage with
up to eighty ( 80) square feet for an individual property having a minimum of four hundred ( 400)
linear feet public frontage. Properties/buildings having more than three separate tenants are
permitted an additional fifteen ( 15) square feet in sign area, not to exceed eighty ( 80) square feet
in total sign area.
D. A property consisting of 20 acres or more having a minimum of five hundred ( 500) linear feet of
public road frontage shall be permitted one freestanding sign per road frontage to a maximum of
one hundred ( 100) square feet in sign area.
I. Illuminated signs such as neon or similar devices or treatments installed within the interior of an
exposed window glazing shall be counted as part of the allowed wall signage regulations of §210-
210E, but shall not exceed six (6) square feet maximum.
K. Calculation of sign area.
1) For signs not involving illuminated facades, translucent awnings or translucent weather
covers: The area of such a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, and
accompanying designs and symbols, but not including any supporting framework and bracing
which are incidental to the display itself. Where the sign consists of individual letters or
symbols attached to a surface, building, wall or window, the area shall be considered to be that
of the smallest single rectangle, including the sign background, which encompasses all of the
letters and symbols, including all enclosed and open areas of the background.
2) For signs involving illuminated facades, translucent awnings, or translucent weather covers:
When lettering, wording, logos, or accompanying designs or symbols are attached to or
displayed from or with illuminated facades, translucent awnings, or translucent weather covers,
in addition to the area described in Subsection ( 1) above, the entire illuminated structure shall
also be considered to be sign area. 
Ordinance No.
September 5, 2017
Page of
3) For internally lighted building decoration, e.g., lighted building wrap: the sign area shall be
deemed to be the greater of the actual square footage of said decoration or one square foot
per linear foot of said decoration.
L. Dynamic Message Display Signs. Dynamic or Digital signs incorporating automatic
changeable copy, electronically changeable messaging, such as, but not limited to, digital
message displays and other such devices, shall be permitted except that such signs are
prohibited within any residential district. Digital signs may be installed as part of a permitted
freestanding sign.
1) Size. The portion of the digital sign which is the digital message display may not exceed
50% of the total sign area and shall be limited to twenty five (25) sq. ft. of display board.
2) Brightness. All digital signs must be equipped with automatic day/night dimming
capabilities. At nighttime or during periods of ambient low light, the sign must automatically
dim the intensity of the light emitted whereby its brightness shall not exceed 0. 5 foot-candle
per square foot of display area.
3) Lettering shall be of sufficient size for immediate recognition.
4) Displayed messages shall be simple and static for immediate recognition. Messages shall
be complete in each display cycle and shall not require viewers to see multiple display cycles
to derive its meaning.
5) Display cycles shall change no sooner than every 30 seconds.
6) Transitions form one message to the next shall be instantaneous with no scrolling, facing,
streaming, flashing or other animated effect.
7) Community Service. All digital sign owners must notify AMBER ALERT and Community
Service and register its location for use as needed.
210-211. Signs permitted in non- residential and non- commercial zoning districts.
D. One wall sign not to exceed one square foot of sign area for each one linear foot of building
frontage on that portion of a building facing or visible from the right-of-way, such wall sign not to
exceed thirty two ( 32) square feet. 
Ordinance No.
September 5, 2017
Page of
Section 2: Repealer.
All Ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinanc
extent of such inconsistency.
Section 3: Severability.
Shall any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid; such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions or any part thereof.
Section 4: Effective Date.
This Ordinance shall become effective five ( 5) days after adoption.
ENACTED and ORDAINED this 57 t day of -.5..e./ 1 tC#PVJ b e r' , 2017.
CONCORD TOWNSHIP COUNCI1ti 9
inic A. Pihf;ggi, President
John J. Gilles
Elizab# h A. Salvucci
Vice President

Township Concord
DELAWARE COUNTY
ORDINANCE NO. 381
2018 CONCORD TOWNSHIP BUDGET
COUNCIL: Dominic A. Pileggi, John J. Gillespie,
Elizabeth A. Salvucci, Gail M. Ryan, Thomas J. Mahoney
WHEREAS; the Township of Concord, Delaware County; Pennsylvania completed and published a
proposed budget, which includes all proposed expenditures and other uses, all anticipated revenues,
and other sources of income, and any unreserved fund balance tobe used for the fiscal year ending
December 31, 2018; and
WHEREAS, the Township Council, pursuant to public notice, did conduct a public hearing on
November 14, 2017, at which time the proposed budget for the fiscal year 2018 was discussed and
considered; and
WHEREAS, the total of all budgeted expenditures and other uses inthe .budget do not exceed
the total of all budgeted revenues and all other sources of income, plus any unreserved income to be
used as set forth in. Exhibit "A," which is incorporated herein and attached hereto; and
WHEREAS, the proposed 2018 final budget as outlined in this Ordinance establishes the 2018
real estate tax millage rate of 0.117 for Library, 0.133 for Fire Hydrant, 0. 265 for. Open Space, and 0.466
for General Purposes including Fire Protection for a total real estate levy "of 0.981 mills as set forth in the
aforementioned Exhibit "A"; and
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that the Council of Concord Township does hereby adopt the
budget Ordinance for Concord Township for the fiscal year 2018. A Copyof which is on file in the
Township offices and published on the Township's website.
Attest:
RESOLVED this 5th day of December, 2017.
A ands Serock, Township Secretary
43 Thornton Road • Glen Mills, PA 19342
Meeting Night: 151Tuesday
TOWNSHIP OF CONCORD
By:
DorninicA. Pi
P 610.459.8911
F 610.459. 8917
Council President
office@concordtownship.org
www.twp.concord. pa. us

Township ? Concord
DELAWARE COUNTY
COUNCIL: Dominic A. Pileggi, John J. Gillespie, Elizabeth A. Salvucci,
Thomas J. Mahoney, Margaret S. Franke, Joshua Twersky, John L. Crossan
ORDINANCE NO. 383
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF
CONCORD, DELAWARE COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, CHAPTER 210
ZONING, ARTICLE II DISTRICTS, SECTION 210- 6 ZONING MAP, BY
EXPANDING THE CCRC CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY
OVERLAY DISTRICT.
WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors, by Ordinance No. 286 adopted
December 14, 2004, amended the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Concord
by creating a new zoning overlay district designated as the CCRC Continuing
Care Retirement Community Overlay District and set the exact boundaries of
such CCRC Continuing Care. Retirement Community Overlay District; and
WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors by Ordinance No. 285 adopted
December 7, 2004, amended the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Concord
by adding a new Article XXXIII setting forth the legislative intent, use regulations,
yard and area regulations and sign regulations for the CCRC Continuing Care
Retirement Community Overlay District; and
WHEREAS, the Board of Supervisors in adopting Ordinance Nos. 285 and
286 recognized an identified need for larger scale Continuing Care Retirement
Communities ("CCRCs") within the region to provide a broad range of services to
senior Citizens and further recognized that the development of CCRCs within the
Township would further provide jobs and benefits to the tax base of the
Township; and
WHEREAS, the Township Council currently recognizes that such need
continues to exist and that such need cannot be fully met within the geographic
limitations of the Township' s CCRC Continuing Care Retirement Overlay District
as currently configured; and
WHEREAS, the Township Council wishes to amend the Zoning Code, and
specifically the Zoning Map, to expand the CCRC Continuing Care Retirement
Overlay District so as to increase the geographic areas in which CCRCs are a
permitted use; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED, by the Council of the Township
of Concord, Delaware County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as follows:
43 Thornton Road • Glen Mills, PA 19342
Meeting Night: 151Tuesday
P 610.459. 8911
F 610. 459.8917
office@concordtownship. org
www.twp. concord. pa. us
Section 1. The Code of the Township of Concord, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, Chapter 210 Zoning, Article II Districts, Section 210- 6 Zoning Map,
is hereby amended by the amendment of the Concord Township Zoning Map so
as to expand the overlay district designated as CCRC Continuing Care
Retirement Community Overlay District by the addition thereto of new lands more
particularly described on the attached Exhibit " A", incorporated herein by
reference. The lands designated on Exhibit "A" which shall now be located within
the CCRC Continuing Care Retirement Community Overlay District are presently
within the C- 2 Planned Business and Commercial District for zoning purposes.
Such lands designated on Exhibit "A" shall be entitled to the benefits and rights of
either the underlying C- 2 Planned Business and Commercial District or the
overlay CCRC Continuing Care Retirement Community Overlay District. Such
lands shall be subject to the regulations and area and bulk requirements of the
overlay CCRC Continuing Care Retirement Community Overlay District as set
forth in Article XXXIII ( Continuing Care Retirement Community Overlay District)
of the Zoning Ordinance.
Section 2. Except as specifically amended herein, Chapter 210 Zoning,
Article H Districts, Section 210-6 Zoning Map, shall remain unchanged and in full
force and effect.
Section 3. The Township Engineer is hereby authorized to amend the
Concord Township Zoning Map to carry out the intent and purpose of this
amendment.
Section 4. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith
are hereby repealed to the extent of any inconsistency.
Section 5. The Code of the Township of Concord, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, Chapter 210 Zoning, Article XXXIII Continuing Care Retirement
Community Overlay District, Section 210-278 Purpose; legislative intent, shall be
amended such that the first sentence thereof shall now read as follows:
The Continuing Care Retirement Overlay District is designed to
promote a campus -setting continuing care retirement community ( CCRC) use on
tracts of a minimum of 75 acres, as an overlay to certain portions of the PIP -
Planned Industrial Park and incorporating areas of the adjacent R- 2 Residential
District and the C- 2 Planned Business and Commercial District."
Section 6. Except as specifically amended herein, Chapter 210 Zoning,
Article XXXIII Continuing Care Retirement Community Overlay District, Section
210-278 Purpose; legislative intent, shall remain unchanged and in full force and
effect. 
Section 7. The Code of the Township of Concord, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, Chapter 210 Zoning, Article XXXIII Continuing Care Retirement
Community Overlay District, Section 210-280 Yard and area regulations,
Subsection A shall be amended such that the last sentence of the first paragraph
thereof shall now read as follows:
The provisions of Article XVIII, PIP - Planned Industrial Park,
Article IV, R- 2 Residence District and Article XIV C- 2 Planned Business and
Commercial District shall not apply to continuing care retirement community
CCRC) use and development."
Section 8. Except as specifically amended herein, Chapter 210 Zoning,
Article XXXIII Continuing Care Retirement Community Overlay District, Section
210-280 Yard and area regulations, shall remain unchanged and in full force and
effect.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED THIS DAY OF , ' ` 61/0,Pc
2018.
ATTEST:
TOWNSHIP OF CONCORD
SIGNED: Of);AL
Dominic A. F(( e gi, President
Amanda E. Serock, Township Manager
EXHIBIT "A"
Legal Description to be attached upon approval of subdivided lot] 

Township -/ Concord
DELAWARE COUNTY
COUNCIL: Dominic A. Pileggi, John J. Gillespie, Elizabeth A. Salvucci,
Thomas J. Mahoney, Margaret S. Franke, Joshua Twersky, John L. Crossan
ORDINANCE NO. 386
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF CONCORD, BY
AMENDING CHAPTER 210, ZONING, ARTICLE I, SECTION 210-4, DEFINITIONS TO
ADD AND DEFINE MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWER/PROCESSOR AND
AMENDING ARTICLE XVII, LI LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT, SECTION 210- 152 B OF
THE CONCORD ZONING CODE, TO ALLOW MEDICAL MARIJUANA
GROWING/PROCESSING IN THE LI LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT AS A SPECIAL
EXCEPTION
WHEREAS, the Act ofApril 17, 2016, P.L. 84, No 16, 35 P. S. §§ 1023. 101 – 1023. 2110,
known as the Medical Marijuana Act (" MMA"), effective April 17, 2016, established a
comprehensive State licensing and regulatory framework for the growing, processing, testing,
distribution, transportation, and dispensing of medical marijuana; and
WHEREAS, the Township of Concord ( hereinafter " Township") is acting to comply with
Pennsylvania law and allow for grower/processor facilities for medical marijuana in accordance
with the applicable state laws; and
WHEREAS, it is the purpose and intent of the Township to regulate medical marijuana
grower/processor facilities in a manner that is consistent with State law while promoting the
health, safety, and general welfare of the residents and businesses within the Township, and
limiting the potential negative impacts associated with the growing and processing of medical
marijuana; and
WHEREAS, nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to allow persons to engage in
any conduct inconsistent with state law, endangers others, causes a public nuisance, allows the
use or diversion of marijuana for nonmedical purposes, or allows any activity relating to
marijuana that is otherwise illegal under Pennsylvania law.
SECTION I:
NOW, THEREFORE, THIS (
441
DAY OF £ e, 2019, THE COUNCIL OF
CONCORD TOWNSHIP HEREBY ENACTS AND ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
Article I, Section 210- 4 Definitions, of the Township Zoning Code shall be amended to
include the definition for Medical Marijuana Grower/Processor as follows:
MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWER/PROCESSOR—A person, including a natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity or any combination thereof, who holds
a valid permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Health under the Medical Marijuana Act
1
Final adopted June 4, 2019
43 Thornton Road • Glen Mills, PA 19342 P 610. 459. 8911
Meeting Night: ' F 610.459. 8917
office@concordtownship. org
www.twp. concord. pa. us
MMA") to grow and process medical marijuana. A Medical Marijuana Grower/Processor shall
meet the same municipal zoning and land use requirements as other manufacturing, processing
and production facilities that are located in the same zoning district.
SECTION II:
Article XVII, Section 210- 152 of the Township Zoning Code shall be amended to add
Subsection ( B)( 7) Medical Marijuana, Grower/Processor as a use permitted by Special
Exception in the LI Light Industry District Zoning District, as follows:
I). Medical Marijuana Grower/Processor.
1) Purpose. The purpose and intent of this Section is to regulate the growing and
processing of medical marijuana in strict compliance with the MMA while promoting
the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents and businesses within
the Township.
2) Marijuana Growing Prohibited. All marijuana growing or processing is prohibited
within Concord Township except as expressly permitted by Special Exception under
this Section.
3) Indoor Medical Marijuana Cultivation. Indoor medical marijuana growing is
permitted in the Township only as expressly specified in this Section.
a] Indoor medical marijuana growing and processing shall only be allowed upon
application and issuance of a Grower/Processor Permit issued by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania and approval of Special Exception approval by the Township in
accordance with the criteria and process set forth herein.
b] Indoor medical marijuana growing and processing is a use permitted only by
Special Exception on properties located within the LI Light Industry zoning district.
c] Indoor medical marijuana growing facilities may be located within the same
building or structure as a medical marijuana processing facility only if the indoor
medical marijuana growing facility is located in separate rooms of the building or
structure, and only if the indoor medical marijuana growing facility has its own
separate entrance into the building or structure.
d] Indoor medical marijuana growing/processing is allowed only within fully
enclosed and secure stand-alone structures. A medical marijuana grower/processor
shall not be located within 1, 000 feet of any public, private or parochial schools or
day- care centers. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the closest
exterior wall of the building or portion thereof in which the grower/processor is
located, to the closest property line of the protected district or use, regardless of the
municipality in which it is located.
2
Final adopted June 4, 2019
e] Indoor medical marijuana growing/processing shall not exceed the square footage
authorized pursuant to the grant of the Special Exception.
f] From any public right-of-way, there shall be no visible exterior evidence of any
indoor medical marijuana growing or processing facility.
g] Indoor medical marijuana growers/ processors must comply with all requirements
set forth in the MMA.
h] There is no set restriction on the hours of operation of indoor medical marijuana
growing/processing facilities; however, restricted hours of operation may be
established as a condition of the grant of the Special Exception.
i] Signage for all medical marijuana growing and processing facilities shall be
limited to the name of the business only, shall be in compliance with the Township' s
sign regulations, and shall contain no advertising of any companies, brands, products,
goods, or services. Signage shall not include any drug-related symbols.
j] The building in which any indoor medical marijuana growing/processing facility is
located, as well as the operations conducted therein, shall fully comply with all
applicable rules, regulations, and laws including, but not limited to, zoning and
building codes, the Township' s business license ordinances, the Revenue and
Taxation Code, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and the MMA.
k] The operators of all indoor medical marijuana growing/processing facilities shall
provide the Township Manager or the Township Manager' s designee with the name,
phone number, facsimile number, and email address of an on- site representative to
whom the Township and the public can provide notice if there are any operational
problems associated with the indoor medical marijuana growing and/ or processing
facility.
I] All indoor medical marijuana growing/processing facilities shall have a security
plan which includes the following measures:
1. An electronic locking system as per Chapter 702 ( b)( 1)( i) of the
MMA.
2. Security cameras shall be installed and maintained in good working
condition, and used in an on-going manner with at least one hundred
and twenty ( 120) concurrent hours of digitally recorded documentation
as a condition of the grant of the Special Exception. The camera shall
be in use twenty-four ( 24) hours a day, seven ( 7) days a week. The
areas to be covered by the security cameras shall include, but are not
limited to, the storage areas, growing areas, all doors and windows,
3
Final adopted June 4, 2019
waste facilities, and any other areas as required by the conditions
imposed as part of the grant of the Special Exception. Any and all
recordings shall be kept for a period of at least two (2) years.
3. Entrance to the growing/processing areas, and all storage areas, shall
be locked at all times, and under the control of the indoor medical
marijuana growing facility' s staff.
4. The facility shall comply with the Township' s lighting standards
regarding fixture type, wattage, illumination levels, shielding, and
shall secure the necessary lighting approvals and permits as needed.
Additional lighting requirements may be imposed as a condition ofthe
grant of the Special Exception. Additional sewer and stormwater
management requirements may be imposed as a condition of the grant
of the Special Exception.
5. All windows on the building that houses the indoor medical marijuana
growing/processing facility shall be appropriately secured and all
marijuana shall be securely stored in the facility.
m] The Township Building Code Official and law enforcement personnel shall have
the right to enter the indoor medical marijuana growing/processing facility with due
cause for the purpose of making reasonable inspections, to observe, and enforce
compliance with this Section, all laws of the Township, and all state laws.
n] Indoor medical marijuana growing and processing shall not be permitted when it
will adversely affect the health or safety of the nearby residents by creating undue
dust, glare, heat, noise, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other adverse impacts, and shall
not be conducted so as to create any hazardous situation due to the use or storage of
materials, processes, products, or wastes.
4) Special Exception Use Permit. All parcels of real property in the LI Light Industry
district upon which indoor medical marijuana growing/processing activities may
occur must obtain a Special Exception from the Township. An application for a
Special Exception shall include at a minimum the following information:
a] An estimate of the size of the proposed indoor medical marijuana
growing/processing facility.
b] The address of the location for which the Special Exception is sought.
c] A site plan and floor plan for the proposed premises denoting the use of all
areas of the premises, including storage, growing areas, lighting, signage, access,
parking, etc.
d] A proposed security plan in compliance with the MMA.
4
Final adopted June 4, 2019
e] The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which
the indoor medical marijuana growing/processing activities are proposed to be
conducted. In the event the Applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the
application must also have a notarized acknowledgement from the owner ofthe
real property that an indoor medical marijuana growing/processing facility will be
operated on the property.
f] Evidence that the indoor medical marijuana growing/processing facility will
be in full compliance with the requirements of the MMA.
5) Enforcement.
1] Any marijuana growing/processing within the Township in violation of this
Ordinance or the conditions of the grant of the Special Exception Use Permit is
hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.
2] Any party who engages in a violation of this Ordinance, or who owns,
possesses, controls, or has charge of any parcel of real property in the Township
upon which a violation of the Ordinance is maintained, shall be subject to the
penalties and remedies provided by this Section.
3] Any violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense for each
and every day the violation occurs or persists.
4] Any person in violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be punishable
by a fine of up to a $ 1, 000 per offense.
SECTION III. REPEALER.
All Township ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions hereof are
hereby repealed and rescinded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict.
SECTION IV. SEVERABILITY.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not
affect or impair any remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts of this
Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Council of Concord Township that such
remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
5
Final adopted June 4, 2019
SECTION V. EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall take effect five ( 5) days after the date of its enactment by the Council of
Concord Township.
ENACTED and ORDAINED this `
T' `
day of ) ne , 2019.
4104461
Attest: Ni_AL
Aman, a Seii'k, Township Manager
CONCORD TOWNSHIP COUNCIL
Domini Pileggi, President
John J.. • espie, Vice -President
o. L. Crossan, 2nd Vice -President
l lial4beth A. Salvucci
g anke
Thomas a oney
6
Final adopted June 4, 2019

Township Concord
DELAWARE COUNTY
COUNCIL: Dominic A. Pileggi, John J. Gillespie, Elizabeth A. Salvucci,
Thomas J. Mahoney, Margaret S. Franke, Joshua Twersky, John L. Crossan
ORDINANCE NO. 387
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF CONCORD, BY
AMENDING CHAPTER 210, ZONING, ARTICLE I, SECTION 210-4 DEFINITIONS TO
ADD AND DEFINE MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITIES AND BY
AMENDING ARTICLE XIII, SECTION 210- 119 AND ARTICLE XIV, SECTION 210- 127 TO
ALLOW MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITIES IN THE C- 1 LOCAL
COMMERCIAL AND C-2 PLANNED BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS AS A SPECIAL EXCEPTION
WHEREAS, the Act ofApril 17, 2016, P. L. 84, No 16, 35 P. S. §§ 1023. 101 – 1023.2110,
known as the Medical Marijuana Act (" MMA"), effective April 17, 2016, established a
comprehensive State licensing and regulatory framework for the growing, processing, testing,
distribution, transportation, and dispensing of medical marijuana; and
WHEREAS, the Township of Concord ( hereinafter " Township") is acting to comply with
Pennsylvania Law and allow for dispensary facilities for medical marijuana in accordance with
the applicable state laws; and
WHEREAS, it is the purpose and intent of the Township to regulate medical marijuana
dispensaries in a manner that is consistent with State law while promoting the health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents and businesses within the Township, and limiting the potential
negative impacts associated with the dispensing of such medical marijuana; and
WHEREAS, nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to allow persons to engage in
any conduct inconsistent with state law, endanger others, cause a public nuisance, allow the use
or diversion of marijuana for nonmedical purposes, or allow any activity relating to marijuana
that is otherwise illegal under Pennsylvania law.
SECTION I:
NOW, THEREFORE, THIS
i
DAY OF, jt)kf , 2019, THE COUNCIL OF
CONCORD TOWNSHIP HEREBY ENACTS AND ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
Article I, Section 210- 4, Definitions, of the Township Zoning Code shall be amended to include
the following definition for Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility:
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITY—A person, including a natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity or any combination thereof, who holds
a permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Health under the Medical Marijuana Act
43 Thornton Road • Glen Millpialn,82te
Meeting Night: 1" Tuesday
d 31.14452i§2g
F 610. 4b9.8917
office@concordtownship. org
www.twp. concord. pa. us
MMA") to dispense medical marijuana. A Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility shall meet
the same municipal zoning and land use requirements as other commercial facilities that are
located in the same zoning district.
SECTION II:
Article XII, Section 210- 119 ( C) Use regulations (C- 1 Local Commercial District) ofthe
Township Zoning Code shall be amended to include Subsection ( C) ( 10), Medical Marijuana
Dispensary Facility, as a use by Special Exception in the C- 1 Local Commercial Zoning District
only along the Township' s principal arterial highways, Route 1, Route 202 and/ or Route 322, as
follows:
210- 119 C ( 10) Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility
a) The use of a building for the dispensing of medical marijuana shall be permitted
only upon grant of a Special Exception to an Applicant possessing a Dispensary
Permit issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with the criteria
and process set forth in the Township' s Zoning Code, for properties located within
the Local Commercial ( C- 1) Zoning District, where the property fronts on one of the
principal arterial highways of Route 1, Route 202 and/ or Route 322.
b) Signage for all medical marijuana dispensary facilities shall be limited to the
name of the business only, shall be in compliance with the Township' s sign
regulations, and shall contain no advertising of any companies, brands, products,
goods, or services or any drug-related symbols.
c) The medical marijuana dispensary facility shall only be located in a secure facility
with each and every entrance and exit thereto dedicated solely to the dispensary
facility. There shall be no passageways connecting the dispensary to any other
facility. Any and all common walls of the dispensary shall be fire walls subject to
approval by the Township Building Code Official to assure that the facility is secure.
The building in which any medical marijuana dispensing facility is located, as well as
the operations as conducted therein, shall fully comply with all applicable rules,
regulations, and laws including, but not limited to, zoning and building codes, the
Township' s business license ordinances, the Revenue and Taxation Code, the
Americans with Disabilities Act, and the MMA.
d) A medical marijuana dispensary facility shall not be located within 1, 000 feet of
any residential zoning boundary line or within 1, 000 feet of any public, private or
parochial schools or day- care centers. This distance shall be measured in a straight
line from the closest exterior wall of the building or portion thereof in which the
dispensary is located, to the closest property line of the protected district or use,
regardless of the municipality in which it is located.
e) The operators of all medical marijuana dispensary facilities shall provide the
Township Manager or the Township Manager' s designee with the name, phone
2
Final adopted June 4, 2019
number, facsimile number, and email address of an on-site representative to whom
the Township and the public can provide notice if there are any operational problems
associated with the medical marijuana dispensary facility. All medical marijuana
dispensary facilities shall make every good faith effort to encourage residents and the
public to call this representative to resolve any operational problems before any calls
or complaints are made to the Township or law enforcement. There shall be " No
loitering" signs posted in the parking lots at all Medical Marijuana Dispensary
Facilities.
f) Security cameras shall be installed and maintained in good working condition, and
used in an on- going manner with at least one hundred and twenty ( 120) concurrent
hours of digitally recorded documentation as a condition of the grant of the Special
Exception. The camera shall be in use twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven ( 7) days a
week. The areas to be covered by the security cameras shall include, but are not
limited to, the storage areas, all doors and windows, all areas where waste facilities
are stored, and any other areas as required by the conditions imposed as part of the
grant of the Special Exception. Any and all recordings shall be kept for a period of at
least two (2) years.
g) The Township Building Code Official and Iaw enforcement personnel shall have
the right to enter the medical marijuana dispensary facility with due cause for the
purpose of making reasonable inspections, to observe and enforce compliance with
this Section, all laws of the Township, and all state laws.
h) The application for a Special Exception shall include at a minimum the following
information:
1] An estimate of the size ofthe proposed medical marijuana dispensary facility;
2] The address of the location for which the Special Exception is sought;
3] The site plan and floor plan for the proposed premises denoting the use of all
areas ofthe premises, including storage, dispensary areas, lighting, signage,
parking, etc.;
4] The proposed security plan in compliance with the MMA;
5] The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which
the medical marijuana dispensing activity is proposed to be conducted. In the
event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must
also have a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the real property that a
medical marijuana dispensary facility will be operated on the property;
6] Evidence that the medical marijuana dispensary facility will be located in a
structure that is compliant with all of the requirements of the MMA; and
3
Final adopted June 4, 2019
i)
7] The location of any other existing or proposed marijuana dispensaries within
3, 000 feet of the site.
Enforcement.
1] Any person who engages in a violation of this Section, or who owns,
possesses, controls, or has charge of any parcel of real property in the Township
upon which a violation ofthis Ordinance is maintained, shall be subject to the
penalties and remedies provided by this Section.
2] Any violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense for each
and every day the violation occurs or persists.
3] Any person in violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be punishable
by a fine of up to a $ 1, 000 per offense.
SECTION III:
Article XIV, Section 210- 127 ( C) of the Concord Township Zoning Code is hereby
amended to add thereto subsection ( 16) Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility as a use by
Special Exception in the C-2 Planned Business and Commercial Zoning District on lots with
frontage lying along the Township' s principal arterial highways, Route 1, Route 202 and/or
Route 322 as follows:
210- 127 ( c) ( 16) Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility
a) The use of a building for the dispensing of medical marijuana shall be permitted
only upon grant of a Special Exception to an Applicant possessing a Dispensary
Permit issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with the criteria
and process set forth in the Township' s Zoning Code, for properties located within
the C-2 Planned Business and Commercial Zoning district, where the property fronts
on one of the principal arterial highways of Route 1, Route 202 and/ or Route 322.
b) Signage for all medical marijuana dispensary facilities shall be limited to the
name of the business only, shall be in compliance with the Township' s sign
regulations, and shall contain no advertising of any companies, brands, products,
goods, or services, or any drug-related symbols.
c) The Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility shall only be located in a secure
facility with each and every entrance and exit thereto dedicated solely to the
dispensary facility. There shall be no passageways connecting the dispensary to any
other facility. Any and all common walls of the dispensary shall be fire walls subject
to approval by the Township Building Code Official to assure that the facility is
secure. The building in which any medical marijuana dispensing facility is located, as
well as the operations as conducted therein, shall fully comply with all applicable
rules, regulations, and laws including, but not limited to, zoning and building codes,
4
Final adopted June 4, 2019
the Township' s business license ordinances, the Revenue and Taxation Code, the
Americans with Disabilities Act, and the MMA.
d) A Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility shall not be located within 1, 000 feet of
a residential zoning boundary line or within 1, 000 feet of any public, private or
parochial schools or day-care centers. This distance shall be measured in a straight
line from the closest exterior wall of the building or portion thereof in which the
dispensary is located, to the closest property line of the protected district or use,
regardless of the municipality in which it is located.
e) The operators of all medical marijuana dispensary facilities shall provide the
Township Manager or the Township Manager' s designee with the name, phone
number, facsimile number, and email address of an on-site representative to whom
the Township and the public can provide notice if there are any operational problems
associated with the medical marijuana dispensary facility. All medical marijuana
dispensary facilities shall make every good faith effort to encourage residents and the
public to call this representative to resolve any operational problems before any calls
or complaints are made to the Township or law enforcement.. There shall be " No
loitering" signs posted in the parking Lots at all Medical Marijuana Dispensary
Facilities.
f) Security cameras shall be installed and maintained in good working condition, and
used in an on-going manner with at least one hundred and twenty ( 120) concurrent
hours of digitally recorded documentation as a condition of the grant of the Special
Exception. The camera shall be in use twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven ( 7) days a
week. The areas to be covered by the security cameras shall include, but are not
limited to, the storage areas, all doors and windows, all waste storage facilities, and
any other areas as required by the conditions imposed as part of the grant of the
Special Exception. Any and all recordings shall be kept for a period of at least two (2)
years.
g) The Township Building Code Official and Iaw enforcement personnel shall have
the right to enter the medical marijuana dispensary facility with due cause, for the
purpose of making reasonable inspections, to observe and enforce compliance with
this Section, all laws of the Township, and all state laws.
h) The application for a Special Exception shall include at a minimum the following
information:
11] An estimate ofthe size of the proposed medical marijuana dispensary facility;
2] The address ofthe location for which the Special Exception is sought;
3] The site plan and floor plan for the proposed premises denoting the use of all
areas of the premises, including storage, dispensary areas, lighting, signage,
parking, etc.;
5
Final adopted June 4, 2019
4] The proposed security plan in compliance with the MMA;
5] The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which
the medical marijuana dispensing activity is proposed to be conducted. In the
event the applicant is not the legal owner ofthe property, the application must
also have a notarized acknowledgement from the owner ofthe real property that a
medical marijuana dispensary facility will be operated on the property;
6] Evidence that the medical marijuana dispensary facility will be located in a
structure that is compliant with all of the requirements of the MMA; and
7] The location of any other existing or proposed marijuana dispensaries within
3, 000 feet ofthe site.
i) Enforcement.
1] Any person who engages in a violation of this Ordinance, or who owns,
possesses, controls, or has charge of any parcel ofreal property in the Township
upon which a violation ofthe Ordinance is maintained, shall be subject to the
penalties and remedies provided by this Section.
2] Any violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense for each
and every day the violation occurs or persists.
3] Any person in violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be punishable
by a fine of up to a $ 1, 000 per offense.
SECTION IV. REPEALER.
All Township ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions hereof, are
hereby repealed and rescinded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict.
SECTION V. SEVERABILITY.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not
affect or impair any remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts of this
Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Council of Concord Township that such
remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
6
Final adopted June 4, 2019
SECTION VL EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall take effect five ( 5) days after the date of its enactment by the Council of
Concord Township.
Attest:
ENACTED and ORDAINED this day of JAL , 2019.
CONCORD TOWNSHIP COUNCIL
Dominic egg', President
iMilfit
John J. Gillespie, Vice -President
Crossan, 2" d Vice -President
Elizateth A. Salvucci
M.,
4
Tho Mahoney
wnship Manager
7
Final adopted June 4, 2019

Township Concord
DELAWARE COUNTY
COUNCIL: Dominic A. Pileggi, John J. Gillespie, Elizabeth A. Salvucci,
Thomas J. Mahoney, Margaret S. Franke, Joshua Twersky, John L. Crossan
ORDINANCE NO. 387
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE TOWNSHIP OF CONCORD, BY
AMENDING CHAPTER 210, ZONING, ARTICLE I, SECTION 210-4 DEFINITIONS TO
ADD AND DEFINE MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITIES AND BY
AMENDING ARTICLE XIII, SECTION 210- 119 AND ARTICLE XIV, SECTION 210- 127 TO
ALLOW MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITIES IN THE C- 1 LOCAL
COMMERCIAL AND C-2 PLANNED BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL ZONING
DISTRICTS AS A SPECIAL EXCEPTION
WHEREAS, the Act ofApril 17, 2016, P. L. 84, No 16, 35 P. S. §§ 1023. 101 – 1023.2110,
known as the Medical Marijuana Act (" MMA"), effective April 17, 2016, established a
comprehensive State licensing and regulatory framework for the growing, processing, testing,
distribution, transportation, and dispensing of medical marijuana; and
WHEREAS, the Township of Concord ( hereinafter " Township") is acting to comply with
Pennsylvania Law and allow for dispensary facilities for medical marijuana in accordance with
the applicable state laws; and
WHEREAS, it is the purpose and intent of the Township to regulate medical marijuana
dispensaries in a manner that is consistent with State law while promoting the health, safety, and
general welfare of the residents and businesses within the Township, and limiting the potential
negative impacts associated with the dispensing of such medical marijuana; and
WHEREAS, nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to allow persons to engage in
any conduct inconsistent with state law, endanger others, cause a public nuisance, allow the use
or diversion of marijuana for nonmedical purposes, or allow any activity relating to marijuana
that is otherwise illegal under Pennsylvania law.
SECTION I:
NOW, THEREFORE, THIS
i
DAY OF, jt)kf , 2019, THE COUNCIL OF
CONCORD TOWNSHIP HEREBY ENACTS AND ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS:
Article I, Section 210- 4, Definitions, of the Township Zoning Code shall be amended to include
the following definition for Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility:
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY FACILITY—A person, including a natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity or any combination thereof, who holds
a permit from the Pennsylvania Department of Health under the Medical Marijuana Act
43 Thornton Road • Glen Millpialn,82te
Meeting Night: 1" Tuesday
d 31.14452i§2g
F 610. 4b9.8917
office@concordtownship. org
www.twp. concord. pa. us
MMA") to dispense medical marijuana. A Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility shall meet
the same municipal zoning and land use requirements as other commercial facilities that are
located in the same zoning district.
SECTION II:
Article XII, Section 210- 119 ( C) Use regulations (C- 1 Local Commercial District) ofthe
Township Zoning Code shall be amended to include Subsection ( C) ( 10), Medical Marijuana
Dispensary Facility, as a use by Special Exception in the C- 1 Local Commercial Zoning District
only along the Township' s principal arterial highways, Route 1, Route 202 and/ or Route 322, as
follows:
210- 119 C ( 10) Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility
a) The use of a building for the dispensing of medical marijuana shall be permitted
only upon grant of a Special Exception to an Applicant possessing a Dispensary
Permit issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with the criteria
and process set forth in the Township' s Zoning Code, for properties located within
the Local Commercial ( C- 1) Zoning District, where the property fronts on one of the
principal arterial highways of Route 1, Route 202 and/ or Route 322.
b) Signage for all medical marijuana dispensary facilities shall be limited to the
name of the business only, shall be in compliance with the Township' s sign
regulations, and shall contain no advertising of any companies, brands, products,
goods, or services or any drug-related symbols.
c) The medical marijuana dispensary facility shall only be located in a secure facility
with each and every entrance and exit thereto dedicated solely to the dispensary
facility. There shall be no passageways connecting the dispensary to any other
facility. Any and all common walls of the dispensary shall be fire walls subject to
approval by the Township Building Code Official to assure that the facility is secure.
The building in which any medical marijuana dispensing facility is located, as well as
the operations as conducted therein, shall fully comply with all applicable rules,
regulations, and laws including, but not limited to, zoning and building codes, the
Township' s business license ordinances, the Revenue and Taxation Code, the
Americans with Disabilities Act, and the MMA.
d) A medical marijuana dispensary facility shall not be located within 1, 000 feet of
any residential zoning boundary line or within 1, 000 feet of any public, private or
parochial schools or day- care centers. This distance shall be measured in a straight
line from the closest exterior wall of the building or portion thereof in which the
dispensary is located, to the closest property line of the protected district or use,
regardless of the municipality in which it is located.
e) The operators of all medical marijuana dispensary facilities shall provide the
Township Manager or the Township Manager' s designee with the name, phone
2
Final adopted June 4, 2019
number, facsimile number, and email address of an on-site representative to whom
the Township and the public can provide notice if there are any operational problems
associated with the medical marijuana dispensary facility. All medical marijuana
dispensary facilities shall make every good faith effort to encourage residents and the
public to call this representative to resolve any operational problems before any calls
or complaints are made to the Township or law enforcement. There shall be " No
loitering" signs posted in the parking lots at all Medical Marijuana Dispensary
Facilities.
f) Security cameras shall be installed and maintained in good working condition, and
used in an on- going manner with at least one hundred and twenty ( 120) concurrent
hours of digitally recorded documentation as a condition of the grant of the Special
Exception. The camera shall be in use twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven ( 7) days a
week. The areas to be covered by the security cameras shall include, but are not
limited to, the storage areas, all doors and windows, all areas where waste facilities
are stored, and any other areas as required by the conditions imposed as part of the
grant of the Special Exception. Any and all recordings shall be kept for a period of at
least two (2) years.
g) The Township Building Code Official and Iaw enforcement personnel shall have
the right to enter the medical marijuana dispensary facility with due cause for the
purpose of making reasonable inspections, to observe and enforce compliance with
this Section, all laws of the Township, and all state laws.
h) The application for a Special Exception shall include at a minimum the following
information:
1] An estimate of the size ofthe proposed medical marijuana dispensary facility;
2] The address of the location for which the Special Exception is sought;
3] The site plan and floor plan for the proposed premises denoting the use of all
areas ofthe premises, including storage, dispensary areas, lighting, signage,
parking, etc.;
4] The proposed security plan in compliance with the MMA;
5] The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which
the medical marijuana dispensing activity is proposed to be conducted. In the
event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must
also have a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the real property that a
medical marijuana dispensary facility will be operated on the property;
6] Evidence that the medical marijuana dispensary facility will be located in a
structure that is compliant with all of the requirements of the MMA; and
3
Final adopted June 4, 2019
i)
7] The location of any other existing or proposed marijuana dispensaries within
3, 000 feet of the site.
Enforcement.
1] Any person who engages in a violation of this Section, or who owns,
possesses, controls, or has charge of any parcel of real property in the Township
upon which a violation ofthis Ordinance is maintained, shall be subject to the
penalties and remedies provided by this Section.
2] Any violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense for each
and every day the violation occurs or persists.
3] Any person in violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be punishable
by a fine of up to a $ 1, 000 per offense.
SECTION III:
Article XIV, Section 210- 127 ( C) of the Concord Township Zoning Code is hereby
amended to add thereto subsection ( 16) Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility as a use by
Special Exception in the C-2 Planned Business and Commercial Zoning District on lots with
frontage lying along the Township' s principal arterial highways, Route 1, Route 202 and/or
Route 322 as follows:
210- 127 ( c) ( 16) Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility
a) The use of a building for the dispensing of medical marijuana shall be permitted
only upon grant of a Special Exception to an Applicant possessing a Dispensary
Permit issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with the criteria
and process set forth in the Township' s Zoning Code, for properties located within
the C-2 Planned Business and Commercial Zoning district, where the property fronts
on one of the principal arterial highways of Route 1, Route 202 and/ or Route 322.
b) Signage for all medical marijuana dispensary facilities shall be limited to the
name of the business only, shall be in compliance with the Township' s sign
regulations, and shall contain no advertising of any companies, brands, products,
goods, or services, or any drug-related symbols.
c) The Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility shall only be located in a secure
facility with each and every entrance and exit thereto dedicated solely to the
dispensary facility. There shall be no passageways connecting the dispensary to any
other facility. Any and all common walls of the dispensary shall be fire walls subject
to approval by the Township Building Code Official to assure that the facility is
secure. The building in which any medical marijuana dispensing facility is located, as
well as the operations as conducted therein, shall fully comply with all applicable
rules, regulations, and laws including, but not limited to, zoning and building codes,
4
Final adopted June 4, 2019
the Township' s business license ordinances, the Revenue and Taxation Code, the
Americans with Disabilities Act, and the MMA.
d) A Medical Marijuana Dispensary Facility shall not be located within 1, 000 feet of
a residential zoning boundary line or within 1, 000 feet of any public, private or
parochial schools or day-care centers. This distance shall be measured in a straight
line from the closest exterior wall of the building or portion thereof in which the
dispensary is located, to the closest property line of the protected district or use,
regardless of the municipality in which it is located.
e) The operators of all medical marijuana dispensary facilities shall provide the
Township Manager or the Township Manager' s designee with the name, phone
number, facsimile number, and email address of an on-site representative to whom
the Township and the public can provide notice if there are any operational problems
associated with the medical marijuana dispensary facility. All medical marijuana
dispensary facilities shall make every good faith effort to encourage residents and the
public to call this representative to resolve any operational problems before any calls
or complaints are made to the Township or law enforcement.. There shall be " No
loitering" signs posted in the parking Lots at all Medical Marijuana Dispensary
Facilities.
f) Security cameras shall be installed and maintained in good working condition, and
used in an on-going manner with at least one hundred and twenty ( 120) concurrent
hours of digitally recorded documentation as a condition of the grant of the Special
Exception. The camera shall be in use twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven ( 7) days a
week. The areas to be covered by the security cameras shall include, but are not
limited to, the storage areas, all doors and windows, all waste storage facilities, and
any other areas as required by the conditions imposed as part of the grant of the
Special Exception. Any and all recordings shall be kept for a period of at least two (2)
years.
g) The Township Building Code Official and Iaw enforcement personnel shall have
the right to enter the medical marijuana dispensary facility with due cause, for the
purpose of making reasonable inspections, to observe and enforce compliance with
this Section, all laws of the Township, and all state laws.
h) The application for a Special Exception shall include at a minimum the following
information:
11] An estimate ofthe size of the proposed medical marijuana dispensary facility;
2] The address ofthe location for which the Special Exception is sought;
3] The site plan and floor plan for the proposed premises denoting the use of all
areas of the premises, including storage, dispensary areas, lighting, signage,
parking, etc.;
5
Final adopted June 4, 2019
4] The proposed security plan in compliance with the MMA;
5] The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which
the medical marijuana dispensing activity is proposed to be conducted. In the
event the applicant is not the legal owner ofthe property, the application must
also have a notarized acknowledgement from the owner ofthe real property that a
medical marijuana dispensary facility will be operated on the property;
6] Evidence that the medical marijuana dispensary facility will be located in a
structure that is compliant with all of the requirements of the MMA; and
7] The location of any other existing or proposed marijuana dispensaries within
3, 000 feet ofthe site.
i) Enforcement.
1] Any person who engages in a violation of this Ordinance, or who owns,
possesses, controls, or has charge of any parcel ofreal property in the Township
upon which a violation ofthe Ordinance is maintained, shall be subject to the
penalties and remedies provided by this Section.
2] Any violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense for each
and every day the violation occurs or persists.
3] Any person in violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be punishable
by a fine of up to a $ 1, 000 per offense.
SECTION IV. REPEALER.
All Township ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions hereof, are
hereby repealed and rescinded to the extent of any inconsistency or conflict.
SECTION V. SEVERABILITY.
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Ordinance is for any reason found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not
affect or impair any remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts of this
Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Council of Concord Township that such
remainder shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
6
Final adopted June 4, 2019
SECTION VL EFFECTIVE DATE.
This Ordinance shall take effect five ( 5) days after the date of its enactment by the Council of
Concord Township.
Attest:
ENACTED and ORDAINED this day of JAL , 2019.
CONCORD TOWNSHIP COUNCIL
Dominic egg', President
iMilfit
John J. Gillespie, Vice -President
Crossan, 2" d Vice -President
Elizateth A. Salvucci
M.,
4
Tho Mahoney
wnship Manager
7
Final adopted June 4, 2019

