
BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS ORDINANCE NO. /5	S-
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, ESTABLISHING RULES AND REGULA­ TIONS FOR THE KEEPING AND/OR BOARDING OF ANIMALS, ANIMAL KENNELS AND THEKKEEPING AND/OR BOARDING OF ALL
··	AND PR6vJ:DING PEN ALTIEs ···:Fo·P.ci'B:E. vio:LATioN ···-
THEREOF.



BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and it is hereby
and enacted by authority of the sq,me:

SECTION I:	No person, firm, company, corporation, association and/or other entity shall build, erect, maintain, supervise and/or control any structure known and/or referred to as an animal and/or fowl kennel and/or enclosure where such kennel
i 'UiO.i'i'J.J.-._o.i'L'J'Cf&   °i'V  i "Cifi+-._ "':0]  b 'C i7/


ing or bartering the animals and/or fowl therein housed, except where now such may be permitted and allowed by existing Borough Zoning Ordinances and/or other Borough<,Ordinances.
SECTION II:	Animals as are herein defined shall mean cats and/or other domesticated or undomesticated animals but shall not include beasts of burden.
SECTION III:	Fowl as is herein defined shall mean all types of winged bird .
.SECTION IV:	No perso.n, firm, company, corporation,

association and/or other entity shall maintain, board, keep and/or control animals and/or fowl except where now allowed and/or
ted by a Borough Zoning Ordinance and/or other Boro<J.gh ordinances,

in excess of a total number of three animals or fowl, whether or not the same shall be or not be maintained, boarded, kept and/or
 
I	,. .




,
trolled for breQtling a.ngl or profit purposes; provided, however,

 
any person, firm, company, corporatio association and/or
 


'1l
 
entity may petition Borough Council for permission to main-	i
Ii
ii
i board, keep and/or control animals and/or fowl in excess of	1

11
total number of three and Council may, after due deliberation, !I
prayer of the petition and direct the Mayor bo issue a	I

petitioner which permit, however, shall be in writing forj
il
!l
the purpose of allowing said petitioner to maintain, boa.rd, keep
!
and/or control said animals and/or fowl in excess of the total	ii
 

number of three.
SECTION V:	Whoever vi.olates or :faiifs to comply with

of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be fined not more than
 


i i a.rvl

!l
 

THREE HUNDRED	($300.00) DOLLARS or imprisoned not more than thirty

(.30) days or both.	A separate offense shall be deemed committed

 
day d:ur .i.rrg ·or

continues.
 
on which a. violciti-o-n-o±-1rvn-=c"CJffipl-iance	occurs   :oJ
il
ii

I
 
SECTION VI:
 
Any Ordinance or part of an Grdina.nee con-
i
 

flicting with the provisions of this ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed in so far as it affects this Ordinance.

ORDAINED AND ENACTED into an Ordinance in Council this

ill,,_,,,.	day of			, 1978.



BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
 
I I 11
w
11
!'1
!
II
l1

I
 
.    rnce.4/;.,v.
 
,r;	•
 
O	,	I	ii
 
By VVM;;i,;-=-r	I
President of Co
 
and approved by me this
 
i
/.;<./J,	day of /dfi'Tlj 	
 
1978.
 
Examined
 

I
i
I
 	!/c,far{_J'		!
Mayor


\\
I


-2-	I
I
 





OFFICIAL BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
ORDINANCE NO. _/_t{_.A_.P:_     _


AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, .ALLEGHENY COU1'l""TY
PENNSYLVANIA, CONTROLLING ANIMAL DEFECATION ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY AND ALLOWING FOR CERTAIN
EXCEPTIONS THERETO




WHEREAS, the excrement of animals on public and private properties presents a clear and present threat to the health, safety and welfare of residents in the Borough of Coraopolis; and,
WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis is desirous of imposing controls relevant to animal defecation by virtue of the within Ordinance.
NOW, therefore, the Borough of Coraopolis hereby ORDAINS AND ENACTS as follows:
SECTION I:	Animal Defecation on Public and Private

Property Restricted.	No person, having possession, custody or control of any animal, shall knowingly or negligently permit any dog or other animal to commit any nuisance, i.e. defecation or urination, upon any gutter, street, driveway, alley, curb or sidewalk in the Borough of Coraopolis, or upon the floors or










------------ --···-·····-··-··--·--·
 





stairways of any building or place frequented by the public or used in common by the tenants, or upon the outside walls, walkways, driveways, alleys, curbs or stairways of any building abutting on a public street or park, or upon the grounds of any public park or public area, or upon any private property other than the property of the owner of such animal.
SECTION II.	Disposal of Animal Feces.	Any person having possession, custody or control of any dog or other animal which commits a nuisance, i.e. defecation or urination, in any area other than the private property of the owner of such dog or other animal, as prohibited in Section I shall be required to immediately remove any feces from such surface and either:

A.	Carry same away for disposal in a toilet.

B.	Place same in a nonleaking container for deposit in a trash or litter receptacle.





SECTION III.	Dogs Accompanying Blind or Handicapped Persons Exempted.	The provisions of Sections 1 and 2 hereof
shall not apply to a guide dog accompanying any blind persons, or

to a dog used to assist any other physically handicapped person.

SECTION IV.	Penalties.	Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon











-------.-------
 




conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than Three Hundred ($300.00) Dollars or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days.
SECTION V.	Repealer.	All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
SECTION VI.	Severability.	If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this ordinance is for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this ordinance.	It is hereby declared as the intent of the Borough of Coraopolis that this ordinance would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part there not been included herein.
SECTION VII.	Effective Date.	This ordinance shall

become effective immediately upon passage hereof.
 


1991.
 
ENACTED INTO LAW THIS   !3
 
--- DAY OF	-'
()jJ	.
 
0	;{ /?
secretary	(sea1J
 


------­
 

Pretaent_Ol#_  c0iii1cii-- -u------
 

Read and approved by the Mayor of the Borough of Coraopolis this  ,/,3-_ ----- day of .!§Y.!'_ '._.'V::-:::.	,	•	j
- - _':_ -Q_-:     -- - _ /}f:.1:_	_ tiff_
Mayor






-	-	--
 




OFFICIAL

BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS NOTICE OF ENACTED ORDINANCE


TAKE NOTICE that at a meeting held on -	aj> E-	-----' 1991, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis enacted an Ordinance of which this Notice is a Summary.


The aforesaid Ordinance prohibits the owners of animals to permit said animals to leave excrement on public property or property owned by others.	In addition, said Ordinance exempts Blind or Handicapped persons.	Further, said Ordinance establishes penalties for violations thereof; the effective date thereof and repeals inconsistent ordinances.


A complete text of the Ordinance is available for review at the office of the Borough Secretary, 1012 Fifth Avenue, Coraopolis, PA 15108, during normal business hours.





















-------"
 





OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 1012 FIFTH AVENUE
CORAOPOLIS, PA 15108
(412) 264-3002







November 14, 1991



The Record
705 Fifth Avenue
Coraopolis PA	15108


Genttlemen:

Please have the two (2).Notices of Enactment of Ordinance appear in the November 20, 1991 edition of The Record.

Sincerely yonrs,

BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS

c;llhir- .J )' .   c-A? A;.4--tf ;l

Oliver G. Casasanta Borough Secretary

enclosures



















-"
 




OFFICIAL BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
NOTICE OF PROPOSED ORDINANCE




TAKE NOTICE that at a meeting held on - .:' ':_Il!_b Ec.'.:_ ,- 9_1    , 1991, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis will act upon an Ordinance of which this Notice is a Summary.


The aforesaid Ordinance prohibits the owners of animals to permit said animals to leave excrement on public property or property owned by others.	In addition, said Ordinance exempts Blind or Handicapped persons.	Further, said Ordinance establishes penalties for violations thereof; the effective date thereof and repeals inconsistent ordinances.


A complete text of the Ordinance is available for review at the office of the Borough Secretary, 1012 Fifth Avenue, Coraopolis, PA 15108, during normal business hours.



Oliver G. Casasanta
Borough Secretary
 
Proof	Of	Publication



Of	Notice	In The	Coraopolis      Record


Under Act No. 587, Approved  May 16, 1929, P.L  1784, As last amended  by Act No.  520 of July  5, 1947.


 
County  of  Alleghe_ny,  . ·
 


ss;
 

State of Pennsyvania,

Robyn    Getsy'		·     oftheGATEWAY.PRESS,lNC.,PUBLJSHERS.beingdu!yswom, deposes  and   says   tliat  The	Corao'polis      Record	is  a  weekly   newspaper   in   gener J    circualtion
published in Monroeville, PA, Allegheny County at 610 Beatty Road, aforesaid, which was established as a weekly newspaper,	19O 5 ,sincewhichdatesaid weeklynewspaperhasbeenregularlyissued .in said County, and that copy of the printed notice or publi ati'oli is at ched hereto exactly as the same was printed and published in the regular editions and issue:s  f the said weekly newspaper on th following dates, viz:

October  30	91
---------------------------------- A.D.   19 -
Affian t further deposes that he is duly authorized to verify the foregoing statement under oath and also declares that affiant is not interested in the subject matterof theaforesaid notice or publication, and thatall allegations in the  foregoing statement as to  time, place and  character  of publication  are true.

Copy of notice  or publication
-· - -o:F F ft°IAL
S0ROUGHOF
 
CORAOPOLIS
NOTCCE'.OF
-PROPOSED ORDINANCE
 
Sworn to and subscribed  before me this
 
 	l_s_t 	_
 

._TAKE: -t:-1o:r :g:_·.:: th'at.' at
·.   _meeting      held     on    _November
 
day of	November	.19
..	1-01·µ_7·;;..:..  S-l·L
 
13,   1991,  the   Council
 
of. :the
 
•	)	PL'.C.E =· WVE":, No .'.F'.Y PUSc!S	1
 
Borough of Coraopolis will 'act
upon _an   Oidfna"ilce   _of   whiCh
:: this  Not) e.iS _a  Summary.
The· :_afOi-e.Said" ordinance·
. prOhibUs ..the-_o_wnei's of anl mals  to  permit_ said  animals
 



My Commission Expires
 
_,,	•   ;.....,.1 ;.:, :·;; _,.. ;: , ;:,.::,, ,.. :. ·::., . .:;. CC-!JNTY l
ff:YGC;/,i,i;'1S 10:-1 ti !:i!f-:0:·
M ; \b<:r, Pi:.:·n:::. ;-:<:.".- ,:\:.;i-:ic.:.;.,;.1:-':ln 1;; 1 _:,.:..;;·
 
to leave excrement on public
.  property    Or    property_   owned
by   others:  _·in·_.  _addition,.· sa_id.
 
STATEMENT  OF ADVERTISING  COST
Borough of	Coraopolis
 
:. Ordinance   exempts   _Blind   or	 	
Handica'Pped  persons
 
Further, said ordinance esta·
·_   i ri es	:i:·ie  !o;  il  -
dafe  ttle'reo_f   cind  repeals-  iri
-  consistent 'ordiililnces.	·
 
Attn:	Mr. Oliver Casasanta

 1012 Fifth Avenue	Coraopolis,  PA	15108 	
 

,,,0.
f' \i
 
A   ·comP1ete     text·--ot'--the OrdinanCe· _is·_- av.ililable. tOr
review  at' the office  of  the
sorough·_ ec-retary,  10-12 Fifth
Avenue; Coraopolis, PA 15108, · during    normal    b'usiness hours..	·
Oiiver· G. casaSanta.
Borough secretary	....I
   (2127 10-30.91, .lT) 	
 

To IBE	DR.

·	For publishing the notice or advertisement attached
hereto  on  the  above  stated  dates .......................... S     2 3 . 3 2 Probating same························································ s		_ Total .........................................................................  S	2 3 . 3 2
 

-- -----
 
Proof	Of	Publication



Of	Notice	In The	Coraopolis      Record


Under Act No.  587, Approved  May  16, 1929, P.L  1784, As last amended  by  Act  No.  520 of July  5,  1947.


 
County· of Allegheny,
 


ss:
 

State  of  Pennsyvania,

Robyn   Getsy		of the GATEWAY PRESS, INC., PUBLISHERS, being duly sworn, deposes  and  says  that  The	Coraopo.lis      Record	s a weekly newspaper in general circualtion published in Monroeville, PA, Allegheny County at 610 Beatty Road, aforesaid, which was established as a weekly
newspaper,	190 5	, since which date said weekly newspaper has been regularly issued in said County, and

that copy of the printed notice or publication is attached hereto exactly as the same was printed and published in the regular editions and issues of  the said weekly newspaper on the follorving dates, viz:

November	20	A.D. 19 91

Affiant further deposes that he is duly authorized to verify the foregoing statement under oath and also declares that affiantis not interested in the subject matter of the aforesaid notice or publication, and that all allegations in the foregoing statement as to time, place and character  f publication are true.

Copy of notice or publication
 

-- -OFFICIAL--
BOROUGH OF
CORAOPOLIS
·	NOTICE OF ,
ENACTeo ORDINANCE:

-::".-TAKE-NOTICE that_-at·a meeting - held  on -Noveiiibef 13, 1991, _the Council _of the Borou.9h       of     _Coraopolis
 


Sworn to and subscribed before me this day of	November
 


22nd

.1911.
 
enacted   an - Ordinance   of
which  t. i  Notice  is... a
Summary ..

The  .aforesaid   ordinance Prohibits the ·owners of  ani­ 'mals  to   perriiit  said  animals to_ leave exCrement on public property. or  property  own by .others.  In  addltion,  said
Ordinance. exempts  Blind or
:Handic_appe_d pe_rsons. Further, said Ordinance esla blishes penalties for viola­ tions  thereof;   the -  effective
date thereof._ and repeals in­ consistent o inances. ·

A _c mplete text .of· the_ Ordinance is available for review at the office. of the Borough Secretary, 1012 Fifth­ AvenUe, Cora_opo\is;PA 15108, du_ring     normal     busiriess·
hOurs;-.---_-·   · ·      ·

\	O.?J 11-20-911 1T)
,,
f' "	. I
 
lie.  Aice .E.Tovey. Nolaly Pub c
Monroev:ce Baro., Allegheny county
My  Commission  Expires	1	MyComm!SSionExpiresNcv.26, 1995	1
KA,,.,..,;:::;:;.. bonne11k..,,n1">	,...  ,.,n ,.,_. K10tanes

STATEMENT OF ADVERTISING  COST

   Borough of  Coraopolis 	 Attn:	Mr.  Oliver  Casasanta
1012 Fifth  Avenue	Coraopolis,  PA	15108

To THE	DR.

For publishing the notice or advertisement  attached
hereto on the above stated dates .......................... $  2 3 3 2 Probating same ........................................................ $	_
Total ...................................:..................................... $ 2 3 .3 2
 
OFFICIAL BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
ORDINANCE	I 7i:i

AN ORDINANCE OFTF..E BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY AND COMMON'"IV:EALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA WHICH REQUIRES OWNERS OF RENTAL PROPERTY TO OBTAIN AN OCCUPANCYPERMITFORTENANTSTHEREOFANDPROVIDE CERTAIN INFORMATION RELEVM'T THERETO

WHEREAS, the Borough of Coraopolis has a valid interest in maintaining accurate information regarding occupants of rental property.

NOW, THEREFORE, be it ORDAINED and ENACTED as follows: Section 1- Registration with Borough Manager
Every person, company or corporation who owns property in this Borough and who rents, leases or allows any other person or persons, company or corporation to live on said property located in Coraopolis Borough shall report the following information to the Manager of the Borough within sixty (60) days from the date of the enactment of this Ordinance and within
thirty (30) days of any change of occupancy thereafter:

A.	The names of persons, companies or corporations, with the exception of dependent children of the property owner, who are occupants of any pr<)perty owned by the said property owner with the Borough.

B.	The date said person, company or corporation commenced to occupy the property owner's premises.

C.	Complete present and former address, if known by the property owner, of said occupants who have moved into the Borough.

D.	The property owner shall also report to the Borough Manager the foiiowing information regarding the occupants of property within the Borough owned by the property owner.

Section II- Application for Occupancy Permit.

Any property owner who leases, rents or permits any person, company or corporation, not members of the property owner's household, to occupy any part of the property owner's
property, must apply to the Borough Manager for an occupancy permit.  Said occupancy permit shall be required for each person, company or corporation as indicated above.  The contents of the application for said occupancy permit as well as any possible fees charged for said permit may be established by the Coraopolis Borough Council.
 
Section Ill- Penalties


Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than 1bree Hundred Dollars ($300.00) and costs, and in default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days.




ORDAINED AND ENACTED this  (3-li-.  day of	A Pi< 1 L	,2005, by the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis.
ATTEST:	BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
 
0-04
 



By:
 

.--···-,   l	) 1'
/ / /}&'-"-1I ,
 
Tom Cellante
Borough Manager
 
President of Council
 


Examined and approved by the Mayor of the Borough of Coraopolis this	{3th	day of
. A Pg	'2005.	1:). grrbz-,,....,,(..
May r
 
OFFICIAL BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
ORDINANCE NO. 1773

AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY AND COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, WHICH REGULATES EXCESSIVE NOISE AND PROVIDING PENALTIES  FOR VIOLATION THEREOF


WHEREAS, residents of the Borough of Coraopqlis are entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of their premises; and,



WHEREAS, the aforesaid peaceful enjoyment is interrupted by unreasonably loud noise; and,



WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis is authorized by the Borough Code to enact laws which, inter alia, protect the health, safety and welfare of the community and to abate conduct which constitutes a nuisance.



SECTION ONE.



NOW THEREFORE, be it ordained and enacted by the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis that the Borough of Coraopolis Code of Ordinances, Part 6, Chapter 654, be amended by the addition of a new Section 654.0l(b)(2) and Section 654.99, to be entitled "Excessive Noise," which shall provide as follows:



Section 654.0l(b)(2)(i). Unnecessarv or excessive noise to be disorderly conduct.

The creation, within the Borough of any unnecessary or excessive noise or of any noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the health or life of any individual or in the disturbance of the public peace and welfare or the aiding and abetting in the creation of any such noise to continue is hereby prohibited and shall constitute disorderly conduct.



Section 654.0I(b)(2)(ii). Enumeration of unnecessary or excessive noises.



Prohibited noise, within the meaning of this chapter is hereby defined to include the following:
 
A.	For any person at any time to use a horn or other warning device otherwise than as a reasonable warning or to make any unnecessary  or unreasonable, loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or othei; warning device.

B.	The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrumep.t in such a manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity thereof.



C.	Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity thereof.



D.	Permitting any animal, bird or fowl in one's possession or under one's control to make any frequent or long continued noise of such character or intensity as to disturb the comfort or repose of any person.



E.	The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger.



F.	The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets or highways in any residential district or section other than between the hours of7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interests of public health and safety and then only with a permit from the Borough of Coraopolis, which permit may be granted for
a period not to exceed thirty (30) days while the emergency continues. If
the Borough should determine that the public health and safety will not be
impaired by the erection, demolitism, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and if they shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, it may grant permission for such work to be done between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work.



G.	The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution oflearning, church or court, while the same are in session, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of sessions thereof and.the making of
 
any other noise  so as to  annoy the users  and/or  occupants  of such places  or buildings  as are herein defined.	·



H.	The use of any drum, loud speaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to the sale or display of merchandise of a commercial  character.



I.Refuse compacting vehicles. Operating of or permitting to be operated the compact cycle of the motor vehicle which can compact refuse during the hours prohibited in the contract and specification documents between the Borough and the refuse collector.


Section 654.01(b)(2)(iii). Exceptions.


None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply to or be enforced against:



A.	Any vehicle or personnel of the Borough while engaged upon necessary public business.



B.	Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the Borough during the nighttime, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during daytime.



C.	Parades with band music on holidays or by civic organizations or by the public schools or divisions of the public schools.



D.	School sports events which may or may not be accompanied by cheering and/or music.



E.	The reasonable use of amplifiers or loud speakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character.



F.	Fireworks exhibits held under permit by the B.orough.
 
.	'
Section 654.99. Violations and penalties.



Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) and costs of such proceedings or, upon default of payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment in the County jail for a term of not more than thirty (30) days.



SECTION TWO. Repealer.


That the within Ordinance shall and is intended to only repeal the former Section
654.99	entitled "Penalty" as Section 654.99, hereinabove, provides for the new and
amended penalty provision for violation of Chapter 654 of the Coraopolis Borough Code of Ordinances. That nothing in the within Ordinance is intended to limit or repeal the provisions of the Pennsylvania Crime Code, Section 5503, entitled "Disorderly Conduct" (18 Pa.C.S. §5503) as those provisions are not deemed inconsistent with the provisions hereof. ·



SECTION THREE. Effective Date.



That the within ordinance shall take full force and effect upon passage and approval of same.



 

ORDAINED and ENACTED this ATTEST:
 
iD rv- day of -.:::G- lL;t'---'' 2013.

OPOLIS
 









Examined and approved by the Mayor of the Borough of Coraopolis, this  I o th
doyof  .'.JJl'j	,2013.


M.
 
BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA ORDINANCE NO. 1797

AN ORDINANCE FOR THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY, COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS RELATING TO ANIMALS, SPECIFICALLY ESTABLISHING THE PROHIBITION OF THE FEEDING OF WILD ANIMALS AND FURTHER PROVIDING ENFORCEMENT PENALTIES.



NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED, by the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis, Allegheny County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and it is hereby Ordained and Enacted that the Coraopolis Borough Code of Ordinances is hereby amended as follows:

ARTICLE VII.	PROHIBITING THE FEEDING OF WILD ANIMALS

Section 1.	Purpose

The Council of the Borough of Coraopolis finds that the feeding of unconfined wild animals is detrimental to the animals, causes a public health nuisance, and a safety hazard that is detrimental to the general health, safety, and general welfare of the public.



Section 2.	Definitions

As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:

"Feed" or "Feeding" means the act of furnishing, exposing, placing, depositing, distributing or scattering, whether intentionally or negligently, any food or substance of any kind which is likely to attract, lure, or entice wild animals.

"Person" shall mean any individual, owner, occupier, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, club, society, or any other form of association or organization subject to the jurisdiction of the Borough of Coraopolis.

"Wild animal" shall mean any species of animal wild by nature, as distinguished from the common domesticated animals. A wild animal is one that can survive in its natural environment without the help or assistance of humans, including but not limited to raccoons, bears, coyotes, deer, foxes, groundhogs, opossums, skunks, birds, and waterfowl.

Section 3.	Prohibited Conduct

It shall be unlawful for any person, or any agent thereof to feed wild animals upon public prope1iy or private prope1iy. It shall further be unlawful to authorize or aid or abet any other person to feed wild animals upon public or private property.
 
Section 4.	Exclusion

A.	The feeding of small songbirds shall be permitted outdoors at such times and in such numbers that:

1.	Such feeding does not create an unreasonable disturbance that affects the rights of surrounding property owners and/or creates a nuisance;

2.	Does not create an accumulation of droppings on the property or surrounding properties in violation of health and safety ordinances.

3.	Does not become an attractant for rodents, wild animals.

B.	Bird feeders or other mechanical devices for feeding small birds shall be placed at least five (5) feet above the ground and utilized so s to not be an attractant to wild animals.

C.	The feeding of wildlife is permitted within confined zoos, educational and environmental centers or federally protected wildlife reserves.

D.	Baiting wild animals for the purpose of the removal or abatement of nuisance wild animals on private or public property.

Section 5.	Enforcement

A. Police officers, animal control officers, code enforcement officers, or any other designated and authorized personnel of the Borough of Coraopolis are hereby given full power and authority to enforce this ordinance.

B.	The designated animal control officer may seize any wild animal at large or running at large within the Borough limits to the annoyance or inconvenience of the residents or pedestrians or operators of motor vehicles. Said wild animal shall be taken and impounded in a place provided for said purpose. Ifthe owner is known, or can be ascertained by a registration, the Borough shall notify that owner to reclaim said animal within a period of 48 hours after receiving notice to do so. Ifthe owner is not known, or cannot be ascertained, or if the wild animal is not claimed within said 48 hour period, said wild animal shall be dispensed of by the designated animal control officer.

C.	Any person found to be in violation of this ordinance shall be ordered to immediately cease the feeding of wild animals, removing all food, substances or devices placed on the propetty in violation of this Ordinance.

Section 6.	Penalties

Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, upon conviction thereof in action brought before the Magisterial District Judge in the maimer provided for the enforcement of summary offense under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 plus costs, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Borough, and, in default of payment of said fines and costs, to a
 
term of imprisonment to the extent permitted by law for the punishment of summary offenses. A separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a violation of this Ordinance is found to exist, or for each section of this Ordinance found to have been violated. The Borough may also commence appropriate actions in equity or other to prevent, restrain, col'l'ect, enjoin or abate violations of this Ordinance. All fines and penalties collected for violation of this Ordinance shall be paid to the Borough Manager.

Section 7.	Severability

If any provision of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such holding _shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this Ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this Ordinance are declared severable.

Section 8.	Repealer

All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.

Section 9.	Effective Date

This Ordinance shall take full force and effect immediately upon passage and approval of same.




ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 13th day of April, 2016.


ATTEST:

 








Examined and approved by the Mayor of the Borough of Coraopolis, this 13th day of April, 2016.
 
BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA ORDINANCE NO. 1798

AN ORDINANCE FOR THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY, COMMONWEALTH  OF PENNSYLVANIA, REGULATING THE PLACEMENT OF WASTE DUMPSTERS AND THE STORAGE OF OTHER ITEMS WITHIN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY OF ANY PUBLIC STREET OR UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY IN THE BOROUGH.



WHEREAS, the Borough Council of the Borough of Coraopolis has determined that it is in the best interests of the Borough of Coraopolis that the placement of waste dumpsters and the storage of items within the right-of-way of any public street or upon any private property in the Borough be regulated.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coraopolis, in lawfol session duly assembled, and it is hereby ORDAINED AND ENACTED as follows:
Section 1. Legislative Intent.

Dumpsters  and portable  storage containers  are a necessary part  of the residential  and business  community  of the Borough  of Coraopolis.  If left unregulated,  dumpsters  and portable storage containers  can create problems  which  can have a detrimental  impact  on the health,  safety, and welfare  of the community.  Dumpsters  aqd portable  storage containers  can hinder pedestrian and vehicular  traffic flow and create dangeroi'.1s  conditions by obstructing sidewalks and streets and can create an appearance of disorder and economic blight.  Council  has determined  that the regulation  of dumpsters  and portable  storage containers within the Borough  will promote  the health,  safety, and welfare of the community  by preventing  hazards  associated  with these
devices, by facilitating pedestrian and vehicular traffic flow and by eliminating a nuisance that
creates the appearance of inefficiency and economic blight.

Section 2. Definitions.

The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation, administration, and enforcement of this Part:
ACT 97 - the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act of 1980, P.S. 380, No. 97, as now or hereafter amended.
BOROUGH - The Borough of Coraopolis.

GARBAGE - All table, refuse, animal and vegetable matter, offal from meat, fish and fowls, fruits, vegetable and parts thereof, and other articles and materials ordinarily used for food which have become unfit for such use or which are for any reason discarded.

HAZARDOUS WASTE - Any garbage, refuse or a combination thereof, as defined in Act 97, which because of its quantity, concentration, or its physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may:
 
a)	Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in morbidity in either an individual or total population; or
b)	Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
PERMITTEE - A person who obtains or is required to obtain a permit under this Part. PERSON - Any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, Limited Liability
Company, estate, trust or other legally recognized entity.

STREET - Any public street, highway, road, lane, court, cul-de-sac, avenue, alley or other thoroughfare within the Borough.

STREET STORAGE-Any item placed in a street for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours that is not a motor vehicle as defined by the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code or a waste dumpster, including, but not limited to, containers commonly known as portable storage devices, stones, mulch, and yard waste.
WASTE DUMPSTER - A unit designed for the deposit of waste materials at or near a building or other structure, commonly located on a temporary basis on a street abutting the site or upon private property and transportable to and from the site for purposes of disposal of its contents by means of a carrying vehicle.
Section 3. Permit Required.

No person, other than agents or employees of the Borough shall place, maintain or use a waste dumpster or street storage, on public or private property, including public thoroughfares, without first having obtained a permit from the Borough by filing an application with the Borough in a form to be hereafter prescribed. Any application fee for obtaining such a permit shall be established by this ordinance or by further resolution of the Borough Council. If the waste dumpster or street storage is or will be located on the street or within the cart way, the placement of the waste dumpster or street storage must be approved by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
A.	The permit application is considered complete when.all required information is provided on the permit application and any applicable fee is paid.
B.	The permit must be issued prior to the placement of the waste dumpster or street storage by the applicant.

C.	All permits issued under this Part shall be valid for a period of fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of placement of the waste dumpster or street storage, as stated in the application. Ifit becomes necessary to amend the date of placement of the Waste dumpster or street storage, the applicant shall notify Borough authorities and the fourteen (14) days will begin with the actual placement of the waste dumpster or street storage.

D.	An applicant may apply for an extension of the fourteen (14) calendar day period, to be granted by the enforcement official in increments of fourteen (14) calendar days, if the enforcement official deems the extension necessary and reasonable. The applicant must apply for an extension at least three (3) days before the expiration of the original permit.
 
Section 4. Placement and Use Regulations.

A.	The placement of a waste dumpster or street storage upon a street shall not extend into the travel lane of traffic.

B.	A waste dumpster or street storage placed upon a street shall be illuminated with a warning light, light reflector or a reflectorized material on the front and rear surfaces in such a manner to indicate the height and width of it, and shall be visible for a distance of not less than tlll'ee hundred (300) feet between the hours of sunset and sumise.

C.	The location and utilization of a waste dumpster or street storage upon a street or private property shall not be in a manner which constitutes a safety hazard to persons or property.

D.	The location and utilization of a waste dumpster or street storage upon a street shall be in compliance with all federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations applicable, thereto, including but not limited to any highway occupancy or other permit required by the Pennsylvania Depmtment of Transportation, in addition to the requirements of this Part.

E.	The waste dumpster or street storage shall be kept at least 20 feet away from any crosswalk and from any intersection and must be placed so it does not block the view of any motorist pulling into a roadway. If the unit occupies a metered parking space, the pennittee shall pay the Borough five ($5.00) Dollars per day for each space so occupied.

F.	The waste dumpster or street storage shall be conspicuously marked with the name, address and phone number of its owner and a copy of the current effective permit shall be visibly attached to it.

G.	During all times when the waste dumpster or street storage is in place and in use, a tarpaulin or other suitable weather resistant cover shall be placed over it in order to protect the contents from being displaced and/or causing litter on public property or a private property or creating dust, offensive odors or other health hazards. The cover should also be applied to
prevent persons from foraging the waste contained in the dumpster. In all instances, the container
shall, when necessary, be provided with adequate restraints to prevent inadvertent movement from its original location. The need for restraints shall be determined by Borough officials at the time the permit is issued.

H.	No overflow of any material shall be permitted from the waste dumpster or street storage, nor shall any accumulation of any material next to the Waste dumpster or street storage be permitted.

I.	Hazari:lous waste and garbage shall not be stored in a Waste dumpster or street storage except and only except, a garbage dumpster shall be permitted for Apartment Buildings with ten(!0) or more rented units.
 
J.  There shall be no defect or faulty design in the waste dumpster or street storage, which might create a hazard to the general public, interfere with its operation or inhibit the purpose for which it is to be used.

K.	Liability insurance shall be obtained and maintained by the pennittee in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) for property damage and personal injury, combined single limit, arising out of or in connection with the placement or utilization of a waste dumpster or street storage on any street, with the Borough being named as an additional insured on said policy for such purpose.

L.	The pennittee shall execute an indemnity agreement, in a form acceptable to the Borough, promising to indemnify, save harmless and defend the Borough, its officials, agents, servants, and employees and each of them, against and hold it and them harmless from any and all lawsuits, claims, demands, liabilities, losses and expenses, including court costs and reasonable attomeys' fees for or on account of any injury to any person or any damage to any property, which may arise or which may be alleged to have arisen out of or in connection with the placement or utilization of a waste dumpster or street storage on any street.

M.	Only one (1) waste dumpster or street storage per property will be permitted on any street in the Borough or upon any one (1) parcel of private property.

N.	If a chute or similar device or object is to be used with a waste dumpster, it must be deemed structurally sound by the Borough or its designee, and liability insurance in the same amount and form as set forth in Subsection K above shall be provided.

0.	The permittee shall assume all risk of damage, and the Borough shall not be liable for any damage, to the waste dumpster or street storage when the Borough is plowing snow, maintaining the street or other facilities within the street or performing other public functions.

P.	The permittee shall be responsible for all damages to Borough property which may occur as a result of the placement or use of the dumpster or street storage. Ifthe permittee does not promptly repair any damage after notice to do so from the Borough, the Borough may repair such damage and recover the cost from the permittee.

Section 5. Revocation of Pcl'mit.

Without limitation as to the utilization of any other legal or equitable remedy or action available to the Borough, civil or criminal, noncompliance with any of the requirements or provisions set forth in this Part or any material false statement or omission made in connection with the application for a permit shall be grounds for revocation by the Borough Manager, the Borough Chief of Police or their designee of the permit issued pursuant to this Part.

Section 6. Removal of Waste Dumpsters or Street Storage.

The Borough may at the expense of the owner or lessee of the private property or the permittee remove or cause the removal of a waste dumpster or street storage.
 
Section 7. Penalties.

Any person who or which violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of Three Hundred ($300.00) Dollars plus costs for each such violation. Each day or portion thereof in which a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation of this Part. Each provision of this Part which is violated shall be considered a separate violation. Such fine shall be in addition to any other fine which may be imposed under the provisions of any other ordinances of the Borough, Pennsylvania law, or Federal law. In default of payment of any fine, such person shall be imprisomnent for not more than thirty (30) days.

Section 8. Equitable Relief.

In addition to or in lieu of the penalties provided in Section 7 hereof, any violations of the provisions of this Part may be abated or enforced by proceedings seeking equitable relief against the violator.

Section 9. Repealer.

Any ordinance or pat1 of ordinance conflicting with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.

Section 10.

If any provision of this ordinance shall be determined to be unlawful,  invalid, void or unenforceable, then that provision shall be considered severable from the remaining provisions which shall continue in foll force and effect.

Section 11.

This ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately upon and after its final passage.


ORDAINED AND ENACTED into law this 13th day of April, 2016.

ATTEST	 

Examined and approved by the Mayo ·o April, 2016.
 
/.





REQUEST FOR TEMPORARY PLACEMENT OF DUMPSTER/CONTAINER ON A ROADWAY WITHIN THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS

Reguestor Information:
Name:	_
Address:     ---------------------------
 
Phone Number:  	
 
-------------
 
Homeowners  Insurance  Carrier: ------------------
PoIicy    Number:-------------------------

Dumpster Company Information:
Name:	_
Address:     ---------------------------
Point   of    Contact:   ------------------------

Insurance   Carrier:   ------------------------
PoIicy    Number:------------------------­
Dumpster     Location:.,----------------------------­
Estimated Time of Placement:
From:        ----------------------------
To:
Type of Traffic Controls (Cones, Drums, Lighting, etc ...):	_


Requestor agrees to assume all costs and responsibilities for the placement and maintenance of Traffic Control Devices required to alert and warn drivers of the potential hazards created by the placement of the dumpster/container. In addition, the requestor agrees to fully indemnify and hold harmless the Borough of Coraopolis and
assumes al/ liability for damages or injury occurring to any person or property through or in consequence of any act or omission of anyone associated with the placement of the dumpster/container on the roadway. Requestor has obtained minimum $100,000 liability insurance, and named the Borough as an additional insured on said policy for such purpose, I have read the conditions and requirements, both above and attached, for the placement of a dumpster container on the roadway and request permission to place a
dumpster/container on a roadway within the Borough of Coraopolis.

Name (Printed):	_
Signature: --------------	Date:  	
==================================================================
FOR DEPARTMENT  USE ONLY

Request has been examined by Chief of Police or his designee and:
Recommend approval of application:	Recommend denial of application:	_
Reason:     -c=-c-...,.-----------------------
Name of Official: ---------
Signature:	Date: ------
 
DUMPSTER/CONTAINER CRITERIA FOR PLACEMENT CORAOPOLIS BOROUGH

The placement of a dumpster/container on a roadway within the Borough of Coraopolis may be permitted providing the following criteria are satisfied:
1.	The requestor has no other available space (driveway, lawn, etc..) that the dumpster can be placed.
2.	The dumpster/container will not be placed on the roadway longer than 14 days.
3.	The dumpster/container will be removed within 24 hours of it being filled.
4.	The dumpster/container will be secured so as to prevent debris from the container from blowing from or spilling from the container.
5.	Traffic control devices will be properly placed and maintained to alert and warn
drivers of the potential hazards created by the placement of the container.
6.	The requestor completes an application requesting the placement of the
dumpster/container and agrees to the conditions and requirements associated with such request.
7.	No garbage will be placed in a Waste dumpster.
8.	The request is approved by the Chief of Police or his designee.

NO dumpster/container will be allowed to be placed in any area that a motor vehicle would be prohibited from stopping, standing or parking by either ordinance or statute. (Unless arlicu/able circumstances present and only upon approval of Chief of Police or designee.)

Traffic Control Devices:
1.	Traffic control devices shall be placed when the dumpster/container is placed on
the roadway, and they shall be properly maintained during the time they are placed.
2.	Traffic control devices shall remain in place only as long as they are needed, and they shall be removed as soon as possible thereafter.
3.	Traffic control devices shall be correctly positioned, clean, legible, operative, and in good state of repair. The reflective sheeting is not permitted to be scratched, scarred dirty or show evidence of loss of reflectivity. They shall be repositioned, cleaned repaired and replaced when necessary to maintain their effectiveness.
4.	Devices shall be positioned to provide for a smooth and gradual transition of
traffic around the dumpster/container.
5.	Devices shall be constructed so as not to inflict undue damage to a vehicle that
strikes them inadvertently.
6.	Only cones (28" to 36"), drums, Type I or II Barricades, or minicades shall be used as traffic control devices. Devices shall have reflective sheeting.
7.	At a minimum, there shall be at least 4 (four) devices positioned in front of the dumpster/container, as shown in the attached diagram, and 2 (two) devices behind.
8.	In addition to the traffic control devices, the dumpster must display reflective material mounted on each of its Corners.
 
OFFICIAL BOROUGH  OF CORAOPOLIS
ORDINANCE NO. 1805


AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY AND COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 1777, ENACTED MARCH 12, 2014, TO ESTABLISH RULES AND REGULATIONS REGARDING THE PLANTING, MAINTENANCE, PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL
OF SHADE TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER VEGETATION WITHIN THE LEGAL BOUNDARIES  OF THE BOROUGH AND TO ESTABLISH THE RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITY OF THE COMMISSION.

WHEREAS, the Coraopolis Borough Council has heretofore on March 12, 2014, enacted into law Ordinance No. 1777 known as the Shade Tree Ordinance; and,

WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis desires to amend Ordinance 1777 by adding the following: '
J.   Any "Shade Tree" or tree on public or private property that is deemed a public safety
hazard because of rotting limbs, trunks or roofs shall be removed within 30 days of notice from the Borough of Coraopolis or the Shade Tree Commission.  Said tree removal shall be the responsibility of the property owner.  Failure to comply with notice to remove said tree will cause the Borough of Coraopolis or the Shade Tree Commission to have said tree removed with the property owner liable for all cost; which if not paid will be li ned on said property.



NOW, THEREFORE, be it ORDAINED and ENACTED as follows:


ORDAINED and ENACTED by the Council of Coraopolis Borough, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, this	12th	day of	September	, 2018.


 



Reviewed  and  approved  by  the  Mayor  of  the  Borough  of  Coraopolis  this	12th	day  of September	, 2018.



Shawn P. Reed, Mayor	------
 


STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE







ORDINANCE NO. 1806





BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS






ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA









Adopted at a Public Meeting Held on November 14, 2018


























A- 1
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS


Article I- General Provisions

 
Section 101.
Section 102.
Section 103.
Section 104.
Section 105.
Section 106.
Section 107.
Section 108.
Section 109. Section 11O Section 111
Section 112
 
Short Title
Statement of Findings Purpose
Statutory Authority Applicability Repealer Severability
Compatibility with Other Requirements
Erroneous Permit Waivers
Version of Regulations and Standards
Disclaimer of Liability
 


Article II - Definitions


Article Ill - Stormwater Management Standards

 
Section 301.
Section 302.
Section 303.
Section 304.
Section 305
 
General Requirements Exemptions
Volume Controls Rate Controls Riparian Buffers
 


ArticleIV-StormwaterManagementSitePlanRequirements

 
Section 401.
Section 402.
Section 403.
Section 404.
Section 405.
Section 406.
Section 407.
 
Plan Requirements Plan Submission Plan Review Modification of Plans
Resubmission of Disapproved SWM Site Plans Authorization to Construct and Term ofValidity
Record Drawings, Completion Certificate and Final Inspection
 

 
Article V - Design Criteria
Section 501.
Section 502.

Section 503
 


Calculation Methodology
Design and Construction Standards - Collection and Conveyance Facilities Design and Construction Standards - Stormwater Detention Facilities
 


Article VI - Operation and Maintenance

 
Section 601.
Section 602.
Section 603.
 
Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners Operation and Maintenance Agreements Performance Guarantee
 
A rticle VII	Fees and Expenses

Section 701.	General


Article VIII - Prohibitions

 
Section 801.
Section 802.
Section 803.
 
Prohibited Discharges and Connections Roof Drains and Sump Pumps Alteration of SWM BMPs
 
Article IX - Enforcement and Penalties

 
Section 901.
Section 902.
Section 903.
Section 904.
Section 905 .
Section 906.
 
Right of Entry Inspection Enforcement
Suspension and Revocation Penalties
Appeals
 

Article X - References

Appendix A-Release Rate Management Districts (Maps) Appendix B - Operation and Maintenance Agreement
Appendix C - Small Project Stormwater Management Site Plan
 
ARTICLE I- GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 101. Short Title

This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Coraopolis Stormwater Management Ordinance."

Section 102. Statement of Findings

The governing body of the Municipality finds that:

A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from development throughout a watershed increases runoff volumes, flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines flood plain management and flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources .

B.	A comprehensive program of stormwater management (SWM), including regulation of development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and welfare and the protection of people of the Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.

C.	Stormwater is an important water resource that provides groundwater recharge for water supplies and supports the base flow of streams.

D.	The use of green infrastructure (GI) and low impact development (LID) are intended to address the root cause of water quality impairment by using systems and practices which use or mimic natural processes to: 1) infiltrate and recharge, 2) evapotranspire , and/or 3) harvest and use precipitation near where it falls to earth. Green infrastructure practices and LID contribute to the restoration or maintenance of pre-development hydrology.

E.	Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program.

Section 103.  Purpose

The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote health, safety, and welfare within the Municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in Section 102 of this Ordinance , through provisions designed to:

A.    Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this Commonwea lth.

B.	Preserve natural drainage systems.

C.	Manage stormwater runoff close to the source, reduce runoff volumes and mimic predevelopment hydrology.

D.	Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning and management.

E.	Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect
water resources.

F.	Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and stream beds.

G.	Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater best management practices (BMPs) that are
implemented within the Municipality.	·

H.	Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
 
Section 104. Statutory Authority

The Municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended , and/or the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1, et seq., as amended , The Stormwater Management Act.

Section 105.  Applicability

All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff, including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to regulation by this Ordinance.

Section 106.  Repealer

Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the Municipality inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Ordinance is hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only and in particular , Ordinance No. 1789 and MS4 Prohibited Discharge Ordinance No. 1790.

Section 107. Severability

In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or provision of this Ordinance invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance .

Section 108. Compatibility with Other Requirements

Approvals issued and actions taken under this Ordinance do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or ordinance.

Section 109. Erroneous Permit

Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Municipality purporting to validate such a violation .

Section 110. Waivers

A		If the Municipality determines that any requirement under this Ordinance cannot  be achieved for a particular regulated activity the Municipality may, after an evaluation of alternatives , approve measures other than those in this Ordinance, subject to Section 110, paragraph B. The proposed area of disturbance shall be less than one (1) acre. The request for a modification or waiver shall originate with the Landowner, shall be in writing, and shall accompany the Stormwater Management Site Plan submitted to the Municipality . The request shall provide the facts on which the request is based, the provisions of the Ordinance involved, and the proposed modification.  The Designated Plan Reviewer shall review the request to determine if it meets the requirements of the Ordinance , including paragraph B below. If acceptable to the Municipality , the Municipality may grant the waiver or modification .


B.	Waivers or modifications of the requirements of this Ordinance may be approved by the Municipality if enforcement will exact undue hardship because of unique physical circumstances or conditions peculiar to the land in question, provided that the modifications will not be contrary or detrimental to the public interest and will achieve the intended outcome , and that the purpose of the Ordinance is preserved . Hardship must be due to such unique physical circumstances or conditions and not to circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the Stormwater Management Ordinance . Cost or financial burden shall not be considered a hardship.	Modifications shall not substantially or  permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property. A request for modifications shall be in writing and accompany the Stormwater Management Site Plan submission , as directed in Section 110, paragraph A above.


C.	No waiver or modification of any regulated stormwater activity involving earth disturbance greater than or equal to one (1) acre may be granted by the Municipality.
 
D. This Section shall not apply to requests for waiver or modification to the provisions of Section V - Design Criteria.
All requests for waivers or modifications from Section V shall be reviewed by the Municipality for applications of any size earth disturbance.

Section 111. Version of Regulations and Standards

Any reference to a statute, regulation or standard, shall be interpreted to refer to the latest or most current version of that document.

Section 112. Disclaimer of Liability


A. For regulatory purposes, the degree of stormwater management sought  by the provisions of this Chapter is considered reasonable. This Chapter shall not impose upon the Municipality any legal duty in addition to those duties otherwise imposed under the Stormwater Management Act upon the Municipality, any appointed  or elected official, employee or representative of the Municipality. It is not the intention of the Municipality to guarantee the elimination of harm resulting from stream flow, floods , rain, snow, or stormwater runoff; or erosion resulting therefrom. It is the intention of the Municipality to create reasonable stormwater management regulations which balance several competing interests in an appropriate fashion with the emphasis on public safety.


B.	This Chapter does not imply that areas within or outside any identified flood-prone area will be free from flooding or flood damages.


C.	Neither the granting of any approval under this Ordinance, nor the compliance with the prov1s1ons of this Ordinance , or with any condition imposed by the Municipality or a Municipality official hereunder, shall relieve any person from any responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the Municipality for damages to person or property.


D.	The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management facilities shall not constitute a representation , guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the Municipality, or by an official, employee, or consultant thereof, of the practicability or safety of any structure, use, or other plan proposed, and shall create no liability upon or cause of action against the Municipality, or an official, employee, or consultant thereof, for any damage that may result pursuant thereto.
 
ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:

A.	Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender .

B.	The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.

C.	The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory ; the words "may" and "should" are permissive.

These definitions do not necessarily reflect the definitions contained in pertinent regulations or statutes and are intended for this Ordinance only.

Act 167 - The Municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect runoff and surface and groundwater quality and quantity by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. Section 680.1, et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water Management Act. "

Agricultural Activity-Activities associated with agriculture such as agricultural cultivation , agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas . This includes the work of producing crops including tillage, land clearing, plowing , disking , harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures . Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity .

Applicant - A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an application to the Municipality for approval to engage in any regulated activity at a project site in the Municipality .

Best  Management  Practice  (BMP)  - Activities,  facilities,  designs,  measures,  or   procedures   used   to   manage stormwater  impacts  from  regulated  activities,  to  meet  state  water  quality  requirements,   to   promote   groundwater recharge,  and  to  otherwise   meet  the  purposes  of  this  Ordinance .  Stormwater   BMPs  are  commonly   grouped   into  one of  two  broad  categories  or  measures:  "structural"  or  "non-structural. "  In  this  Ordinance,   non-structural   BMPs   or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the  contact  of  pollutants  with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that  consist  of  a  physical  device  or  practice that  is installed to capture and  treat  stormwater  runoff.  Structural  BMPs  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  a  wide  variety  of practices  and  devices ,  from  large-scale  retention  ponds   and   constructed   wetlands,   to   small-scale   underground treatment  systems ,  infiltration  facilities ,  filter  strips ,  low  impact  design,  bioretention,  wet  ponds,  permeable   paving, grassed swales, riparian  or  forested   buffers ,  sand  filters ,  detention  basins,  and  manufactured  devices .  Structural stormwater   BMPs  are  permanent  appurtenances   to  the  project  site.

Conservation District -A conservation district, as defined in Section 3(c) of the Conservation District Law (3 P. S.
§ 851(c)) that has the authority under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code 102.

Design Storm - The magnitude and temporal distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., a 5-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems . Also see Return Period.

Designated Plan Reviewer-A Qualified Professional as defined herein, or organization such as the Allegheny County Conservation District, that has been designated by the Municipality to be the reviewer of SWM Site Plans for the Municipality , and shall be understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the Municipality within this ordinance .

Detention Basin - An impoundment designed to collect and retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate. Detention basins are designed to drain completely in a designed period after a rainfall event, and to become dry until the next rainfall event.

Detention Volume - The volume of runoff that is captured and released into the waters of the Commonwealth at a controlled rate.

DEP - The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
 
Development Site (Site) - See Project Site.

Disturbed Area - An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.

Earth Disturbance Activity -A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance; building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock, or earth materials.

Erosion - The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.

Existing Condition - The dominant land cover during the 5-year period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity .

FEMA - Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Floodplain - Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania DEP Technical Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by DEP).

Floodway - The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge the 100-year flood . Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the boundary of the 100-year floodway, it is assumed--absent evidence to the contrary--that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream .

Forest ManagemenUTimber Operations - Planning and activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include conducting a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction , timber harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.

Green Infrastructure - Systems and practices that use or mimic  natural  processes  to  infiltrate ,  evapotranspire ,  or reuse stormwater  on the site where  it is generated .

Groundwater - Water beneath the earth's surface that supplies wells and springs and is within the saturated zone of soil and rock.

Groundwater Recharge - The replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies from precipitation or overland flow.

Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG) - Infiltration rates of soils vary widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates. Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices . Soils become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS 1·2) .

Impervious Surface (Impervious Area) -A surface that prevents the infiltration of water into the ground . Impervious surfaces (or areas) shall include, but not be limited to: roofs; additional indoor living spaces , patios, garages , storage sheds and similar structures ; and any new streets or sidewalks . Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are counted as impervious areas if they directly prevent infiltration. Any surface areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces. In addition , any surface designed to be  constructed  of permeable , pervious or porous concrete,  asphalt ,  or  pavers shall  be considered  an impervious  surface.

Invasive Species - DCNR defines  invasive  plants as those species  that are  not native to the state,  grow aggressively,  and spread  and displace  native vegetation .  (see
http ://www .dcm.state .pa .us/cs/ groups/public /document s/document /dcm  010314 .pdf for a list of invasive species .

Infiltration - Movement of surface water into the soil, where it is absorbed by plant roots, evaporated into the atmosphere, or percolated downward to recharge groundwater.
 
Land Development (Development) - Inclusive of any or all of the following meanings: ()the improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving (a) a group of two or more buildings or (b) the division or allocation of land or space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups, or other features;
(ii) any subdivision of land; (iii) development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the PA Municipalities Planning
Code.

Low Impact Development (LID) - Site design approaches and small-scale stormwater management practices that promote the use of natural systems for infiltration, evapotranspiration, and reuse of rainwater. LID can be applied to new development, urban retrofits , and revitalization projects. LID utilizes design techniques that infiltrate, filter, evaporate, and store runoff close to its source. Rather than rely on costly large-scale conveyance and treatment systems, LID addresses stormwater through a variety of small, cost-effective landscape features located on-site.

Municipality - Borough of Coraopolis , Allegheny County, Pennsylvania .

Native Vegetation - Plant species that have historically grown in Pennsylvania and are not invasive species as defined herein.

NRCS - USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).

Peak Discharge - The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a specific storm event.

Pervious Area - Any area not defined as impervious .

Project Site - The specific area of land where any regulated activities in the Municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.

Qualified Professional -Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified under Pennsylvania law to perform the work required by this Ordinance .

Regulated Activities - Any earth disturbance activities or any activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that may affect stormwater runoff.

Regulated Earth Disturbance Activity -Activity involving earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa. Code 102, or the Clean Streams Law.

Release Rate - The percentage of existing conditions peak rate of runoff from a site or subarea to which the proposed conditions peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas .

Release Rate District -A watershed or portion of a watershed for which a release rate has been established by an adopted Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan.

Retention Volume/Removed Runoff - The volume of runoff that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this Commonwealth during or after a storm event.

Return Period - The average interval, in years, within which a storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example, the 25-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a 25-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a 4% chance) .

Riparian Buffer - A permanent vegetated area of trees and shrubs located adjacent to streams , lakes, ponds and wetlands.

Runoff -Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.

Sediment - Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a product of erosion .

State Water Quality Requirements - The regulatory requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.

Stormwater - Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
 
Stormwater Management Facility - Any structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design , or construction, conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and retention basins; open channels ; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration facilities.

Stormwater Management Site Plan - The plan prepared by the developer or the developer 's representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be managed at the development site in accordance  with this Ordinance . Stormwater Management Site Plan will be designated as SWM Site Plan throughout this Ordinance.

Stream - A channel or conveyance of surface water having a defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.

Subdiv ision - As defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P. L. 805 , No. 247.

USDA- United States Department of Agriculture.

Waters of this  Commonwealth  - Any  and  all  rivers,  streams,  creeks,  rivulets,  impoundments,  ditches,  watercourses, storm sewers , lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds,  springs ,  and  all  other  bodies  or  channels  of  conveyance  of surface and underground water , or parts thereof , whether natural or artificial , within or on the  boundaries  of  this Commonwealth   .

Watercourse - See Stream .

Watershed - Region or land area drained by a river, watercourse , or other surface water of this Commonwealth to a downstream point.

Wetland - Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps , marshes , bogs, and similar areas .
 
ARTICLE 111-STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS

Section 301. General Requirements

A	For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM Site Plan is specifically exempted in Section 302:

1.	Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM Site Plan is required.

2.	No regulated activities shall commence until the Municipality issues written approval of an SWM Site Plan, which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.

B.	SWM Site Plans approved by the Municipality, in accordance with Section 406, shall be on site throughout the
duration of the regulated activity.

C.	These standards apply to the landowner and any person engaged in regulated activities .

D.	For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g., during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual (E&S Manual4), No. 363-2134-008, as amended and updated. Comment on the adequacy of the Erosion and Sedimentation Controls may be provided by the Municipality per the requirements of Allegheny County Conservation District.

E.	Impervious areas:

1.	The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the impervious areas in the total proposed development even if development is to take place in stages .

2.	For development taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in determining conformance with this Ordinance.

3.	For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this Ordinance; except that the volume controls in Section 303 and the peak rate controls of Section 304 do not need to be retrofitted to existing impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed regulated activity.

F.	Stormwater flows onto adjacent or downstream property shall not be created, increased, decreased , relocated, impeded, or otherwise altered without written notification of the affected property owner(s) . Notification shall include a description of the proposed development and the stormwater flows that are being created, increased, decreased, relocated, impeded, or otherwise altered. Adjacent property shall at a minimum include any property having a shared boundary with the subject property of the SWM Site Plan, however, if in the judgem ent of the Designated Plan Reviewer additional properties are being affected , additional notifications may be required. Proof of notification (signed postal receipt for example) shall be included as part of the SWM Plan submission to the Municipality. Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this Ordinance.

G.	All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:

1.	Protect health, safety , and property.

2.	· Meet the water quality goals of this Ordinance by implementing measures to:

a.	Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands , and wooded areas .

b.	Maintain or extend riparian buffers.

c.	Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.

d.	Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this Commonwealth .
 
e.	Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious areas, wherever possible.


3. Incorporate methods described in the Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual3). If methods other than green infrastructure and LID methods are proposed to achieve the volume and rate controls required under this Ordinance, the SWM Site Plan must include a detailed just ification, acceptable to the Designated Plan Reviewer, demonstrating that the use of LID and green infrastructure is not practicable.

H.	Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the project site at strategic locations, made as shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this Ordinance.

I.	Normally dry, open top, storage facilities. should completely drain both the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design storm. Infiltration tests performed at the facility locations and proposed basin bottom depths, in accordance with the BMP Manual, must support time-to-empty calculations if infiltration is a factor .

J.	The design storm precipitation depths to be used in the analysis of peak rates of discharge shall be as obtained in PennDOT's Drainage Manual, Publication 584, Appendix 7A; or obtained from the latest version of the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Weather  Service,  Hydrometeorological  Design Studies  Center,  Silver  Spring,  Maryland.  NOAA's Atlas  145 can be accessed at:  http://hdsc .nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.

K.	For all regulated activities , SWM BMPs shall be designed, implemented , operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this Ordinance and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law, and the Storm Water Management Act.

L.	Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP Manual3.

M.	The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures for meeting the state  water  quality requirements other than those in this Ordinance , provided that they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with, state law including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law.

Section 302.  Exemptions

A. Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less than one-quarter (0.25) acre and propose an increase in impervious area of less than 5,000 square feet are exempt from the requirements in Section 401 of this ordinance except as provided in paragraph B below.

B.	Earth disturbances between one-twentieth (0.05) acre (2,178 square feet) and one-quarter (0.25) acre (10,890 square feet) of earth disturbance must submit a SWM Site Plan to the Municipality which shall consist of the following items and related supportive material needed to determine compliance with Sections 303 through 305. The applicant can use the protocols in the Small Project Stormwater Management Site Plan (Appendix C).

a.	General description of proposed stormwater management techniques , including construction specifications of the materials to be used for stormwater management facilities.
b.	An erosion and sediment control plan, including all reviews and letters of adequacy from  the Conservation District where appropriate.
c.	Limits of earth disturbance, including the type and amount of impervious area that is proposed; proposed structures , roads, paved areas , and buildings ; and a statement , signed by the Applicant, acknowledging that any revision to the approved drainage plan must be approved by the Municipality, and that a revised erosion and sediment control plan must be submitted  to the Municipality or Conservation District for approval.
d.	All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan and described in detail; and all calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the stormwater management facilities must be shown.

C.	Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM Site Plan preparation requirements of this Ordinance provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
 
D.	Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM Site Plan preparation requirements of this Ordinance provided the activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter102.

E.	Roadway resurfacing and maintenance projects, which do not increase impervious area, and underground infrastructure projects are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance, provided the activities meet the requirements of all other Municipal, State and Federal requirements. Exemptions from any provisions of this Ordinance shall not relieve the applicant from the requirements in Sections 301.D. through J.

F.	The Municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this Section at any time for any project that the Municipality believes may pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.

G.	Voluntary Green Stormwater Infrastructure (GSI) retrofit projects that are solely intended to better manage runoff from existing development and are not part of new development or redevelopment, are exempt from the stormwater management provisions of this Ordinance. This does not exempt such projects from any other municipal, state, or federal regulation.

Section 303. Volume Controls

The green infrastructure and low impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual3 shall be utilized for all regulated activities wherever  possible. Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method  in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below. Water volume controls shall be implemented using . the Design Storm Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below, or alternative design criteria as allowed by PA Code Title 25, Chapter 102.

A    The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual3)  is applicable as a method to any size of regulated activity.
This method requires detailed modeling  based on site conditions. The follow ing shall be incorporated  into the CG-1 method:

1.	Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all storms equal to or less than the 2-year 24-hour duration precipitation.

2.	At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this Commonwealth . Removal options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration. If the developer provides justification that the listed removal options are not feasible , and the Designated Plan Reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a facility designed for a 48 to 72 hour dewatering time in an area with a dedicated stormwater system (not contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a facility designed for a 72 hour dewatering time in an area contributory to a combined sewer system before discharge to local stormwater systems or the environment. Justification , as prepared and sealed by a qualified professional , for assertion that permanent removal is not feasible must be provided, at a minimum, in the form of field measured infiltration rate testing and geotechnical evaluation of the existing site soils with regard to the impact of proposed infiltration. Applications omitting this justification , including infiltration rate testing will be cons idered incomplete. BMPs proposing use of extended detention in lieu of permanent reduction through the listed methods shall include a valve to adjust or regulate dewatering time to achieve the performance standards noted herein. The valve system shall include an inspection/monitoring  port for review of dewatering .

3.	For modeling purposes:

a.	Existing (predevelopment) non-forested pervious areas must be considered meadow in good condition.

b.	20% of existing impervious area, when present, shall be considered meadow in good condition in the model for existing conditions .

B.	The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual3) provided below is independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is not followed . This method is not applicable to regulated activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:

1.	Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two (2) inches of runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces .
 
2.	At least the first one inch of runoff from the net increase in impervious surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow , i.e., it shall not be released into the surface waters of this Commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation , transpiration , and infiltration. If the developer provides justification that the listed removal options are not feasible , and the Designated Plan Reviewer agrees, runoff shall be detained in a facility designed for a 24 hour dewatering time in an area with a  dedicated stormwater system (not contributory to a combined sewer system) and shall be detained in a facility designed for a 72 hour dewatering time in an area contributory to a combined sewer system before discharge to local stormwater systems or the environment.
3.	Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed runoff; however , in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated .

4.	This method is exempt from the requirements of Section 304, Rate Controls, if the project qualifies for exemption by the provisions of Section 302.A.

Section 304. Rate Controls

A	For areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:

Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the pre-development discha rge rates for the 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year, 24-hour storm events . This is the equivalent to a 100% release rate area when compared to those rates shown in the maps contained in Appendi x A (Release Rate Management Districts). This Pre­ development to Post-development control is not to be misconstrued as the same as the "Conditional Direct Discharge" areas on the Release Rate maps. For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth of a cubic foot per second (cfs) . If it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the post­ development analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of discharge indicated by the pre-development analysis for 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25- , 50-, and 100-year, 24-hour storms, then the requirements of this section have been met. Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement. Peak flows should be computed using the methods included in the Chapter titled "Stormwater Calculations and Methodology" of the PADEP Stormwater Management BMP Manual. Except, however , where documented downstream flooding problems ex ist, the Municipality may impose a 50% reduced release rate criteria .

B.   For areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167 Stormwater Management Plan:

For the 1-, 2-, 5-, 10-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year, 24-hour storm events , the post-development peak discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate maps. These maps are contained in Appendix A (Release Rate Management Districts) of this Ordinance For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth of a cubic foot per second (cfs) . For any areas not shown on the release rate maps, the post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the pre-development discharge rates for the spec ified design events .  Peak flows should be computed using the methods included in Chapter 8 of the PADEP Stormwater Management BMP Manual.

Section 305. Riparian Buffers

A		In order to protect and improve water quality , a Riparian Buffer Easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or land development that encompasses a Riparian Buffer. The intent of this ordinance in establishing a Riparian Buffer is to protect and improve stream water quality. The Riparian Buffer is intended to slow overland flow to the stream through the presence of native grasses, trees and shrubs, allowing infiltration/groundwater recharge; causing deposition of sediment , nutrients, pesticides , and other pollutants in the buffer rather than in the stream ; and reducing erosion by providing stream bank stabilization . The trees provide shade for streams ; keeping waters cooler and reducing evaporation .

B.	Except as required by PA Code Title 25 Chapter 102, the Riparian Buffer Easement shall be required for all streams (as defined in Article II) with a contributing watershed area of greater than 10 acres. The Riparian Buffer Easement shall be measured to be a minimum of 35 feet from the top of the streambank (on each side).

C.	Minimum Management Requirements for Riparian Buffers .

1.	No use or construction within the Riparian Buffer shall be permitted that is inconsistent with the intent of the
 
Riparian Buffer as described in Section 305.A.

2.	Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within the Riparian Buffer Easement.

3.	Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively removed and the Riparian Buffer Easement shall be  planted with native trees, shrubs  and  other  vegetation  to  create  a diverse  native  plant  community appropriate to the intended ecological context of the site.

D.	The Riparian Buffer Easement shall be enforceable by the Municipality and shall be recorded in the appropriate County Recorder of Deeds Office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the property located therein. The easement shall allow for the continued private ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area required by Zoning, unless otherwise specified in the municipal Zoning Ordinance .

E.	Any permitted use within the Riparian Buffer Easement shall be conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent of the existing 100-year floodplain, improve or maintain the stream stability, and preserve and protect the ecological function of the floodplain.
F.	Stormwater drainage pipes shall be permitted within the Riparian Buffer Easement, but they shall cross the Easement in the shortest practical distance . Other structural stormwater management facilities are not permitted within the Riparian Buffer Easement.

G.	The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private recreation trails are permitted by the Municipality within Riparian Buffers:

1.	It is preferred that trails be designed to be permeable and for non-motorized use only; however, impermeable trails are permitted provided they have adequate drainage

2.	Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant species and other sensitive environmental features.

H.	Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted within the Riparian Buffer Easement and shall comply with setback requirements established under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 73.

I.	Underground utilities shall be permitted within the Riparian Buffer Easement; however, work shall be performed to minimize disturbance area and removal of trees . Restoration within the Riparian Buffer Easement shall be with native species of trees, grasses , and other plantings. One tree shall be planted for each tree removed and the restoration shall be designed by a Registered Professional with the requisite experience. Aboveground utilities shall only be permitted to cross the Easement perpendicular to the Easement or in the shortest practical distance. Existing utilities may remain and be maintained as required.
 
ARTICLE  IV-STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT (SWM) SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS

Section 401. Plan Requirements


Appropriate sections from the Allegheny County Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, and other applicable local ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the SWM Site Plans.

The Municipality shall not approve any SWM Site Plan that is deficient in meeting the requirements of this Ordinance. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this Article , when a SWM Site Plan is found to be deficient, the Municipality may either disapprove the submission and require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the Municipality may accept submission of modifications .

The following items shall be included in the SWM Site Plan:


A		Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as necessary to implement the Operation and Maintenance  (O&M) Plan discussed in paragraph C.9 below.

8.       The following signature block for the Municipality:

"(Municipal official or Designated Plan Reviewer (Section 403.A)), on this date (Signature date), has reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM Site Plan meets all design standards and criteria of the Municipal Ordinance No.              ), except where waivers have been granted as noted on the Plan.  The review is based on a survey and plan prepared by others and assumes that all information is correct and valid as submitted."

C.	The SWM Site Plan shall provide the following information:

1.	The overall stormwater management concept for the project.

2.	A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP Manual3. A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for projects proposed in environmentally sensitive areas, such as brownfields.

3.	A key map showing the development site's location within the Municipality's stormwater management districts, watersheds and subareas. On all site drawings, show the boundaries of the district(s), watershed(s) and subarea(s) as they are located on the development site and identify their district and watershed names and applicable subarea numbers.

4.	Location of the one hundred year floodplain  on the development  site based on the current  municipal
Flood Insurance Rate Maps.

5.	Stormwater runoff design computations and documentation as specified in this Ordinance , or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate that the maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet the requirements of this Ordinance , including the recommendations and general requirements in Section 301.

6.	Expected project time schedule.

7.	A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.

8.	The effect of the project (in terms of  runoff volumes , water quality, and peak flows)  on surrounding properties and aquatic features and on any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be affected by the project.

9.	Plan and profile drawings and details of all SWM BMPs, including drainage structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.

10.	SWM Site Plan shall show the property lines, dimensions of the site and the locations of existing and proposed on-lot wastewater facilities and water supply wells , property boundaries, existing and proposed
 
topography, point(s) of interest, utilities, and potential utility conflicts .


11.	The SWM Site Plan shall include an O&M Plan for all existing and proposed physical stormwater management facilities . This plan shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for O&M including type and schedule/frequency of maintenance activities , personnel and equipment requirements , estimated annual maintenance costs, and method of financing continuing O&M.

12.	A justification , acceptable to the Designated Plan Reviewer, must be included in the SWM Site Plan if BMPs other than green infrastructure methods and LID practices are proposed to achieve the volume , rate and water quality controls under this Ordinance .

13.	Certification and seal of the qualified professional responsible for the preparation of the plans and report.

14.	Watershed maps delineating pre-development and post-development watershed boundaries  and  land cover conditions , as well as the flow path and segments used to determine time of concentrations for each watershed

15.	Storm sewer calculations and watershed maps delineating all sub-areas used to size and compute flow for storm sewer system .

16.	Existing contours at intervals of two (2) feet except in areas with  slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%), in which case five (5) foot contour intervals may be used.

17.	Contours of the finished project site at intervals of two (2) feet, except in areas with slopes greater than fifteen percent (15%), in which case, five (5) foot contour intervals may be used.


Section 402. Plan Submission

Up to five copies of the SWM Site Plan shall be submitted as follows :

1.	Two copies to the Municipality .

2.	One copy to the municipal engineer (when applicable) .

3.	One copy to the Allegheny County Conservation District (when requested by the District) .

4.	One copy to the Allegheny County Sanitary Authority (in areas with combined sewer systems).

Section 403. Plan Review

A The Municipality has designated Municipal Engineer as the Designated Plan Reviewer of SWM Site Plans for the Municipality , and shall be understood to be the reviewer where indicated as the Municipality within this ordinance.

B.	SWM Site Plans shall be reviewed by the Municipality for consistency with the provisions of this Ordinance .

C.	The Municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days whether the SWM Site Plan is approved or disapproved or requires additional documentation . If the SWM Site Plan involves a Subdivision and Land Development Plan, the notification shall occur within the time period allowed by the Municipalities Planning Code (90 days) . If a longer notification period is provided by other statute , regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified by the Municipality.

D.	For any SWM Site Plan that proposes to use any BMPs other than green infrastructure and LID practices to achieve the volume and rate controls required under this Ordinance , the Municipality will not approve the SWM Site Plan unless it determines that green infrastructure and LID practices are not practicable .

E.	If the Municipality disapproves the SWM Site Plan, the Municipality will state the reasons for the disapprova l in writing . The Municipality also may approve the SWM Site Plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the acceptable conditions for approval in writing .
 
F.	The applicable review fee, in accord with Article Vil, must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan.


Section 404. Modification of Plans

A modification to a submitted SWM Site Plan that involves a change in SWM BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the SWM Site Plan, as determined by the Designated Plan Reviewer, shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM Site Plan in accordance with this Article .

Section 405. Resubmission of Disapproved SWM Site Plans

A disapproved SWM Site Plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions addressing the Municipality's concerns , to the Municipality in accordance with this Article . The applicable review fee, in accord with Article VI, must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM Site Plan.


Section 406. Authorization to Construct and Term of Validity

The Municipality's approval of an SWM Site Plan authorizes the regulated activities contained in the SWM Site Plan for a maximum term of validity of 5 years following the date of approval. The Municipality may specify a term of validity shorter than 5 years in the approval for any specific SWM Site Plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the Municipality signs the approval for an SWM Site Plan. If an approved SWM Site Plan is not completed according to Section 407 within the term of validity, then the Municipality may consider the SWM Site Plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. SWM Site Plans that are considered disapproved by the Municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with Section 405 of this Ordinance.

Section 407. Record Drawings, Completion Certificate, and Final Inspection

A	The developer shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM Site Plan, including, but not limited to BMP grading, outlet structure configu ration and emergency spillway configuration . The record drawings and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans shall be submitted to the Municipality.

B.	The record drawing submission shall include a certification of  completion signed by a qualified  professional verifying that all permanent SWM BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and specifications. The latitude and longitude coordinates for all permanent SWM BMPs must also be submitted , at the central location of the BMPs . If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the construction plans , then a licensed qualified professional must sign the completion certificate .  The  certification  shall  include documentation confirming field reviewed dewatering times for rate and volume control BMPs . Record Drawings shall be provided in both hard copy and electronic (AutoCAD, latest edition) format.

C.	The Municipality may conduct inspections during construction as it deems appropriate . If inspections performed by the Municipality reveal deficiencies from the submitted and approved SWM Site Plan, the Municipality may request corrective actions . Any corrective action shall be at the cost of the stormwater facility owner .

D.	After receipt of the completion certification by the Municipality, the Municipality may conduct a final inspection .
 
ARTICLE V - DESIGN CRITERIA

Section 501. Calculation Methodology

A.	All computations  used in conjunction with the analysis  and design  of stormwater  management  facilities shall be based on one (1) or more of the following methods, or as otherwise approved in advance by the Municipality:

1.	TR-55-Soil Conservation Service (SGS) Technical Release No. 55

2.	TR-20-Soil Conservation Service (SGS) Technical Release No. 20

3.	Modified Rational Method

4.	Penn State Runoff Model

5.	Virginia Tech I Penn State Runoff Model

B.	These methods for determining peak discharge shall be used to:

1.	Determine pre-development runoff conditions;

2.	Analyze the impact of development ; and

3.	Perform calculations in the design of any detention/retention facilities used in controlling runoff.

C.	The SGS, Type II Rainfall Distribution shall be used for all analyses. The design storm frequencies for the watershed are:


Design Storm	24 Hour Rainfall Depth
1-Year	1.97
2-Year	2.35
5-Year	2.88
10-Year	3.30
25-Year	3.90
50-Year	4.40
100-Y	ear	4.92

D.	Pre-Development Conditions:  The cover type for all sites will be considered to be the dominant land cover
during the 5-year period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity:

1.	For the purposes of pre-development peak flow rate and volume determination , existing non­ forested pervious areas conditions shall be considered as meadow (good condition) . Forested land areas shall be considered in good condition.

2.	For the purposes of pre-development peak flow rate and volume determination, 20 percent  of existing disturbed impervious area, when present, shall be considered meadow (good condition).

E. Post-Development Conditions : The hydrologic parameters used to develop peak flow  rates  shall  be reflective of anticipated soil runoff characteristics following grading and development of the site.

F.	Time of Concentration : The minimum time of concentration for any watershed shall be 6 minutes. A minimum 6-minute time of concentration may be assumed for any  post  development  watershed. Calculations must be provided for all pre-development times of concentrations.  A minimum time of concentration cannot be assumed for predevelopment conditions .

G.	The use of the Basic Rational Method in estimating runoff may be employed in the design of the storm
 
sewer conveyance system within the development. The storm sewer system shall be interpreted as the conduits, culverts, inlets and appurtenant features for the conveying of stormwater to , through or from a development site to the point of final discharge or control facility . The Rational Method shall not be used in the analysis of stormwater runoff from the development in its entirety or in conjunction with the design of any retention/detention facilities or other runoff control measures.

H.	Points of interest for analysis of pre- and post-development runoff must be selected to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of Sections 303 and 304 is achieved at all points where runoff exits the perimeter of the property.

I.	Stormwater runoff shall not be transferred from one watershed to another unless the watersheds are sub­ areas of a larger watershed that are tributary to a common point of interest within or near the perimeter of the property . Transfer of runoff from one watershed to another under any other circumstances shall only be approved at the discretion of the Municipality . Documentation shall be provided that peak flow rates are not increased following development and there will be no detrimental impact in downstream areas .

J.	The Stormwater Management Plan shall consider all of the stormwater runoff flowing over the project site.
Runoff  calculations  shall  be  made  to  ensure  that  runoff  from  the  upstream  watershed  area  can  be
accommodated by the pipes, drainage easements and watercourses , etc. on the site.

Section 502. Design and Construction Standards - Collection and Conveyance Facilities

A.	All  stormwater collection  and conveyance facilities (pipes, swales , and structures)  shall be designed for a  100-year design storm event , unless the runoff would  naturally drain overland to a stormwater detention  facil ity , in which case a 25-year design storm event may be used.  The hydraulic gradeline must be a minimum of two (2)  feet below the surface elevation within the pipe.  Swales and channels shall provide at least one foot of freeboard above the energy gradeline.  Backwater effects of pipes discharging under surcharge conditions shall be included.

B.	Runoff calculations shall include complete hydrology and hydraulic analysis of all downstream swales and pipe facilities to permanent stream discharge point, to the municipal boundary or connection to a State or County owned conveyance system .

C.	Manholes shall not be spaced more than three hundred (350) feet apart for pipe sizes up to twenty-four (24) inches in diameter and not more than four hundred fifty (450) feet apart for larger pipe sizes .

D.	No public stormwater pipe shall be less than 15-inches in diameter that conveys surface  runoff.  The minimum pipe slope shall be 1.0% grade or maintain velocity of 2 ft/s . For public storm sewer systems , only pipes related to construction of stormwater BMPs may be less than 15 inches in diameter . All stormwater pipes shall be concrete unless otherwise approved by the Municipality.

E. All workmanship and materials shall conform to the Municipality's Construction Standards . In addition , all workmanship and materials shall conform to the latest edition of PennDOT Form 408 and be supplied by manufacturers  or suppliers listed in PennDOT's Bulletin  15.

F.	Manhole and  inlet castings shall conform to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408 and PennDOT Standards for Roadway Construction . Inlet grates shall  be  bicycle  safe .  Frames  and  grates shall be cast iron or structural steel.    Concrete frames shall not be permitted .

G.	All connections to existing storm sewer pipes shall be made by construction of a suitable junction box (inlet or manhole) to provide  access for cleanout.   No blind connections shall be permitted.

H.	The discharge of stormwater runoff shall be to a well-defined drainage course, which  has  a defined  bed and bank. If stormwater runoff cannot be  discharged  to  a  defined  drainage  course,  documentation  of written permission from each downstream property owner shall be provided for all properties between the source of discharge and the defined drainage course. The use of level spreaders or  similar BMPs  that promote sheet flow may be permitted if the applicant provides documentation that the peak post-development 100-year discharge is no greater than pre-development 2-year discharge and a letter from the Geotechnical Engineer of Record regarding slope stability of the downstream area is provided. Use of a level spreader requires a waiver to be granted by the Municipality .
 
Section 503. Design and Construction Standards - Stormwater Detention Facilities

A.	All retention/detention facilities shall be equipped with multistage outlet structures to provide discharge control for each designated storm frequency . Provisions shall also be made to safely pass the post-development one­ hundred year storm runoff in the event of an outlet structure failure without damaging or  impairing  the continued function of the facilities (i.e., impairing the continued function of) the facilities . The facility(ies) must have an emergency outlet which is able to discharge the post-development one-hundred year  peak  flow. Should any stormwater management facilities qualify as a dam under PaDEP Chapter 105 criteria, the facility shall be designed in accordance with those regulations and meet the regulations concerning dam safety.

B.	Any stormwater management facility designed to store runoff shall provide an emergency spillway designed to convey the unattenuated 100-year post- development peak rate flow with a blocked primary outlet structure and an inundation stormwater to the invert elevation of the spillway, with a minimum one-foot freeboard to the crest of the embankment.

C.	Woody vegetation shall not be permitted on the embankments or within 25 feet of the emergency spillway .

D.	The water depth of a storage facility which is not fenced shall be limited to 2 feet unless approved by the Municipality. Otherwise, appropriate fencing at least 4 feet in height shall be required.

E.	Side slopes of storage facilities shall not exceed a ratio of three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical dimension .
The crest of the embankment shall have a minimum width of not less than 10 feet.

F.	The facility shall be equipped with an access road at least ten (10) feet wide and with a maximum of grade of 15 percent. Access roads greater than 12% grade must be paved.  Access roads 12% or less shall have a minimum 6" depth non-eroding aggregate surface. A gate with a minimum opening  of  10 feet  shall  be provided for maintenance access .  An access easement with a minimum width of 20 feet to all stormwater detention facilities shall be provided. The access easement shall include a statement on the recorded plan from the owner/operator of the facility granting access to the Municipality .

G.	All stormwater facility outlet structures shall  have suitable  gaskets  to  prevent  leakage  and  piping of water through the facility embankment. All storm pipe installed through the facility embankment must be constructed of   reinforced  concrete  pipe.  Use  of  high-performance  polypropylene   pipe   may   be   permitted   with documentation of pipe manufacturer's backfill requirements .

H.	A geotechnical investigation report for the construction of the stormwater detention/retention  and infiltration facilities must be  provided  including  design  recommendation  for  embankment  construction,  interior  and exterior slopes, drainage swales and infiltration areas .

I.	Basin outlet structures shall have non-clogging trash racks over all design openings . Periodic cleaning of debris from trash racks shall be included  in the operation and maintenance plan.

J.	Inlet structures and outlet structures shall be separated to the greatest extent possible in order to maximize the flow path through the basin.

K.	BMPs must be designed to protect and maintain existing uses (e.g., drinking water use; cold water fishery use) and maintain the level of water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in "Special Protection" streams, as required by statewide regulations at 25 Pa.Code, Chapter 93 (collectively referred to herein as "State Water Quality Requirements").
 
ARTICLE VI - OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

Section 601. Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners

A. The Municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM Site Plan. The Municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part of the requirements for approval of the SWM Site Plan. Such a requirement is not an indication that the Municipality will accept the facilities . The Municipality reserves the right to reject or accept the ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the stormwater management controls.

B.	Facilities, areas, or structures used as SWM BMPs shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with the land.

C.	The O&M Plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that runs with the land.

D.	The Municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for any failure to satisfy the provisions of this Article .

Section 602. Operation and Maintenance Agreements

A.	Prior to final approval of the SWM Site  Plan, the property owner shall sign and record an Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement (see Appendix B) covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be privately owned.

1.	The  owner,  successor  and  assigns  shall  maintain  all  facilities   in  accordance  with  the  approved
maintenance schedule in the O&M Agreement.

2.	The owner shall convey to the Municipality conservation easements to assure  access  for  periodic inspections by the Municipality and maintenance, as necessary .

3.	The owner shall keep on file with the  Municipality the  name, address,  and telephone  number  of the person or company responsible for maintenance activities ; in the event of a change, new information shall be submitted by the owner to the Municipality within ten (10) working days of the change.

B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the SWM  BMPs.  If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M Agreement, the Municipality may perform the services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.

Section 603. Performance Guarantee

For SWM Site Plans that involve subdivision and land development, the applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the Municipality for the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management controls as required by the approved SWM Site Plan and this Ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.

Section 604. Special Stormwater Facility Maintenance Fund

A.	If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the municipality for dedication, the Municipality may require persons installing stormwater BMPs to pay a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater BMP Operation and Maintenance Fund, to help defray costs of operations and maintenance activities . The amount may be determined as follows:

1.	If the storage facility is to be Owned and maintained by the Municipality, the deposit shall cover the estimated annual costs for maintenance and inspections for ten  (10) years, as estimated by the Municipality.

2.	The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual series values .

B.   If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g. ball field, lake), the Municipality may adjust
the amount due accordingly.
 
ARTICLE VII - FEES AND EXPENSES

Section 701.  General

The Municipality may include all costs incurred into the review fee charged to an applicant. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the following :
A  Administrative/clerical processing.

B.	Review of the SWM Site Plan.

C.	Review of a SWM Site Plan resubmission .

D.	Attendance at meetings.

E.	Inspections.
 
ARTICLE VIII - PROHIBITIONS

Section 801. Prohibited Discharges and Connections

A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter the surface waters of this Commonwealth is prohibited.

B.	No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated small MS4, or discharges into waters of this Commonwealth, which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except (1) as provided in paragraph C below and
(2) discharges authorized under a state or federal permit.

C.	The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to be significant contributors to pollution of a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this Commonwealth:

1.	Discharges or flows from firefighting activities.

2.	Discharges from potable water sources including water line flushing and fire hydrant flushing, if such discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of Total Residual Chlorine (TRC).

3.	Non-contaminated irrigation water, water from lawn maintenance, landscape drainage and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.

4.	Diverted stream flows and springs.

5.	Non-contaminated pumped ground water and water from foundation and footing drains and crawl space pumps.

6.	Non-contaminated HVAC condensation and water from geothermal systems.

7.	Residential (i.e., not commercial) vehicle wash water where cleaning agents are not utilized.

8.	Non-contaminated hydrostatic test water discharges , if such discharges do not contain detectable concentrations of TRC.

9.	Dechlorinated swimming pool and hot tub discharges , as long as the PADEP guidelines for swimming pool water discharge are followed.

D.	In the event that the Municipality or DEP determines that any of the discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this Commonwealth, the Municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge .

Section 802. Roof Drains and Sump Pumps

A.   Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative BMPs wherever feasible.

B.	Unless  otherwise  approved  by  the  Municipality,  no  stormwater  from  roofs  or  driveway  drains  shall  be discharged to the street surface or curb.

Section 803. Alteration of SWM BMPs

No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs, facilities , areas , drainage easements, or structures that were installed as a requirement of this Ordinance without the written approval of the Municipality .
 
ARTICLE IX - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES

Section 901. Right of Entry

Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Municipality or its designated agent may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the Municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this Ordinance.

Section 902.  Inspection

The landowner or the owner's designee (including the Municipality for dedicated and owned facilities) shall inspect SWM BMPs, facilities and/or structures installed under this Ordinance according to the following frequencies,  at a minimum, to ensure the BMPs, facilities and/or structures continue to function as intended:

a.	Annually for the first 5 years.

b.	Once every 3 years thereafter.

c.	During or immediately after the cessation of a 10-year or greater storm.

Inspections should be conducted during or immediately following precipitation events. A written inspection report shall be created to document each inspection. The inspection report shall contain the date and time of the inspection, the individual(s) who completed the inspection, the location of the BMP, facility or structure inspected, observations on performance , and recommendations for improving performance , if applicable. Inspection reports shall be submitted to the Municipality within 30 days following completion of the inspection .

Section 903.  Enforcement

A.	It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity except as provided in an approved SWM Site Plan, unless specifically exempted in Section 302.

B.	It shall be unlawful to violate Section 803 of this Ordinance.

C.	Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM Site Plan are a responsibility of the Municipality .

Section 904. Suspension and Revocation

A.	Any approval or permit issued by the Municipality pursuant to this Ordinance may be suspended or revoked for:

1.	Non-compliance with or failure to implement any provision of the approved SWM Site Plan or O&M Agreement.

2.	A violation of any provision of this Ordinance or any other applicable law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating
to the Regulated Activity .

3.	The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during the Regulated Activity which constitutes or creates a hazard, nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.

B.	A suspended approval may be reinstated by the Municipality when :

1.	The Municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the violations that caused the suspension.

2.	The Municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected .

C.	An approval that has been revoked by the Municipality cannot be reinstated . The applicant may apply for a new
approval under the provisions of this Ordinance.
 
D.	If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or property, at its sole discretion, the Municipality may provide a limited time period for the owner to correct the violation.  In these cases, the Municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner to correct the violation . If the owner does not correct the violation within the allowed time period, th.e Municipality may revoke or suspend any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision of this Ordinance.

Section 905. Penalties

A Anyone violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a summary offense , and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each violation , recoverable with costs. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties shall be cumulative .

B. In addition , the Municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this Ordinance. Any court of competent jurisdic tion shall have the right to issue restraining orders , temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.

Section 906. Appeals

A   Any person aggrieved by any action of the Municipality or its designee , relevant to the provisions of this Ordinance,
may appeal to the Municipality within 30 days of that action.

B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Municipality , relevant to the provisions of this Ordinance, may appeal to the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within 30 days of the Municipality's decision .
 
ARTICLEX-REFERENCES

1.	U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology , 1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering   Handbook , Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at:  http://www.nrcs .usda.gov/.

2.	U.S. Department of Agriculture , Natural Resources Conservation Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington , D.C.

3.	Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection . No. 363-0300-002 (December 2006) , as amended and updated . Pennsylvania  Stormwater  Best Management  Practices  Manual.  Harrisburg, PA

4.	Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No. 363-2134-008 (March 31, 2012) , as amended and updated. Erosion and Sediment Pollution  Control Program  Manual.  Harrisburg, PA

5.	U.S. Department of Commerce , National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas  of  the  United  States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring , Maryland. Internet address : http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
 
Borough of Coraopolis Stormwater Management Ordinance

 	Ordinance Number 	


ENACTED and ORDAINED at a regular meeting of the Borough of Coraopolis Borough Council




on this 14th day of November, 2018.


This Ordinance shall take effect immediately.

 
 

ATTEST:
 


"Secretary	-
 
OFFICIAL BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
ORDINANCE NO. 1809


AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY AND COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
ESTABLISHING RULES AND REGULATIONS REGARDING HAWKING OR PEDDLING OF GOODS, WARES, OR MERCHANDISE WITHIN  THE LIMITS OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS.

WHEREAS, the Coraopolis Borough Council has heretofore enacted into law the Borough Code of Ordinances; and,

WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis desires to amend said Code to provide rules and regulations regarding the hawking or peddling of goods, wares, or merchandise within the limits of the Borough of Coraopolis by adding the following:

NOW, THEREFORE, be it ORDAINED and ENACTED as follows:

§ 1. Definitions.

The following definitions are provided for construction and use for this chapter:

A.	CANVASSING

To go from house to house, place to place or street to street, soliciting or taking, or attempting to take, orders from individuals for goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals or personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed at that time or in the future, regardless of whether such person collects in advance payments for such orders.

B.	DISTRIBUTING

To go from house to house, place to place or street to street and distribute or cause to be distributed verbal or written information, whether in the form of a handbill, advertisement, circular, card,
pamphlet or printed material of any kind; other than a regularly distributed newspaper, magazine or periodical.

C.	PEDDLING

To go from house to house, place to place or street to street, conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise, offering or exposing the same for sale or making sales, and/or delivering articles to purchasers.

D.	SOLICITING

To seek or request money, donations of money or property or financial assistance of any kind, or to sell or distribute, or attempt to sell or distribute, literature, tokens or merchandise for which a fee is charged or requested from persons.  This definition does not apply to individuals or members of organizations who, upon the streets, in office buildings, by house-to-house canvass or in public places, canvass, solicit, or distribute materials for charitable, religious, political or philanthropic purposes.
 
§ 2. License Required.

It shall be unlawful for any person to canvass, hawk, distribute, solicit or peddle any goods, wares or merchandise within the limits of the Borough of Coraopolis without first having obtained a license from the Mayor to do so. Said license shall be issued only for the hours from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.	of each day of the license period.   No canvassing, hawking,  distributing,  soliciting or peddling shall be licensed during any other hours.

§ 3. Conditions of License.

The license shall be issued by the Mayor upon and with the following conditions and restrictions:

A.	The Mayor shall be satisfied that the applicant is of good moral character.

B.	The applicant will remain of good moral character and he/she will be honest in his/her dealings with the citizens of Cocaopolis.

C.	The said applicant will keep and comply with all the ordinances of the Borough of Coraopolis, and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and United States of America.

If a licensee fails to comply with any provisions contained within this Chapter, then licensee's license shall be revoked.

§ 4. Fees.

Any person or organization desiring to canvass, hawk, distribute, solicit or peddle any goods, wares or merchandise within the limits of the Borough of Coraopolis shall first obtain a license to do so from the Borough Manager.  A license can be obtained by filing an application with the Borough on a form to be provided by the Borough. The application for a license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable license application fee which shall defray the administrative costs of the Borough in investigating and approving or denying said license application. The nonrefundable fee shall be established by Resolution of the Borough Council.

§ 5. Action on Application.

The Borough Manager shall approve or deny an application no later than fifteen (15) days after receiving a completed application. If the application is denied, the Borough Manager shall inform the applicant of the grounds for denial, in writing, and apprise applicant of his/her/its right of appeal.

§ 6. Appeal Procedure.

The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a license. A notice of appeal shall be filed within five (5) days after mailing or personal delivery of a notice of denial, setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The appeal must be filed no later than one (1) calendar week preceding a Borough Council's regular monthly meeting, to be placed on the next regular meeting's agenda. The Borough Council shall hear the applicant or a designated representative, receive any relevant information and documents and act on the appeal at its next regular meeting. The decision of the Borough Council is final.
 
§ 7. Excepted Activities.

The Borough hereby declares its intention that this Ordinance shall only apply to commercial conduct and speech and the solicitation of money or other things of value. This Ordinance 1s specifically not intended to, and shall not be interpreted to:

A.	Limit  or  affect  constitutionally  protected  pamphleteering,  political  or  religious  speech  or conduct;

B.	Apply to persons selling wholesale to dealers in such goods;


C.	Apply to merchants  or their employees delivering good or performing  services in the regular course of business;


D.	Prohibit any sale required by statute or order of court; or,


E.	Prevent  any  licensed  auctioneer  from  conducting  a  bona  fide  auction  sale  subject  to auctioneers' law.

§ 8. Non-Solicitation Signs.

Residents of the Borough may, at their individual option, display upon their front door or upon another conspicuous and open space, a notice, sign or sticker which declares "No Soliciting." It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any person, firm or corporation to enter upon the premises of a Borough resident who displays such a notice, sign or sticker and attempts to engage in activity herein defined as canvassing, hawking, distributing, soliciting or peddling.

§ 9. Violations and Penalties.

Any person, firm, corporation or association that violates the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon the conviction thereof, be punished by imposition of a fine of THREE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($300.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed THIRTY (30) days, or both.

§10. Severability.

If any  section, subsection, sentence, . clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.

§ 11. Repealer.

Any and all Ordinances or subsections of Ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter are hereby repealed.

§12. Effective Date.

This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon the adoption thereof.
 
ORDAINED and ENACTED by the Council of Coraopolis Borough, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, this 14th day of August, 2019.

ATTEST




ond M. McCu cheon, Borough Manager



Reviewed and approved by the Mayor of the Borough of Coraopolis this 14th day of August, 2019.





Shawn P. Reed, Mayor
 
OFFICIAL BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
ORDINANCE NO. 1810


AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY AND COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA ESTABLISHING RULES AND REGULATIONS REGARDING PERMITTING PROCESS FOR TEMPORARY USE OF BOROUGH FACILITIES, STREETS, SIDEWALKS, PARKING LOTS, PARKS, ALLEYS OR OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR SPECIAL EVENTS WITHIN  THE BOROUGH.

WHEREAS, the Coraopolis Borough Council has heretofore enacted into law the Borough Code of Ordinances; and,

WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis desires to amend said Code to provide rules and regulations regarding the permitting process for temporary use of Borough facilities, streets, sidewalks, parking lots, parks, alleys or other rights-of-way for Special Events within the Borough by adding the following:

NOW, THEREFORE, be it ORDAINED and ENACTED as follows:

§ 1. Purpose.

This chapter provides for the establishment of a permit requirement and establishes standards for the issuance of a permit for Special Events that occur on or at Borough facilities or on streets, sidewalks, parking lots, parks, alleys or other rights-of-way which obstruct, delay or interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or do not comply with traffic laws and controls. Permits shall also be required for Special  Events  occurring  on private property which impact traffic and other Borough services. This chapter also  establishes standards for the reimbursement of Borough expenses caused by Special Events which will result in interference with the normal flow of traffic or otherwise require provision of Borough services in excess of that which would be required absent the Special Event.

§ 2. Definitions/Word Usage.

Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:


A.	APPLICANT

Any person and any sponsoring organization who or which seeks a Special Event permit from the Borough Manager to conduct or sponsor an event governed by this section. Any organization shall designate an individual person as the responsible contact person.

B.	ATHLETIC EVENT

An occasion in which a group of persons collectively engage in a sport or form of physical exercise on a Borough street, sidewalk, parking  lots, parks, alley or other right-of-way,  which
 
obstructs, delays or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply with traffic laws and controls.  "Athletic events" shall include bicycle and foot races.

C.	BLOCKPARTY

A festive gathering of the residents on a residential street requiring a closure of a street or a portion thereof to vehicular  traffic  and use of the  street for the festivity,  including barbecues,
.	.
p1crncs, music or games.

D.	FREE SPEECH ROUTE

A route (course of travel) along designated  streets, sidewalks or other rights-of-way whose primary purpose is First Amendment expression under the Pennsylvania and United States Constitutions.

E.	PARADE

A march or procession consisting of persons, animals or vehicles or any combination thereof on any Borough street, sidewalk, alley or other right-of-way which obstructs, delays or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian  or vehicular traffic or does not comply with traffic laws or controls.

F.	PERMIT APPLICATION FEES

The fee to be paid by the Special Event permit applicant at the time the application is filed with the Borough Manager. A fee schedule shall be set by the Borough Council by Resolution and shall cover the actual, full costs or a portion thereof of processing and investigating Special Event applications and administering the Special Event permit program.

G.	PERMITTEE

Any person and any sponsoring organization who has been issued a Special Event permit by the Borough Manager.

H.	RIGHT-OF-WAY

Public streets, alleys and crosswalks, including bike and pedestrian paths.

I.	SPECIAL EVENT

Parade, athletic event, street fair, art and craft show, carnival, block party, soap box derby, rally, wedding, march, demonstration, speech, debate, bazaar, circus,  concert,  tournament, exhibit, exhibition show, food truck and/or other similar events or activities that occur on or in Borough facilities or on a Borough street, sidewalk, parking lot, park, alley or other right-of-way. "Special Event" shall also mean indoor or outdoor concerts, displays, fairs and athletic events occurring on private property which are designed to attract large crowds, interfering with the normal traffic flow.

J.	BOROUGH MANAGER

The Borough Manager of the Borough of Coraopolis or his/her deputy.

§ 3. Permit Required.
 
Any person or organization desiring to conduct or sponsor Special Event in the Borough of Coraopolis shall first obtain a Special Event permit from the Borough Manager.

§ 4. Application Procedure; Fee.

A. Any person or organization desiring to sponsor a Special Event shall apply for a Special Event permit by filing a verified application with the Borough Manager on a form supplied by the Borough Manager.  All applications shall be submitted not less than thirty
(30) days nor more than ninety (90) days before the event date.

B.	Upon a showing of good cause, the Borough Manager shall consider an application that is filed after the filing deadline if there is sufficient time to process and investigate the application and obtain police services for the event. "Good cause" can be demonstrated by the applicant showing that the circumstances that gave rise to the permit application did not reasonably allow the applicant to file within the time prescribed and that the event is for the purpose of exercising the right of free speech.


C.	The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit application fee which shall defray the administrative costs of the Borough in making preparations for such Special Event in the amount set by the Borough Council.

§ 5. Action on Application.

The Borough Manager shall approve, conditionally approve or deny an application for the grounds specified in§ 6. Action on all Special Event applications shall be taken no later than fifteen (15) days after receiving a completed application. If the application is denied or conditionally approved, the Borough Manager shall inform the applicant of the grounds for denial, in writing, or the reason for a change in the date, time, route or location of the event and his/her/its right of appeal. If the Borough Manager relied on information about the event other than that contained in the application, he/she shall inform the applicant what information he/she considered. The applicant shall be notified of any permit conditions at the time the application is approved and of his/her/its right of appeal of the permit conditions. If the Borough Manager refuses to consider a late application under § 4(B), the Borough Manager shall inform the applicant of his/her reason for the refusal and of his/her/its right to appeal.

§ 6. Grounds for Denial of Application.

A.	The Borough Manager shall approve an application for a Special Event permit unless he/she determines from a consideration of the application or other pertinent information that:
1.	Information contain in the application or supplemental information requested from the applicant is found to be false in any material detail.

2.	The applicant fails to complete the application form after having been notified of the additional information or documents required.

3.	The sole purpose of the event is advertising of any product, good, ware, merchandise or event and is designed to be held solely for private profit and not for First Amendment  expression.
 
4.	Another Special Event permit application has been received prior in time or has already been approved to hold another event at the same time and place requested by the applicant or so close in time and place as to cause undue traffic congestion or the Coraopolis Police Department is unable to meet the needs for police services for both events.

5.	The time, route or size of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the event site or route or disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually subject to a great traffic congestion.

6.	The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the site of the event or the assembly and disbanding areas around an event will prevent proper police, fire or ambulance services to areas contiguous to the event.

7.	The size of the event will require diversion of so great a number of police officers of the Borough  to ensure that participants stay within the boundaries or route of the event or to protect participants in the event as to prevent normal protection to the rest of the Borough. Nothing herein authorizes denial of the permit when additional peace officers would be available to the Borough under applicable state law and mutual aid plans, if requested by the Borough in advance of the event. Nothing herein authorizes denial of a permit because of the need to protect participants from the conduct of others, if reasonable permit conditions can be imposed to allow for the adequate protection of event participants with the number of police officers available to police the event.

8.	The parade or other event moving along a route will not move from its point of origin to its point of termination in three (3) hours or less.

9.	The location of the event will substantially interfere with any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or along the Borough streets or a previously granted encroachment permit.

10.	The event will occur at a time when a school is in session at a route or location adjacent to the school or class thereof and the noise created by the activities of the event would substantially disrupt the education activities of the school or class thereof.

B. When the grounds for denial of an application for permit specified in Subsection A(4) through (10) above can be corrected by altering the date, time, duration, route or location of the event, the Borough Manager shall, instead of denying the application, conditionally approve the application upon the applicant's acceptance of conditions for permit issuance. The conditions imposed shall provide for only such modification of the applicant's proposed  event  as are necessary to  achieve compliance  with  Subsection A(4) through
(10) above.

§ 7. Conditions of Issuance.

The Borough Manager may condition the issuance of a Special Event permit by imposing reasonable   requirements   concerning  the  time,  place   and  manner   of  the  event  and  such
 
requirements as are necessary to protect the safety of persons and property and the control of traffic, provided that such conditions shall not unreasonably restrict the right of free speech.

§ 8. Appeal Procedure.

The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit or a permit condition. The applicant shall also have the right to appeal the amount of fees imposed pursuant to this Chapter. A notice of appeal shall be filed within five (5) days after mailing or personal delivery of a notice of denial or permit condition with the Borough Manager, setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The appeal must be filed no later than one (1) calendar week preceding a Borough Council's regular monthly meeting, to be placed on the next regular meeting's agenda. The Borough Council shall hear the applicant or a designated representative, receive any relevant information and documents and act on the appeal at its next regular meeting. The decision of the Borough Council is final.

§ 9. Violations and Penalties.

Any person, firm, corporation or association which conducts or sponsors a Special Event without first providing the necessary fees and deposits shall be billed for the actual cost to the Borough of Coraopolis for police and cleanup services. Failure to pay any such bill for services within fifteen (15) days shall result in the imposition of a ten-percent penalty and interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month until collected.



ORDAINED and ENACTED by the Council of Coraopolis Borough, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, this 14th day of August, 2019.

ATTEST
By:, k	JJt"h N/_

Borough Manager



Reviewed and approved by the Mayor of the Borough of Coraopolis this  14th day of August, 2019.




Shawn P. Reed, Mayor
 
OFFICIAL BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
ORDINANCE NO. 1811


AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY AND COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
AMENDING ORDINANCE 1810 TO ADD AN ADDITIONAL DEFINITION WITHIN§  2.

WHEREAS, the Coraopolis Borough Council has heretofore enacted into law the Borough Code of Ordinances, including Ordinance No. 1810; and,

WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis desires to amend said Ordinance to provide an additional definition within § 2 pertaining to extended permits for reoccurring special events under the Ordinance by adding the following:

NOW, THEREFORE, be it ORDAINED and ENACTED as follows: SECTION I.
That the Coraopolis Borough Code of Ordinances, Ordinance No. 1810 § 2 is hereby amended so as include the following new "Six Month Permit" definition pertaining  to extended permits for reoccurring special events under the Ordinance such that § 2 will now read:

§ 2. Definitions/Word Usage.

Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:


A.	APPLICANT

Any person and any sponsoring organization who or which seeks a Special Event permit from the Borough Manager to conduct or sponsor an event governed by this section. Any organization shali designate an individual person as the responsible contact person .

B.	ATHLETICEVENT

An occasion in which a group of persons collectively engage in a sport or form of physical exercise on a Borough street, sidewalk, parking lots, parks, alley or other right-of-way , which obstructs, delays or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply with traffic laws and controls.  "Athletic events" shall include bicycle and foot races.

C.	BLOCKPARTY

A festive gathering of the residents on a residential street requiring a closure of a street or a portion thereof to vehicular traffic and use of the street for the festivity, including barbecues, picnics, music or games.

1
 
D.	FREE SPEECH ROUTE

A route (course of travel) along designated streets, sidewalks or other rights-of-way whose primary purpose is First Amendment expression under the Pennsylvania and United States Constitutions.

E.	PARADE

A march or procession consisting of persons, animals or vehicles or any combination thereof on any Borough street, sidewalk, alley or other right-of-way which obstructs, delays or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply with traffic laws or controls.

F.	PERMIT APPLICATION FEES

The fee to be paid by the Special Event permit applicant at the time the application is filed with the Borough Manager. A fee schedule shall be set by the Borough Council by Resolution and shall cover the actual, full costs or a portion thereof of processing and investigating Special Event applications and administering the Special Event permit program.

G.	PERMITTEE

Any person and any sponsoring organization who has been issued a Special Event permit by the Borough Manager.

H.	RIGHT-OF-WAY

Public streets, alleys and crosswalks, including bike and pedestrian paths.

I. SIX MONTH PERMIT

An event in which the same function (i.e., food truck, arts and crafts shows, street fairs, etc.) reoccurs daily, weekly or on weekends for the period of six months or less.


J.  SPECIAL EVENT

Parade, athletic event, street fair, art and craft show, carnival, block party, soap box derby, rally, wedding, march, demonstration , speech, debate, bazaar, circus, concert, tournament , exhibit, exhibition show, food truck and/or other similar events or activities that occur on or in Borough facilities or on a Borough street, sidewalk, parking lot, park, alley or other right-of-way. "Special Event" shall also mean indoor or outdoor concerts, displays, fairs and athletic events occurring on private property which are designed to attract large crowds, interfering with the normal traffic flow.

K.  BOROUGH MANAGER

The Borough Manager of the Borough of Coraopolis or his/her deputy.

SECTION IL

The remainder of Ordinance 1810 shall remain unchanged. This Ordinance shall take immediate

effect upon the passage of the same.
 
ORDAINED and ENACTED by the Council of Coraopolis Borough, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, this 9th day of October, 2019.

ATTEST	CORAOPOLIS BOROUGH COUNCIL





By
'
Borough Manager



Reviewed and approved by the Mayor of the Borough of Coraopolis this 9th day of October, 2019.





Shawn P. Reed, Mayor
 
(    .



BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS ALLEGHENY  COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA ORDINANCE NO. 1812
AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, ALLEGHENY COUNY, COMMONWEALTH  OF PENNSYLVANIA ESTABLISHING HOURS FOR ALL BOROUGH RECREATIONAL FACILITIES AND AREAS PURSUANT TO THE BOROUGH CODE, 8 PA.C.S.A. §2701.



WHEREAS, the Borough of Coraopolis, Allegheny County, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (hereinafter the "Borough") desires to regulate the use of its recreation areas and facilities;
WHEREAS, Section 2701 of the Borough of Code authorizes the Borough to regulate recreation places within the borough limits by ordinance;
NOW, THEREFORE, be it ordained and enacted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coraopolis as follows:
Section 1:	All Borough Owned recreational facilities and areas (i.e., gazebos, parks, playgrounds) shall be open from dawn until dusk.  No person shall occupy or be present in any recreation facility or area during the hours it is not open to the public, provided that Borough personnel, police officers on official duty, or other Borough officers, employees on park duty, or other persons with special permits from the Borough are not so prohibited.
Section 2:	Any person found to be violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed a trespass and shall received a citation in accordance with the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure and upon conviction, shall be guilty of a summary offense, and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250 and/or a jail sentence of no more than 90 days.




1
 
Section 3:	Repealer.  All prior Ordinances or Resolutions are hereby repealed in whole or in part to the extent inconsistent herewith.
Section 4:	Severability. Ifany sentence, clause, section, or part of this Ordinance for any reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections, or parts of this Ordinance. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Borough of Coraopolis that this section or part thereof not been included herein.

ORDAINED and ENACTED this 11th day of December , 2019.




ATTEST:	BOROUGH OF CORAOPLIS

R#iond McCutcheon	--
Borough Manager	Council President



EXAMINED AND APPROVED by me this this 11th day of December, 2019.






s - f /?
Shawn P. Reed
Mayor













2
 
OFFICIAL BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
ORDINANCE NO. 1813


AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY, COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA FIXING THE TAX RATE FOR THE YEAR 2020

BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the Borough of Coraopolis, County of Allegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:

That a tax be and the same is hereby levied on all real estate property and Occupations within the Borough of Coraopolis subject to the fiscal year 2020 as follows:

Tax Rate for General Purposes                                              11.38 mills On each dollar of assessed valuation, the sum of                   114 cents Tax Rate for Debt Service the sum of                                         1.12 mills
On each dollar of assessed valuation, the sum of                    11 cents The same being summarized in tabular for as follows:

 
SOURCE		MILLS ON EACH DOLLAR OF ASSESSED VALUATION
 
CENTS ON EACH ONE HUNDRED ASSESSED VALUATION
 

 
Tax Rate for General Purposes
 
11.38 mills	114 cents
 

 
Tax Rate on Debt Service
 
1.12	mill	11 cents
 

TOTAL	12.50 mills	125 cents
 






That any Ordinance, or part of Ordinance, conflicting with this Ordinance be and the same is hereby repealed insofar as the same affects the Ordinance.

ADOPTED THIS 11TH DAY OF DECEMBER 2019


ATTEST:	BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS

 



To the Secretary of the Commonwealth and Department of Economic Development Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania

I HEREBY CERIFY that the foregoing is a true and correct copy of the Ordinance No. 1813 enacted by the Borough of Coraopolis Council on the 11th Day of December 2019.




SEAL
 














BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS ZONING ORDINANCE






Ordinance No.    J&. l'j
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS


PAGE NO.

ARTICLE I - PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS
SECTION 100 - ENACTING CLAUSE	1
SECTION 101 - SHORT TITLE	1
SECTION 102 - VALIDITY AND CONFLICT	1
SECTION 103 - PURPOSES OF THE ORDINANCE	1-2
SECTION 104 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES	2-3
SECTION 105 - FILING	3
ARTICLE II-DEFINITIONS
 
SECTION 200 - GENERAL RULES SECTION 201 - SPECIFIC DEFINITIONS
 
4
4-27
 



ARTICLE III-ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS

SECTION 300 - OFFICIAL ZONING MAP	28-29
SECTION 301 -APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS	29-30
SECTION 302 - DESCRIPTION OF ZONING DISTRICTS	30-31
SECTION 303 -PERMITTED USES AND CONDITIONAL USES	31-35
SECTION 304 - LOT REQUIREMENTS BY ZONING DISTRICT	35-38



ARTICLE  IV -SUPPLEMENTAL  REGULATIONS

SECTION 400 - LOT EXCEPTIONS	39
SECTION 401 - YARD EXCEPTIONS	39-40
SECTION 402 - HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS	41
SECTION 403 - SITE GRADING AND DRAINAGE	41-42
SECTION 404 - LANDSCAPE BUFFERS, FENCES AND HEDGES	42-43
SECTION 405 - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS	43-44
SECTION 406 - TEMPORARY USES	45-46
SECTION 407 - OIL AND GAS OPERATIONS AND FACILITIES	46-49
SECTION 408-MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS	49-61





TABLE OF CONTENTS
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED)

PAGE NO.

ARTICLE V - STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR CONDITIONAL USES

SECTION 500- GENERAL  STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
FOR EVALUATION DISTRICTS	62-63
SECTION 501 - PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATION 	63-65
SECTION 502 - SPECIFIC CRITERIA FOR ALL CONDITIONAL
USES	65-66
SECTION 503 - STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR SPECIFIC
USES	66-87
ARTICLE VI - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
 

SECTION 600 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKINIG SECTION 601 - DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 602 - DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION 603 - SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 604 - OFF-STREET PARKING REDUCTION AREAS SECTION 605 - BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS SECTION 606 - SHARED PARKING REQUIREMENTS SECTION 607 -PARKING OF COMMERCIAL  VEHICLES
IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
SECTION 608 - OFF STREET LOADING



ARTICLE VII- SIGNS

SECTION 700 - SIGNS - GENERAL
SECTION 701 -DEFINITIONS OF TERMS RELATED TO SIGNAGE
SECTION 702 - GENERAL SIGNS PROVISIONS SECTION 703 - SIGN LIMITATIONS
SECTION 704 - SIGN EXEMPTIONS
SECTION 705 - PERMITS
SECTION 706 - SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 109-110
 

88

88-89
90-91

91
96
96-98
98-100

100
101





102

102-106
106-107
107
108
108-109
 



11	TABLE OF CONTENTS
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED)

PAGE NO.

 
SECTION 707 - SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS SECTION 708 - SIGNS IN INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS SECTION 709 - SIGN MAINTENANCE

ARTICLE VIII-NON-CONFORMING USES SECTION 800 - APPLICATION
SECTION 801 - NON-CONFORMING  USES OF LANDS AND STRUCTURES
SECTION 802 - NON-CONFORMING  STRUCTURES
SECTION 803 - RECORD OF NON-CONFORMING USES SECTION 804 - NON-CONFORMING  SIGNAGE

ARTICLE IX - ZONING HEARING BOARD SECTION 900 - GENERAL
SECTION 901 - FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD
SECTION 902- OPERATION OF THE ZONING HEARING BOARD SECTION 903 - HEARING PROCEDURES
SECTION 904 - HEARING DECISIONS SECTION 905 - ZONING APPEALS SECTION  906-MEDIATION  OPTION



ARTICLE X-ADMINISTRATION

SECTION 1000 - DUTIES OF THE ZONING OFFICER SECTION 1001 - BUILDING PERMITS
SECTION 1002 - OCCUPANCY PERMITS
SECTION 1003 -ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES SECTION 1004 - SCHEDULE OF FEES
SECTION 1005 - AMENDMENT OF THE ORDINANCE
SECTION 1006 - ENACTMENT OF THE ORDINANCE
 
110-112
112-113
113-114





115

115-116
116-117
117
117-118





119
119-121
122-123
123-125
125-126
126-127
127-128





129
129-131
131-132
132-133
134
134-137
137
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS (CONTINUED)

TABLES

PAGE NO. TABLE 1 - PERMITTED USES AND CONDITIONAL USES	32-35
TABLE 2 - RESIDENTIAL  ZONING DISTRICTS -RESIDENTIAL
AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS	36
TABLE 3 - NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS - NONRESIDENTIAL AREA AND BULK
REGULATIONS	37-38
TABLE 4 - MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS	91-96
TABLE 5 -PARKING REDUCTION AREAS	96
TABLE 6-BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS	98
TABLE 7 - CALCULATING PARKING FOR MIXED USE
BUILDINGS	99
 

ARTICLE I PRELIMINARY  PROVISIONS

Section 100	Enacting Clause

Be it ordained and enacted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coraopolis, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, assembled, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same, that from and after the passage and approval of this Ordinance, the several classes of districts specified herein shall be established and the following regulations shall be in full force and effect.

Section 101	Short Title

This Ordinance shall be known as, and may be cited as, "The Coraopolis Borough Zoning Ordinance".

Section 102	Validity and Conflict

A.	If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such action shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining sections, subsections, clauses or phrases.

B.	Where conflicts exist between this Ordinance and other ordinances or regulations of the Borough, or of a higher level of government, or legal restrictive covenants applied by landowners to their property, the ordinance, regulation, or covenant establishing the higher standard for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail.

C.	All ordinances or parts thereof in  conflict  with  this  Zoning  Ordinance, inconsistent with its provisions or less restrictive are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.

Section 103	Purposes of the Ordinance This Ordinance is deemed necessary to:
A.	Promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the Borough of Coraopolis and the general public as a whole;

B.	Encourage practical and coordinated community development throughout the Borough of Coraopolis;



FEBRUARY 2020
 
C.	Establish proper density of population in the various zoning districts and provide adequate light, air and amenity therein;

D.	Facilitate the economical provision of public highways and streets, vehicle parking, public transportation, water supply, sewage disposal, public schools, parks and open spaces and other public requirements;

E.	Prevent the overcrowding or improper or incompatible development or use of land, to prevent blighting conditions and congestion or hazard in travel and transportation;

F.	Secure the safety of health, life and property from fire, flood, panic, noise, noxious fumes, explosion and other dangers;

G.	Conserve and stabilize property values through encouragement of the most appropriate uses of land in relation to one another;

H.	Preserve flood plains, steep hillsides and recreation lands from conflict with development and from erosion; and

I.		Facilitate generally, orderly and compatible growth and expansion within the Borough of Coraopolis and the programming of public improvements.

Section 104	Community Development Objectives

In addition to the purposes listed in Section 130, the following specific Community Development Objectives are considered the basis upon which the zoning districts and regulations of this Ordinance are established. These Objectives are a statement of legislative findings of the Borough Council and are concerned with land use patterns, density of population, and the location and function of streets and other community facilities and utilities.

A.	The existing municipal tax base should be preserved and enhanced.

B.	The spread of blight should be halted and older housing should be upgraded.

C.	Vacant or underutilized structures should be recycled for new uses or more fully utilized to their full potential.

D.	Existing desirable commercial and industrial land uses should be encouraged to remain, improve and expand, and new businesses should be invited to become established in the Borough of Coraopolis in appropriate locations.
 

E.	Further development in areas susceptible to flooding or on steep slope lands should be carefully regulated and recreational or open space uses encouraged in these areas.

F.	The private and public renewal of the Borough of Coraopolis in the future should result in an inviting and compatible  residential, commercial and industrial environment.

G.	Streets should function to move present and expected traffic volumes as safely and smoothly as possible and new development should not interfere with this objective.

Section 105     Filing

This Ordinance, including the Zoning Map and any subsequent amendments to the text and map, shall be on file and be viewed by any interested party in the Municipal Building during regular business hours.
 
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS

Section 200	General Rules

A.	Words used in the present tense include the future tense;

B.	The particular shall control the general;

C.	The singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular;

D.	The masculine gender includes the feminine;

E.	The word PERSON or the word DEVELOPER includes a firm, association, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual;

F.	The word SHALL is mandatory; the word NAY is permissive;

G.	The word LOT includes "plot", "piece", "parcel" or "tract" of land;

H.	The words USED or OCCUPIED  include the words  "intended, arranged, maintained or designed to be used or occupied", and;

I.	Words used in this Ordinance and not otherwise defined in Section 210 shall have the same meaning as in a standard dictionary.

Section 201	Specific Definitions

Access Drive: The area between the traveled portion of a roadway and a parking lot used by motor vehicles for access to and from the parking lot, but does not include an aisle.

Accessory Structure: A structure that is on the same lot as, but detached from, the principal building or structure and is incidental and subordinate to the principal structure or principal use of the land, including but not limited to storage sheds, private garages, and the like. An accessory structure shall not be installed or constructed in advance of the principal structure or use.

Accessory Use: A use customarily subordinate and incidental to the principal use of the land located on the same lot as the principal use.
 

Adult-Oriented Business: An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, or adult theater.

Alterations, Structural: Any change in the support members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders; changes in the means of ingress and/or egress; enlargement of floor area or height of a structure; or relocation of a structure from one position to another.

Amendment: Any addition, deletion or revision of any part of the zoning ordinance text or zoning map officially approved by Borough Council after public hearing.

Amusement Enterprise: Recreation facilities, including but not limited to movie or live entertainment theatre, bowling alleys, dance halls, body building, pool and billiard halls, electronic games and similar  uses are conducted entirely within an enclosed building, and involving no gambling or activities that appeal to the prurient interest of customers, including any Adult-Oriented Business. Pool and billiard halls shall be premises  with more than two (2) tables, while electronic game parlors shall be premises with more than two (2) coin-operated machines with or without a video display.

Animal Grooming Facility: An establishment for the grooming and aesthetic enhancement of domestic animals that does not include medical or surgical treatment, or overnight boarding facilities.

Antenna: Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels, dishes, whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or reception of wireless signals. An antenna may include an omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic antenna (disc) or any other wireless antenna. An antenna shall not include Communications Towers as defined herein.

Apartment:

a.	Conversion Apartment: A dwelling unit established from a portion of an already existing single family dwelling, each dwelling to contain its own cooking, food storage, bathing and toilet facilities and separate means of access to the outside.

b.	Efficiency Apartment: A dwelling unit designed as one room except for bathing and toilet facilities in one room and cooking and food storage in an alcove, closet or attached room.
 
c.	Garage Apartment: A secondary dwelling unit located on a parcel with an existing single-family residence.

d.	Garden Apartment: A multi-family residential building  no  more than three stories in height containing three or more dwelling units which share a common entrance to the outside, usually through a common corridor, and which dwelling units may  have other dwelling units either above or below them.

e.	High-Rise   Apartment:   A   multi-family    residential    building containing at least four residential floors and which share a common entrance and/or common interior corridor.

Applicant: A landowner or developer who has filed an application for development, permit or approval pursuant to this Ordinance, including his heirs, successors, assigns, or agents.

Architect: A professional architect licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

Automobile Repair Garage: A building, or part thereof, used for the servicing, repairing, or retreading of tires for vehicles and where all storage of parts and dismantled vehicles and all repair work are conducted entirely inside an enclosed building. Businesses solely devoted  to vehicle electronics repair and/or installation shall be considered retail stores.

Automobile Sales and Service: A retail establishment which may include one or more of the following: an open area, other than a street, for the display and sale or rental of new or used automobiles and light duty trucks; buildings which may contain offices and showrooms; an area within a completely enclosed building where reconditioning, preparation, accessory installation, repairs, and/or servicing of vehicles is performed. All parts of the business shall be on the same or contiguous lots.

Bakery Shop: See Food and Grocery Store.

Bank I Financial Institution: A business in which money is kept for saving or commercial purposes, is invested, supplied for loans, and/or exchanged.

Basement: Any portion of a building (or story) that is partly or completely below ground or the adjacent ground level of the lot.

Bed and Breakfast: A detached dwelling which is the principal residence of the operator and in which a maximum of five sleeping rooms are provided for overnight guests for a period of no more than 14 consecutive nights in a 90-day period,  with  or without breakfast  meals, for compensation.   This
 

definition shall not include a boarding house, rooming house, group home, motel, hotel, or the like.

Boarding House: An establishment, including a fraternity or sorority house, with lodging for five or more persons where meals are regularly prepared and served for compensation and where food is placed upon the table family style, without service or ordering of individual portions from a menu.

Brewery or Micro-Brewery Pub: A facility that produces specialty beers using limited production facilities. A facility such as this typically only produces and sells its beers locally and they may or may not serve food on the premises.

Buffer:	A fence, trees, grass, ground cover, shrubs, bushes, natural landscaping, a natural change of grade, or any combination of these conditions that protect residential development from potential negative impacts of adjacent, incompatible land uses.

Building: A roofed structure, whether or not enclosed by walls, to be used for shelter, enclosure, or protection of persons, goods, materials, or animals.

a.	Building Area: The area oflot within the setback lines inside which building construction may occur.

b.	Building, Enclosed: A building in which all exterior walls are solid except for windows and doors.

c.	Building Height: The vertical distance between finished grade and the top of a wall parapet if a flat roofed building or halfway between the gutter and ridge lines if a sloped roofed building.

d.	Building Line: The setback distance from the street abutting a lot behind which building construction may occur, such minimum distance specified by this Ordinance for each zoning district.

e.	Building Permit: A certificate issued by the Zoning Officer attesting that a developer proposal meets all requirements of this Ordinance and authorizing construction to proceed.

Business Services: A commercial establishment which provides services primarily to businesses and offices on a fee or contract basis, such as, advertising and public relations, management and consulting services, security and maintenance services, financial or secretarial services, equipment rental or leasing, photocopying or document reproduction, and/or computer and data processing services.
 

Candy or Ice Cream Store: An establishment which sells candy items and/or ice-cream for consumption on or off the premises.

Car Wash: An area of land and/or a structure with machine or hand­ operated facilities used primarily for the interior and/or exterior cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles and whereas no repairs or sales of petroleum fuel or lubricants are performed.

Cemetery: A burial place or ground for human remains, including a graveyard, mausoleum, and columbarium, but not including a crematorium.

Centerline: A line parallel with the length of a street and equidistant from the right-of-way lines on either side of the street.

Church or Place of Worship: An institution of any denomination where people regularly observe, practice or participate in religious or spiritual services, meetings and/or activities. A convent, rectory, monastery, and parish house shall be considered accessory uses to a place of worship.

Club, Fraternal, or Service Organization: A non-profit civic, social, educational, recreational or cultural organization chartered under laws of the Commonwealth but not including residential accommodations except for the manager and his family.

Co-location: The mounting of one or more Wireless Communication Facilities (WCFs), including antennae, on an existing Communications Tower, or on any structure that already supports at least one Communications  Antenna.

Commercial Multi-Family Plan: A proposal for development of a tract of land that allows a more flexible arrangement of lots or apartment buildings provided an overall density of established by this Ordinance for the zoning district containing the tract is not exceeded and recreation areas are provided for the residents.

Common Open Space: a parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside  for public facilities.

Communications Antenna: All Non-Tower Wireless Communication Facilities, including but not limited to, antennae and related equipment attached to the wireless support structure. Communication Antennas shall not include support structures for antennae or any related equipment that is mounted to the ground or at ground level.
 

Communication Equipment Building: Any unmanned Building, Court, or other enclosure containing equipment or control devices for the operation of a Communications Antenna.

Communications Tower: Any structure that is used for the purpose of supporting one or more Antennae, including but not limited to, self­ supporting lattice towers, guy towers, and monopoles, utility poles, and light poles. Distributed antenna system hub facilities are considered to be Communications Towers.

Communications Tower, Height of: The vertical distance measured from the ground level to the highest point on a communications tower, including any communications antennae mounted on the tower.

Communications Tower, Related Equipment: Any piece of equipment related to, incidental to, or necessary for, the operation of a Communications Tower  or Communica:tions Antenna. By way of illustration, not limitation, Related Equipment includes generators and base stations.

Community Unit Plan: A proposal for development of  a tract of  land allowing a more flexible arrangement of lots or residential buildings provided an overall density established by this Ordinance for the zoning district containing the tract is not exceeded and recreation areas are provided for the residents.

Conditional Use: An authorized use which may be granted only by the Borough Council pursuant to the express standards and criteria prescribed in this Chapter, after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission and a public hearing by the Borough Council pursuant to public notice. Conditional uses are further discussed in Article V of this Ordinance.

Construction: The erection, renovation, repair, extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building, structure, or site improvements including the placement of mobile homes.

Contractor Storage/Supply Yard: A commercial establishment storing or offering for sale building supplies, steel supplies, coal, heavy equipment, feed and grain, and similar goods. Supply yards do not include the wrecking, salvaging, dismantling or storage of automobiles and similar vehicles.

Convenience Store: A retail establishment offering for sale food products, household items, and other goods commonly associated with the same and
 

generally having a gross floor area of less than 10,000 square feet. Convenience stores shall not include fuel sales unless fuel sales specifically permitted in the Zoning District.

Convent/Monastery/Rectory/Parish House: An accessory use  and accessory structure associated with a Place of Worship where priests, clergy members, nuns, monks, and/or pastors may reside.

County: Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and any departments or agencies thereof.

County Planning Agency: Allegheny County Department of Economic Development, Planning Division, or any agency successor thereto.

Contour: A line connecting all the points that are the same distance above or below an established elevation, with each such line equidistant vertically from adjacent lines, this distance being the "contour interval".

Comer Lot:  A lot which abuts two (2) or more streets that intersect at one
(1) or more comers of the lot.

Crematorium: An establishment containing properly installed and certified apparatus for use in the act of cremation, including both human and pet/animal  crematoriums.

Curative Amendment: A proposed revision of this Ordinance initiated by a landowner or by the Borough intended to correct a defect in the regulations contended by the initiating party.

Cut: Earth material excavated on a lot and moved elsewhere as part of a grading operation in connection with the development of a lot.

Day Care Center: A facility, licensed by the Commonwealth, located within a building which is not used as a dwelling unit, for the care of children under the age of 16, or handicapped or elderly persons during part of a 24-hour day.

Decision: Final adjudication of any board or other body granted jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this act to do so, either by reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the court of common pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the municipality lies.

Delicatessen:  See Food & Grocery Store.
 

Density: A measure of intensity of residential development, number of dwelling units per acre of land, exclusive of public streets and grounds.

Determination: Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder, except the following:

(1)	the governing body.
(2)	the zoning hearing board.
(3)	the planning agency, only if and to the extent the planning agency is charged with final decision on preliminary or final plans under the subdivision and land development ordinance or planned residential development provisions.

Determinations shall be appealable only to the boards designated as having jurisdiction  for such appeal.

Developer: Any landowner or agent of such landowner, or tenant with permission of such landowner, who proposes, makes or causes to be made an application for subdivision and/or land development, permit, or approval pursuant to this Ordinance.

Development Plan: The provisions for development, including a planned residential development, a planned non-residential development, a land development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of building and other structures, intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways, and parking facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development plan" shall mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.

Distillery: A distillery business containing a tasting room where spirits are manufactured, packaged, sold, and/or stored on the premises.

Domestic Pets: Animals, reptiles, fish, and/or fowl normally permitted in a house and kept for company or pleasure such as dogs, cats, hamsters, gerbils, canaries, parakeets, and similar animals or fowl, but not including:
(1) any animal, reptile, fish, and/or fowl normally found on a farm; (2) any other animal, reptile, fish, and/or fowl normally found in a zoo; (3) any other exotic animals. Domestic pets shall not include a sufficient number to constitute a kennel, as defined herein.

Dormitory: A building used as a group living facility for a student body or other group as an associated use to a college, university, boarding school or other similar educational use.
 

Driveway: A private vehicular access route serving only one parcel or lot which provides access to a public street, but which does not provide access to any other lot or parcel under separate ownership.

Drug Store/ Pharmacy: A retail store not exceeding 5,000 square feet of gross floor area which primarily sells prescription drugs, patient medicines, and surgical and sickroom supplies.

Dwelling: A building, portion thereof or other structure used primarily for human habitation (whether permanent or seasonal), providing complete housekeeping facilities and which includes exclusive sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation facilities and a separate entrance for each unit. The word "dwelling" shall not include hotels, motels, fraternity or sorority houses, group residences, institutional facilities, nursing homes, or similar uses for group residence.  Dwelling types shall include the following:

a.	Single-Family Dwelling: A residential building containing one dwelling unit which is the only principal building on the lot and which has a minimum gross floor area of 500 square feet.

b.	Two-Family Dwelling: A residential building containing two independent dwelling units, each having a separate entrance, and which is the only principal building on the lot.

c.	Quad-Plex/Tri-Plex: A detached residential building divided by two common party walls into three or four distinct and separate dwelling units where each dwelling unit has direct access to the outdoors.

d.	Townhouse: A multi-family residential building no more than two and one-half stories in height which contains no more than eight dwelling units, each of which are separated from the adjoining unit or units by a continuous, unpierced vertical wall extending from the basement to the roof, each unit having independent access directly to the outside and having no other units above or below.

Earth Movement or Grading: The rearrangement  of the earth surface on a lot by mechanical means in accordance with an approved plan in the course of development of a lot.

Easement: A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for a specific purpose or purposes, by  the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons.

Essential Services: The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies of underground or  overhead  gas,  electrical,  steam  or  water  transmission  or  distribution
 

systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduit cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, street signs, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare, but not including buildings. Communication towers shall not be considered essential services for the purposes of this Ordinance.

Family: An individual or a group of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or not more than three (3) unrelated individuals living together in the same dwelling unit.

Feed and Grain Business: A retail store that sells feed, grain, and other agricultural materials related to the production of crops or the raising of livestock.

Fill: Earth material collected elsewhere and deposited over undisturbed earth as part of a grading operation in connection with development of a lot.

Findings: Facts developed from the testimony of witnesses and conclusions determined by the examining body as the basis for deciding an appeal raised by application of the requirements of this Ordinance.

Flex Space: A building or buildings that can be divided in use by one tenant or multiple tenants primarily for office, light manufacturing, pilot manufacturing, research and development, warehousing, and associated administrative space.

Floor Area Ratio: The total floor area of all floors in a building relative to the lot area, with the lot area being considered the whole number one (1). Floor area shall include all walls and all space with a floor to ceiling height of six (6) feet or greater and be measures based on the interior dimensions of walls and ceiling..

Florist:  A retail store that sells and arranges plants and cut flowers.

Food & Grocery Store: An establishment that may include any of the following: supermarkets; bakeries, dairies, delicatessens; but not including convenience stores.

Fraternity or Sorority House: An establishment with lodging for five (5) or more persons actively enrolled in a college or university and members of a fraternity or sorority where meals are regularly prepared and served for compensation and where food is placed upon the table family style, without service or ordering of individual portions from a menu.
 

Frontage: The width of a lot along the street that provides the principal access to the lot. The front lot line is the line that is coterminous with the street right-of-way line.

Fuel Sales: The retail sale of motor vehicle fuel, including but not limited to gasoline, diesel, compressed natural gas, and electric.

Funeral Home: A building used for the embalming of the deceased for burial, but not including cremation, and for the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation.

Garage, Private: An accessory building on a residential lot that may be attached to a dwelling, or a space within a dwelling building for storing vehicles operated by the residents of the dwelling, and not to be used as an auto repair shop except for such vehicles.

Garden Supply/Plant Materials Store: A business primarily engaged in selling indoor or outdoor grown plants and landscaping materials to the general public.

Group Care Facility: An establishment, including but not limited to, an assisted living facility, independent living facility, and personal care home, that provides room and board to persons who are residents by virtue  of receiving supervised specialized services limited to health, social and/or rehabilitative services provided by governmental agencies, their licensed or certified agents, or any responsible non-profit corporation meeting the minimum requirements of the sponsoring agency. Supervision shall be provided by responsible adults whose number shall be determined and certified by the sponsoring agency; however, no less than one responsible adult shall always be in the actual facility on a 24-hour basis. The number of residents shall not exceed one (1) person for every 300 square feet of gross floor area, excluding supervisory adults and the children  of supervisory adults. This category shall not include correctional facilities or other facilities operated by or under the jurisdiction of any government bureau of corrections or similar institution.

Group Residence: A dwelling unit in a residential area where room and board are provided to six or fewer unrelated persons of any age who are permanent residents, who are mentally or physically handicapped and who are in need of supervision and specialized services, including necessary staff who may or may not reside in the dwelling and who provide health, social and/or rehabilitative services to the residents; such services being provided by a governmental agency, its licensed or certified agents or any other responsible nonprofit corporation meeting the minimum requirements of the  sponsoring  agency.    This  category  shall  not  include  correctional
 

facilities or other facilities operated by or under the jurisdiction of any government bureau of corrections or similar institution.

Half-Way House: A residential facility that provides a supervised environment to ease the transition of its residents between institution living and independent living, and is conducted under regulations of the Commonwealth and the auspices of a social service agency.

Health Club or Fitness Center: A facility intended to provide wholesome exercise, athletic training or practice or physical therapy, but not including any activities that appeal mainly to the prurient interests.

Hearing Officer: An individual member of the Zoning Hearing Board appointed by the Board to hear and provide a decision on a case before the Zoning Hearing Board, such  decision appealable to the Zoning Hearing Board as a whole.

Heavy Manufacturing: The mechanical or chemical transformation of raw materials or substances into new products or other raw materials or any manufacturing process not included in the definition of  Light Manufacturing as defined in this Ordinance.

Home Occupation: A business or  commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling, but which does not meet the requirements of a no­ impact home-based business.

Homeowners' Association: An organization of all the property owners in a community unit  or multi-family development plan with responsibility to maintain all those areas of, and facilities within the plan held in common by the property others if other than the Developer or his successors.

Hospital: An establishment that provides diagnostic health services and extensive medical, surgical and/or psychiatric services and/or treatment either through inpatient care or on an emergency outpatient basis.

Hotel: An establishment which provides transient lodging accommodations to the general public and which may provide such additional supporting services as restaurants, meeting rooms, recreation facilities and living quarters for a resident manager or proprietor.

Indoor Recreation Facility: An establishment consisting of indoor facilities for the pursuit of sports, recreation and leisure activities including, but not limited to, tennis or racquet clubs, fitness clubs, swimming pools, and similar facilities.
 
Kennel:  An establishment, whether for profit or not, where more than four
(4)	dogs or more than six (6) cats who are more than six (6) months old are kept, bred, trained, groomed, boarded and/or administered veterinary services.

Land Development: any of the following activities:

The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:

a)	a group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether	proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure; or
b)	the  division  or  allocation  of  land  or  space,  whether  initially  or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
c)	A subdivision of land.
d)	Development	in	accordance	with	section	503(1.1)	of	the Municipalities Planning Code.

Landowner: the legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a proprietary interest in land.

Laundromat: An establishment with coin-operated washing machines and dryers for public use.

Life Care Facility: A facility for the transitional residency of elderly and/or disabled persons, progressing from independent living in  single-family units to congregate apartment living where residents share common meals and culminating in a full health and continuing care nursing home facility.

Light Manufacturing: The processing and fabrication of certain materials and products where no process involved will produce noises, vibration, air pollution, fire hazard, or noxious emissions which will disturb or endanger neighboring lots. Light manufacturing includes the production of the following goods: home appliances, electrical instruments, office machines, precision instruments, electronic devices, clocks/watches, jewelry, optical goods, musical instruments, novelties, wood products, printed material, lithographic plates, type composition, machine tools, dies and gauges, ceramics, apparel, lightweight nonferrous metal castings, film processing,
 
light sheet metal products, plastic goods, pharmaceutical goods and food products, but no animal slaughtering, curing nor rendering of fats.

Liquor Store: A retail store that predominantly sells prepackaged alcoholic beverages, typically in bottles, intended to be consumed off the store's premises. These stores must be licensed and approved by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.

Loading Area: A portion of a lot occupied by multiple family apartment buildings, commercial or industrial uses intended for the use of servicing vehicles exclusively.

Lot: a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.

a.	Lot Area:   All the ground  surface measured  within the perimeter lines of a lot.

b.	Lot Coverage: The maximum area within the setback lines in a lot that may be occupied by buildings.

c.	Lot Line: The boundary line, or part of such line, describing the perimeter of a lot.

d.	Lot, Comer: A lot at the intersection of, and fronting on, two or more street rights of way at adjacent lot lines. All lot lines contiguous with a street right-of-way shall be considered front lot lines. Remaining lot lines shall be considered side lot lines.

e.	Lot, Through: Any  lot, except  a comer lot, bounded  on opposite sides by streets. All lot lines contiguous with a street right-of-way shall be  considered front lot lines.  Remaining  lot lines shall be considered side lot lines.

f.	Lot Line, Front: A lot line that is contiguous with the street right-of­ way line..

g.	Lot Line, Rear: The lot line not intersecting a front lot line that is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line. A lot bounded by only three lot lines will not have a rear lot line.

h.	Lot Line, Side: Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
 

L	Lot Width: The distance across a lot measured along the front setback line between the side lot lines.

J.	Lot of Record: A lot of legal record  on file with the Allegheny County Recorder of Deeds, pursuant with statutes governing recording.

Manufacturing:  The creation of a marketable product from raw materials or partially completed assemblies prepared elsewhere with value added as a result of the process.

Marina: A business establishment for the secure mooring of recreational boats, including facilities for storage and repair of boats and the sale of boating supplies and fuel, for use by the owner or resident of the lot, and those other than the owner or resident of the lot, upon which the facility is located. A marina may include a restaurant and/or boat and motor sale store as an accessory use.

Massage Therapy Establishment: Any business or part thereof where massage services are provided by a person having graduated from a massage therapy training program approved by the  Pennsylvania State Board of Private Licensed Schools, or equivalent agency, if trained in another State, by a person certified through a massage therapy certification exam approved by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies, by a person certified through the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork, or by a person who is a practitioner or higher level member of the American Massage Therapy Association (AMTA), Associated Bodywork and Massage Professionals (ABMP), or International Massage Association (IMA).

Medical Clinic: An establishment, excluding a medical office and business or professional office, where two or more medical professionals licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health provide diagnostic health, medical, surgical, and/or psychiatric services and/or treatment to the general public, where patients are not provided with board or kept overnight, and shall include such uses as reception areas, waiting areas, consultation rooms, x­ ray and minor operating rooms and a dispensary, provided that all such uses have access only from the interior of the building or structure.

Mineral: Any aggregate or mass of mineral matter, whether or not coherent. The term includes, but is not limited to, limestone and dolomite, sand and gravel, rock and stone, earth, fill, slag, iron ore, zinc ore, vermiculite and clay, anthracite and bituminous coal, coal refuse, peat and crude oil and natural gas
 

Mixed Use Building: A building which houses a mix of both nonresidential and residential uses, with the residential uses located on the upper floors and the nonresidential uses located on any floor within the building.

Mobile Home: a transportable, single family dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation.

Monopole: A Wireless Communication Facility or site which consists of a single pole  structure, designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure,	to support Communications Antennae and connecting appurtenances.

No-Impact Home-Based Business: A business or commercial activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or patient, traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally associated with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements:

a.	The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses.

b.	The business shall employ no employees other than family members residing in the dwelling.

c.	There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.

d.	There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.

e.	The business activity may not use any equipment or process which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or  electrical or electronic interference, including interference with radio or television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.

f.		The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
 
g.	The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.

h.	The business may not involve any illegal activity.



Non-Conforming Lot: A lot that the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.

Non-Conforming Structure: A structure or part of a structure manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of use provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.

Non-Conforming Use: A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance or amendment, or prior to the application of such ordinance  or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.

Nursing Home: A facility licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that is engaged in providing a patient nursing and health related personal care, utilizing in whole or in part, licensed and/or registered nurses, excluding hospital services and excluding day-to-day personal care which is not health care by licensed or registered nurses.

Occupancy Permit: A certificate issued by the Zoning Officer attesting that the construction for which a building permit has been issued has been completed in accordance with the building permit and may be occupied, or attesting that a proposed new occupancy or use on a lot, but not requiring a building permit, is a permitted use or has been approved as a conditional use.

Office, Business or Professional: Any office of recognized professions such as doctors, lawyers, architects, engineers, real estate brokers, insurance agents, and others who, through training, are qualified to perform services of a professional nature and other offices used primarily for accounting, corresponding, research, editing or other administrative functions, but not including banks or other financial institutions.
 

Office, Medical: A building or a series of buildings or rooms where one or more licensed medical professionals provide diagnosis and treatment to the general public without overnight observation. A medical office shall include such uses as reception areas, offices, examination rooms and x-ray rooms, provided that all such uses have access only from the interior of the building.  A medical office shall not include a pharmacy or surgical suites.

Oil and Gas Operations and Facilities: This term includes the following: well location assessment, including the seismic operations, well site preparation, construction, drilling, hydraulic fracturing and site restoration associated with an oil or gas well of any depth; water and other fluid storage or impoundment areas used exclusively for oil and gas operations; construction, installation, use, maintenance, and repair of oil and gas pipelines, natural gas compressor stations, and natural gas processing plants or facilities performing equivalent functions; and, construction, installation, use, maintenance and repair of all equipment directly associated with activities specified, to the extent that the equipment is necessarily located at or immediately adjacent to a well site, impoundment area, oil and gas pipeline, natural gas compressor station, or natural gas processing plant, and the activities are authorized and permitted under the authority of a federal or commonwealth agency.

Open Space: Public or private land used for recreation, resource protection, amenity and/or buffers, not including any area of a lot, any part an existing or future street right-of-way, easement of access or areas set aside for public or private utilities, stormwater facilities and easements.

Outdoor Recreational Facility: A facility where activities are conducted primarily for entertainment, amusement, or recreational purposes and occurring outside an enclosed structure, with ancillary services (such as restrooms, offices, electronic games, and refreshments) conducted within an enclosed building located on the same property. Outdoor recreational activities shall include, but not be limited to, miniature golf, go-cart tracks, amusement rides or devices, swimming pools, festivals, fairs, flea markets, concerts, athletic fields, or any other similar activities.

Parking, Required: The minimum number of parking spaces to be provided in support of an activity on the same lot, or guaranteed in a nearby location, in accordance with this Ordinance.

a.	Parking Lot: An area wholly outside any public street right-of-way constructed to accommodate the storage of vehicles and connected to a public street or streets by a driveway or access lane.

b.	Parking Space: An area within a parking lot intended for the storage of one (1) vehicle and adjacent to an access lane.
 

Permitted Use: An activity that is expressly allowed by right as the principal use of a lot because the lot is located in a zoning district where the activity or use is permitted.

Personal Services: Any enterprise providing services pertaining to the person, their apparel, or personal effects commonly carried on or about the person, including, but not limited to, shoe repair, tailoring, clothes cleaning, watch repairing, barber shops, beauty parlors, tattoo parlors, body piercing establishments and/or other related activities.

Pilot Manufacturing: An establishment or part thereof used to test concepts and ideas, determine physical layouts, material flows and processes, types of equipment required, costs and other information necessary prior to undertaking full-scale production.

Place of Assembly: A public or private lot of land, building or structure that is designed for the assembly or collection of persons, for civic, political, religious, educational, social purposes and where recreation, amusement or dining occur as accessory activities.

Principal Use of a Structure or Lot: The main use to which a structure or lot is to be devoted, making all other activity on the lot accessory to the mam use.

Printing/Publishing/Engraving: A retail establishment primarily devoted to providing area businesses and residents with printing services, publishing services, and the general engraving of products sold in the printing/ publishing/ engraving store.

Public Building: Buildings, structures, or uses belonging to, or affecting, any duly authorized governmental body or municipal authority, which is available for common or general use by all, including municipal buildings, fire stations, emergency service facilities, and/or libraries but excluding schools.



Public Hearing: a formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the governing body or planning agency, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this act..

Research & Development: Any establishment which carries on an investigation in the natural, physical  or social sciences, or engineering or development as an extension of such investigation with the objective of creating end products which may include pilot manufacturing, as defined by this Ordinance.
 


Restaurant, High-Turnover: A sit-down and/or carry-out eating establishment with turnover rates typically less than one (1) hour in duration, where food is ordered at tableside and does not utilize drive­ through facilities, that generates greater than 20 combined peak-hour weekday trips per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, and that generally has a gross floor area open to the public greater than 1,000 square feet in size.

Restaurant, Low-Turnover: A sit-down type eating establishment with turnover rates typically at more than one (1) hour in duration, where food is ordered at tableside for eat-in only, that generates less than 20 combined
(a.m. and p.m.) peak-hour weekday trips per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area that is open to public use, and where the gross floor area of space open to public use does not exceed 5,000 square feet.

Restaurant, with Drive Thru: A sit-down and/or carry-out eating establishment with turnover rates typically less than one (1) hour in duration, where food is ordered at tableside and does utilize drive-through facilities, that generates greater than 20 combined peak-hour weekday trips per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area, and that generally has a gross floor area open to the public greater than 1,000 square feet in size.

Retail Store: A business establishment located entirely within an enclosed building which sells goods, services or merchandise to the general public for personal, household or office consumption and which shall not include wholesaling, manufacturing or processing of the goods offered for sale.

Right-of-Way: A strip of land over which passage is guaranteed, either to the public for general or restricted vehicular and/or pedestrian passage, or to utilities as an easement for the passage and maintenance of segments of a distribution or collection system.

School: A place of instruction operated by a public, private or religious organization, having regular sessions, with regularly employed instructors and meeting all of the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Education for providing primary, secondary, vocational or post-secondary education.

Self-Service Storage Facility: A building or group of buildings in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains various sizes of individualized, compartmentalized and controlled access stalls and/or lockers leased by the general public for a specified period of time for the dead storage of personal goods.
 

Service Station: A commercial facility providing for the daily maintenance and supply of motor vehicles but not including auto body repair and refinishing, engine overhaul, or the accumulation of discarded parts or damaged vehicles on the premises.

Setback: The minimum distance that a building must be held back from an adjacent lot line, depending on the zoning district in which the lot is located. The setback line is a line within a lot parallel to an adjacent property line and distant from it the setback or yard depth required in the zoning district containing the lot. The front setback line is parallel to the front lot line and distant from it the depth of the front yard. The side and rear setback lines are similarly situated.

Stealth Technology: Camouflaging methods applied to Wireless Communication Facilities which render them more visually appealing or blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods include but are not limited to architecturally screened roof­ mounted antennae, building-mounted antennae painted to match the existing structure, and facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, and light poles.

Story: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor or roof next above. A story is measured as the vertical distance from the top to top of tow successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost  story, from the top of the floor of the ceiling joists, or, where there is not a ceiling to the top of the rafters.

Street: Street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private. A public street is one maintained by the Borough or the Commonwealth.

Structure: Any permanent man-made construction in, on or over the ground surface and attached to the ground but not including surfaces treated for vehicular or pedestrian passage.

Studio  - Art,  Dance,  Martial  Arts,  Music,  etc.:   A  small  scale  facility, typically accommodating one group of students at a time.  Larger facilities are included under the definition of "Schools."  Examples of these facilities include individual and group instruction and training in the arts; production rehearsal; photography,  and the processing of photographs produced only by users of the studio facilities; martial  arts training studios; gymnastics instruction,  and  aerobics  and  gymnastics  studios  with  no  other  fitness
 

facilities or equipment. Also includes production studios for individual musicians, painters, sculptors, photographers, and other artists.

Tavern/Bar: An establishment where the principal use is the serving of alcoholic beverages by the drink to the general public and where food or packaged beverages may be served or sold as an accessory use.

Tract: A lot or property of real estate under one ownership with a boundary that closes on itself described by bearings and distances.

Trucking Terminal: A building and adjacent loading area where cargo is stored and where commercial vehicles load and unload cargo on a regular basis which may or may not include facilities for maintenance, fueling, storage or dispatching of the vehicles.

Undisturbed Earth: Stabilized ground surface that has not been altered for at least two (2) years prior to any grading operations upon it.

Variance: relief granted pursuant to the provisions of Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.  .

Veterinary Clinic: An establishment owned and operated by a veterinary medical doctor(s), certified in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the medical or surgical treatment of domestic, agricultural or zoological animals but excluding the boarding and grooming of animals not subjected to medical or surgical treatment.

Warehouse: An establishment for the storage and handling of freight or merchandise, but not including the maintenance or fueling of commercial vehicles.

Wholesale Business: A business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, institutional, commercial or professional business customers or other wholesalers, rather than to the general public which includes the warehousing of merchandise and which may include distribution of such merchandise on the site of the principal business.

Winery: A facility specifically designed for the crushing,  fermentation, and/or barrel aging of wine. A winery may include any of the following: a tasting room, barrel rooms, bottling rooms, tank rooms, laboratories, and offices. Uses that are clearly incidental to the production of wine are permissible accessory uses to a winery. These may include, but are not limited to, the following: bottling, case or goods storage, retail and/or wholesale sales of wine, tours, ancillary retail sales, picnic areas, and food service. Food service is not to include restaurants, unless restaurants are otherwise allowed in the zoning district.
 


Wireless: Transmissions through the airwaves including but not limited to infrared line of sight, cellular, microwave, satellite, or radio signals.

Wireless Communications Facility (WCF): The antennae, nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits,. ducts, pedestals, electronics, and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving, distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless communications services.

Wireless Support Structure: A freestanding structure, such as a Communications Tower or any other support structure that could support the placement or installation of a wireless communications facility if approved by the Borough.

Yard: The area of a lot between lot lines and adjacent parallel setback lines in the lot, the yard depth being specified for front, side and rear yards in each zoning district. Within yard areas, no permanent roofed structure may be built.

a.	Yard Depth: The horizontal distance between a lot line and the parallel setback line in the property.

b.	Yard, Front: The area of a lot between the front lot line abutting the street to which the lot has access and the front setback line, and extending between the side lot lines.

c.	Yard, Rear: The area of a lot between the rear lot line and rear setback line and extending between the side lot lines.

d.	Yard, Side: The area of a lot between the side lot lines and side setback lines on each side of the lot and extending between the front and rear yards.

e.	Yard, Required: The minimum depth of open space to be left on the front, side and/or rear of a lot between any lot line and the adjacent parallel building line.

Zoning District: A contiguous area of land on all parts of which the same uniform zoning controls apply.

Zoning District Boundary: The perimeter line completely enclosing  a zoning district.

Zoning Hearing Board: A body appointed by Borough Council to examine and decide appeals for relief from strict conformance to this Ordinance or
 

relief from a decision of the Zoning Officer and to hear testimony regarding the validity of any regulations upon development in the Borough.

Zoning Map: The official plan of zoning districts in the Borough showing precisely the boundaries and title of each zoning district, such map being a part of this Ordinance.

Zoning Officer: A person retained by the Borough to enforce the regulations of this Ordinance, with power to issue permits, to halt illegal construction, and to interpret literally the meaning of the various sections of the Zoning Ordinance subject to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board.
 

ARTICLE III ESTABLISHMENT  OF DISTRICTS

Section 300	Official Zoning Map

A.		The Borough is hereby divided  into zones, or districts,  as shown on the Official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
B.	The eight (8) zoning districts delineated on the Map are as follows: R-1	One Family Dwelling District;
R-2	Two Family Dwelling District;
R-3	Multiple Family Dwelling District;
C-2	Central Business Commercial District; C-3	Planned Shopping Commercial District; I-1	Limited Industrial District
I-2	Heavy Industrial District; and
P	Public Recreation District.

C.	No changes of any nature  shall be made on the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance and punishable as provided under the provisions of this Ordinance.

D.	The Official Zoning Map, which shall be located in the Borough Office, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the Borough of Coraopolis.

E.	Any amendments legally adopted to change any district boundaries of the Official Zoning Map shall be noted on such map by ordinance number and date of adoption of the amendment. The Official Zoning Map shall be changed to reflect the amendment within thirty (30) days of adoption.

F.	Interpretation of Zoning Boundaries

1.	Boundaries indicated as appearing to follow the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed as following such centerlines;

2.	Boundaries indicated as appearing to follow property lines shall be construed as following such property lines;
 

3.	Boundaries indicated as appearing to follow Borough limits shall be construed as following Borough limits;

4.	Boundaries   indicated   as  following  railroad   lines  shall  be construed to be midway between the main tracks;

5.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other bodies of water, shall be construed as moving with the actual body water and following the centerlines thereof unless a surveyed Borough boundary governs the edge of the zoning district;

6.	Boundaries indicated as parallel to a highway, property line or railroad shall be construed to be parallel thereto and at such a distance from the centerline indicated on the Map; and

7.	Boundaries whose location cannot be determined by any of the above tests may  be measured using the scale of the Official Zoning Map.

G.	Conflicts Arising from Interpretation:  When there is disagreement on the location of zoning district boundaries, a decision shall be rendered by the Zoning Officer, with appeal from his decision made to the Zoning Hearing Board.

Section 301	Application of District Regulations

A.	The regulations established by this Ordinance within each district shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land.

B.	No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure, or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified in this Ordinance for the district in which it is located, or unless a variance has been properly granted.

C.	No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:

1.	To exceed the height;

2.	To accommodate or house a greater number of families;

3.	To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; and
 

4.	To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance.

D.	No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required adjacent to or in connection with any building for compliance with this Ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.

E.	No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein.  Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Ordinance.

F.	Railroad lines and public utility transmission lines and their supporting members, but not including above-ground buildings, shall not be required to be located on a lot, nor be held to reduce yard dimensions for other buildings on a lot.

G.	All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the Borough of Coraopolis shall be placed in the R-1 One Family Dwelling District until the Planning Commission has made a thorough study of the newly annexed area, reported its recommendations  to the Borough Council, and Council has adopted a final zoning district  classification. This study and report by the Planning Commission shall be made within six (6) months of the time of annexation.

Section 302	Description of Zoning Districts

A.	R-1 One Family Dwelling Zoning District -The purpose of this district is to allow for lower density residential development to occur. The R-1 District consists of primarily larger lots and lot sizes.

B.	R-2 Two Family Dwelling Zoning District -The purpose of this district is to allow for higher density residential development to occur. The R-2 District consists of primarily medium sized lots and lot sizes.

C.	R-3 Multi Family Dwelling Zoning District-The purpose of this district is to allow for higher density residential development to occur, including apartment buildings. The R-3 District is the most dense of the residential zoning districts in the Borough and typically the smallest lots and lot sizes.

D.	C-2 Central Business Commercial Zoning District - The purpose of this district is to provide for general retail, commercial, and service facilities that serve the needs of the greater community and which are located in areas that allow convenient access to local roadways and corridors.
 

E.	C-3 Planned Shopping Commercial Zoning District - The purpose of this district is to provide for community-level commercial and service establishments and to promote stable commercial development for smaller­ scale business and service uses.

F.	I-1 Limited Industrial Zoning District - The purpose of this district is to encourage the development of light industrial uses in appropriate locations where the public health, safety, and welfare of the surrounding areas and neighborhoods are protected.

G.	I-2 Heavy Industrial Zoning District - The purpose of this districts is to provide areas for the development of heavy industrial uses, including manufacturing processes, in locations that are convenient to the regional transportation network and where the environmental impacts of the uses will not negatively impact the surrounding community.

H.	P Public Recreation Zoning District - The purpose of this district is to provide areas where residents and members of the general public can participate in both passive and active recreation activities and associated accessory uses.

Section 303	Permitted Uses and Conditional Uses

A.	The permitted uses and conditional uses for each zoning district are set forth in the following table.  As used in Table 1, the following applies:

1.	The letter "P" denotes a permitted use by right, subject to the requirements specified by this Ordinance and provided a zoning certificate has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

2.		The letter "C" denotes a use that is conditional, subject to the requirements specified by this Ordinance and provided that the Borough Council grants the conditional use pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance.
 

TABLE 1
PERMITTED USES & CONDITIONAL USES

P=Permitted Use C=Conditional Use
=Not Applicable/Not Permitted


	Residential	Nonresidential/Mixed  Use

Princi		R-1	R-2	R-3	C-2	C-3	I-1	I-2	p
	pal Use								
Residential Use								
Conversion Apa Efficiency Apart	rtment		p						
	ment		p						
Garage Apartment			p					
Single-Family Detached Dwelling	p	p	p					
Two-Family Dwelling		p	p					
Garden Apartment			p					
High Rise Apartment			p					
Townhouse		p	p					
Triplex/Quadplex		p	p					
Nonresidential Use								
Adult-Oriented Business							c	
Animal Grooming Facility				p	p			
Amusement Enterprise				c	p			
Automobile Repair Garage					p	p		
Automobile Sales &
Service				c	p	p	p	
Bakery Shop				p	p			
Bank/Financial Institution				p	p			
Bed & Breakfast			c		p			
Boarding House			c					
Brewery or Micro- Brewery				p	p	p		
Business Services				p	p	p		
Candy/Ice Cream Store				p	p			
Car Wash					p	p		
Cemetery							p	
Church/Place of Worship	c	c	c	c	c			
Club/Fraternal or
   Service Org 					p	p			
 

	Residential	Nonresidential/Mixed  Use
	R-1	R-2	R-3	C-2	C-3	1-1	1-2	p
Commercial Multi- Familv Plan			c					
Community Facilities	p	p	p	p	p	p	p	p
Community Unit Plan	c	c	c		c			
Communication Antenna						p	p	
Communication Tower							p	
Contractor Storage/Supply Yard						p		
Convenience Store				p	p			
Crematorium							p	
Dav Care Center		c	c	p	p			
Delicatessen				p	p			
Distillery				p	p		p	
Dormitory			c					c
Drug Store/Pharmacy				p	p			
Emergency Services Facility				p	p	p	p	
Essential Services	p	p	p	p	p	p	p	p
Feed & Grain Business						p		
Flex Space						p	p	
Florist				p	p			
Food & Grocery Store				p	p			
Fraternity/Sorority House			c					
Fuel Sales					p			
Funeral Home				p	p			
Garden Supply/ Plant Material Store					p			
Group Care Facility	c	c	c	c	c			
Group Residence	p	p	p					
Half-way House		c	c					
Health Club/Fitness Center				p	p			
Heavy Manufacturing							p	
Home Occupation	c	c	c					
Hospital					c			c
Hotel				c	p			
Indoor Recreation Facility					c	c	c	p
Kennel					c	c		
Laundromat					p	p		
Life Care Facility						p		
Light Manufacturing						c	p	
Liquor Store					p	p			
 

Residential	Nonresidential/Mixed  Use
R-1	R-2	R-3	C-2	C-3	I-1	I-2	p
Marina, docks, portals	c	c
for water access
Massage Therapy	c	c
Establishment
Medical Clinic	c	c
Mixed Use Building	p	p
No-Impact Home-Based	p	p	p
Business
Nursing Home	c
Office, Business or	p	p
Professional
Office, Medical	c	p	c
Oil and Gas Operations	p
or Facilities
Outdoor Recreational	c	c	p
Facility
Parking Lots (for Multi-	c	c
Family Units)
Parking Lot or Garage	p	p
Personal Services	p	p
Pilot Manufacturing	p	p
Place of Assembly	c
Printing/Publishing/Eng	c	p	p
raving
Public Building	p	p	p	p	p	p	p	p
(Municipal, Fire, or Library)
Public Recreation Uses	p
Research &	p
Development
Restaurant, high	p	p
turnover
Restaurant, low	p	p
turnover
Restaurant, with drive-	c	p
thru
Retail Store	p	p
School	c	c	c	c	c
Self-Storage Facility	c	p	p
Service Station	p
Studio-Arts, Dance,	p	p
Martial Arts, Music, Etc.
Tavern/Bar	p	p
Trucking Terminal	p
Veterinary Clinic	c	p	p
 

	Residential	Nonresidential/Mixed  Use
	R-1	R-2	R-3	C-2	C-3	I-1	I-2	p
Warehouse						p	p	
Wholesale Business						p		
Winery				p	p		p	
All Other Uses Not Specifically Listed						p		


Section 304	Lot Requirements by Zoning District

A.		The minimum dimensional requirements for lots in each zoning district shall be provided as shown in Table 2, "Residential Zoning Districts - Residential Use Area & Bulk Regulations" and Table 3, "Nonresidential Zoning Districts -Nonresidential Use Area & Bulk Regulations."

B.	Corner lots shall provide front yards on each street frontage. The remaining two yards shall be considered side yards.

C.	Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this Ordinance may be used for the erection of a building or structure conforming to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, even if its area and/or width are  less than the minimum requirements of the zoning district in which it is located can be met.

D.	Any development of a lot shall conform to the dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, as well as, if applicable to the lot, any additional overlay provisions as identified in this Ordinance.
 

TABLE2
RESIDENTIAL  ZONING DISTRICTS -RESIDENTIAL USE AREA & BULK REGULATIONS

 		R-1 		R-2 		R-3 	
Minimum Lot Area
One-Family Dwelling	6,000 SQ. ft.	3,600 SQ. ft.	3,600 SQ. ft.
Two-Family Dwelling	--	5,000 sq. ft.	5,000 sq. ft.
Multi-Family Dwellin1r	--	--	None
Townhouse
 		--	--	2,700 sq. ft. per dwelling unit 	
Minimum Lot Frontage
 One-Family Dwelling Two-Family  Dwelling:	50 feet	30 feet	30 feet
	--	30 feet	30 feet
Multi-Familv  Dwelling:
Townhouse  		--	--	None
	 	-- 		-- 		16 feet 	
Maximum Heii?:ht
Principal Building	35 feet	35 feet	70 feet
#of Stories	2 y,	2 y,	5
Accessory Building	20 feet	20 feet	20 feet
Minimum Front Yard Depth
All Dwellings Except	35 feet	20 feet	20 feet
 	Multi-Family Dwellin1rs 		-- 		-- 		20 feet 	
Minimum Side Yard Deoth
Interior Lots, Each Yard	8 feet	5 feet	5 feet
Corner Lots, Abutting Street	20 feet	10 feet	10 feet
% of Lot Width, Each Yard
(for lots that do not meet frontaJZe reauirement)	15%	17%	17%
Absolute Minimum Side Yard
Ifor lots that do not meet frontaJZe reauirement)	5 feet	2 feet	2 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Depth
Greater of Depth in Feet	35 feet	20 feet	20 feet
 	Or % of Lot Depth 		20% 		20% 		20% 	
Maximum Lot Coverage
All Buildings as% of Lot Area	30%	35%	35%
Multi-Family  Dwelling:	--	--	40%
Total Floor Area to Lot Area Ratio
<Multi-Family)	--	--	4
Minimum Floor Area
One-Story Dwelling:	700 sa. ft.	500 sa. ft.	500 sa. ft.
Two-Storv Dwelling	1,000 sa. ft.	700 sa. ft.	700 sa. ft.
Conversion Apartment	--	400 sa. ft.	--
Garage Apartment	--	400 sa. ft.	400 sa. ft.
Multi-Family Apartment	--	--	400 sa. ft.
 

TABLE 3
NONRESIDENTIAL  ZONING DISTRICTS -NONRESIDENTIAL  AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS























































 		20 feet 	
 

Minimum Rear Yard Depth	15 feet
Abutting a Residential District	15 feet
Width of Planted Buffer Strip	10 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage	
All Buildings as% of Total Lot
   Area 			60%
 

ARTICLE IV SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS

Section 400	Lot Exceptions

A.	Maximum Number of Principal Structures on a Lot: No more than one (1) principal structure, to be occupied by the principal permitted use, shall be constructed on an undivided lot except for the following:

1.	Industrial buildings complex;

2.	Community unit plan (as outlined in this Ordinance); and

3.	A garage apartment in the R-3 zoning district limited to one (1) apartment per lot.

In all other cases, additional structures on the lot shall be considered  as accessory structures and may contain no dwellings.

B.	Lot Measurement

1.	Lot width shall be measured along the front yard setback line between the side lot lines.

2.	Lot depth shall be measured between the center of the front lot line and the center of the lot line furthest from the front lot line.

Section 401	Yard Exceptions

A.	Front Yard Setback Line on Streets Partially Developed: When a vacant lot occurs between two (2) developed lots and the buildings on those lots are set forward of the front yard setback line applicable in the zoning district, development on the vacant lot may be set back from its front lot line the average of the setbacks of the two developed lots. If a lot on one side of a vacant lot contains a building set forward of the minimum front yard depth that applies in the zoning district, development on the vacant lot may be set back from its front lot line the average of the setback of the adjacent building and the minimum front yard depth required for the zoning district.

B.	Building Projections Permitted in Required Yards:

1.	A building may be set on its lot so that the average of the nearest and most remote points of a wall adjacent to a side lot line is no less than the minimum  side yard depth required  in the zoning district
 

containing the lot and the nearest point is no less than one-half the minimum side yard depth. The same may apply to front or rear building walls relative to front or rear lot lines except that the nearest point of such wall to an adjacent front or rear lot line shall be not more than fifteen (15) percent less than the minimum front or rear yard depth.

2.	Chimneys, eaves, cornices, fire escapes, bay windows, balconies or covered porches shall extend not more than two (2) feet into any required yard on a lot.

Driveways, uncovered patios or porches, parking areas and walkways shall be located not less than two (2) feet from any side or rear lot line except for access to public streets, unless adjacent property owners agree in writing that driveways, walkways, uncovered patios or parking areas may abut their mutual property line. Written documentation of agreement of adjacent property owners of the encroachment must be filed at the Recorder of Deeds' office, recorded as an instrument to each affected property.

3.	For purposes of this section balconies shall be considered as supported by a building and not touching the ground, porches as raised above the surrounding ground level but not supported by a building, and patios as paved surfaces at ground level.



C.	Setback and Yard Coverage of Accessory Buildings:

1.	Accessory buildings not attached to the principal building on a lot shall be set back from a rear lot line not less than the minimum side yard depth for the zoning district containing the lot.

2.	Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of area of the lot between the rear face of the principle structure and the rear lot line. Any accessory structure built into the ground or not projecting at any point more than two (2) feet above ground level shall not be included for purposes of this calculation.

3.	Where the rear yard of a lot abuts a public street, one-half the street width may be included as part of the rear yard for purposes of rear yard depth and area calculations except that no structure may extend into a public right-of-way and no garage may be within ten (10) feet of a rear street if the doors face the street.
 

Section 402	Height Exceptions

A.		Measurement of Height: Height shall be measured as the vertical distance along the wall of a structure between the average of the highest and lowest elevations at finished grade on the front or rear wall, whichever has the lower ground elevations, and the top of the parapet wall on a flat roof building, or halfway between the eave and ridge on the highest portion of the structure on a sloped roof building.

B.	Height Exceptions: Chimneys, exhaust stacks, church steeples, flagpoles, water tanks, roof mounted air handling equipment and communications equipment meeting Federal Communications Commission requirements shall be exempt from height regulations.

C.	Any structure exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height shall not be permitted for erection until the Allegheny County Department of Aviation has approved the construction as it may affect airplane traffic safety at the Greater Pittsburgh International Airport.

Section 403	Site Grading and Drainage

A.	Site Grading:

1.	Earth movement shall result in finished grades that do not exceed two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical unless a report prepared by a professional engineer stipulates that specific steeper slopes in a particular location will not compromise the stability of the completed slope or areas above or below it, or threaten adjacent streets or property.

2.	Top soil and all vegetation existing on the area to be graded shall be removed prior to grading. Top soil shall be stockpiled for later return to the new slope and protected from stormwater runoff.

3.	Graded slopes shall be planted with a fast-catching grass cover as soon as grading is completed and protected by burlap or equivalent covering until the grass is established.

4.	Where fill is used it shall be clean fill and placed in layers not exceeding eight (8) inches in depth, thoroughly compacted, and keyed in to undisturbed earth at the edges of the fill.

5.	No grading shall be permitted except as  part  of  a  permitted construction project.
 

6.	Where a location off-site in the Borough is used to dump excess cut or borrow fill for an approved project, the off-site location shall also be a permitted construction project.

B.	Storm Drainage:

1.	All developments in the Borough of Coraopolis must comply with the provisions and requirements set forth in the Borough's Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance No. 1806, as amended. Ordinance No. 1806 was enacted on November 14, 2018 by Borough Council.

C.	Site Restoration Bond:

1.	Council may require a developer, after receiving recommendations from the Borough Engineer, to provide a site restoration bond or other security payable to the Borough to guarantee that grading and drainage work approved in the development plan are completed. The bond shall be acceptable to the Borough Solicitor and shall be for one hundred ten percent (110%) of the cost of the work as determined by the Borough Engineer, plus ten percent (10%) for each year after the first anniversary of the bond that the work will be extended. The stipulation that a site restoration bond will be required shall appear on the permit authorizing the work.

2.	Council may invoke the conditions of the bond or other security if the developer fails to complete the work within the time limit established in the bond, or an extension granted by Council. Proceeds from the bond may only be used to complete the work left undone or not done in a satisfactory manner in the opinion of the Borough Engineer.

Section 404	Landscape Buffers, Fences and Hedges

A.		Fences, hedges and or walls may be placed along lot lines provided they do not exceed four (4) feet in height if located along a street right-of-way line or along a side lot line forward of the face of the building on the lot, and do not exceed six (6) feet in height in all other cases. Fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair and hedges trimmed to keep them within the height limitations.

B.		In the event a residence exists on an adjacent lot less than six (6) feet from the common lot line, a fence, hedge or wall along the line shall not exceed in height the horizontal distance between the residence and property line or hedge for the full length of the residence.
 

C.	Planted buffer strips where required to screen residential uses from adjacent commercial or industrial uses or to screen a parking area serving a multi­ family development from adjacent one-family or two-family dwellings shall be at least fifty (50) percent opaque when viewed at ground level for their entire length. Hedge plantings shall be at least four (4) feet high when installed. The full width of the buffer shall be planted in grass or other ground cover and maintained.

D.	The height offences, hedges and walls shall be measured along the property lines where they are installed or along the inner edge of the sidewalk, or, if no sidewalk exists, along a street right-of-way line.

E.	Where changes of grade occur along a zoning district boundary or edge of a parking lot, or natural or existing planting or a building are already present there, the Planning Commission may recommend and Council approve adjustments to the screening requirements to fit the circumstances.

F.	At street comers fences, hedges and walls shall be set back at least twenty­ five (25) feet from the point of intersection of the street curb lines, creating an open triangular area whose sides are at least twenty-five (25) feet long. The Zoning Officer may order a fence, hedge or wall removed or a hedge trimmed in a front or aide yard when such obstruction clearly interferes with traffic safety on streets abutting the lot.

G.	A security fence protecting any commercial, industrial, public or semi­ public property may be extended to ten (10) feet in height provided any portions more than eight (8) feet high are chain link-type metal fencing.

H.	Any outdoor swimming pool,, shall be surrounded by a fence not less than four (4) feet high containing no openings greater than four (4) inches in any direction, access through which is controlled by a gate capable of being locked and/or through the main building in the property and in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code, as amended and adopted by the Borough. Private swimming pools accessory to a one or two family dwelling and on the same lot shall meet setback requirements for dwellings in the zoning district and all applicable public health and sanitary requirements.

Section 405	Performance  Standards

A.		Fire Protection: Fire protection and fire-fighting equipment, procedures and safety protocols acceptable  to the Borough Fire Standards, the Borough Building Code, the Uniform Construction Code, as amended and adopted by the Borough and the National Fire Protection Association shall be readily available and followed where there is any activity involving the handling or storage of flammable or explosive material.
 

B.	Radioactivity/ Electrical Disturbances: Unless otherwise permitted by the Borough for medical purposes, no activity shall emit radioactivity at any point or cause electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation of radio or other equipment in the vicinity.

C.	Noise: Fire sirens, place-of-worship bells and related apparatus used solely for public purposes shall be exempt from this requirement. Within the Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts, when adjoining a residential lot, noise in excess of 75 decibels between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and 50 decibels between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as measured on a decibel or sound level meter of standard quality and design operated on the A­ weighted scale, shall not be permitted. Industry standards and equipment shall be utilized for measuring such noise at any and all lot lines of the subject lot on which the noise source is located. Proof of such current compliance shall be presented to the Borough upon the request of the Zoning Officer. This standard shall not have any effect on the disturbing of the peace ordinance enforced by the police. In addition, it shall not have any influence on complaints among neighbors regarding HVAC equipment or gas generators.

D.	Vibrations: Except for temporary vibration resulting from construction activity, vibrations detectable without instruments on any adjacent lot in any zoning district shall be prohibited.

E.		Odors: Other than the municipally authorized public sewage treatment, no malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is discernible on any adjacent lot or property.

F.	Smoke: There shall be no emission of smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors, or gases which violates all applicable Federal, State, or County laws and regulations.

G.	Glare: Lighting devices which produce objectionable direct or reflected glare on adjoining properties or roadways shall not be permitted.

H.	Air Pollution: No pollution of air by fly ash, dust, vapors or other substance shall be permitted which is harmful to health, animals, vegetation or other property or which can cause soiling of property.
 

Section 406	Temporary Uses

A.	All temporary uses shall require a Temporary Use Permit as issued by the Borough.

B.	Temporary Construction Trailers or Sheds shall be permitted in all zoning districts subject to the following conditions:

1.	Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be permitted only during the period that the construction work is in progress. A permit for the temporary structure shall be obtained from the Borough Zoning Officer prior to the commencement of construction.
2.	Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be located on the lot
on which the construction  is progressing  and shall not be located within 20 feet of any lot line adjoining an existing residential use.

3.	Temporary construction trailers or sheds shall be used only as temporary field offices and for storage of incidental equipment and supplies and shall not be used for any dwelling use whatsoever.

C.	Tent Sales and/or Sidewalk Sales shall be permitted in all non-residential zoning districts subject to the following conditions:

1.	The tent sale and/or sidewalk sale shall be conducted on the same lot on which the principal use occurs.

2.	The tent sale and/or sidewalk sale shall be directly related to the services and/or products of  the principal use, unless approved by the Borough.

3.	The tent sale and/or sidewalk sale shall not compromise the minimum number of required parking spaces for the principal use, unless approve by the Borough.

D.	Food  Trucks  shall be permitted  in the  C-2,  C-3,  and P zoning  districts subject to the following conditions:

1.	Food trucks conducting business in the Borough shall have all proper and required permits from the Allegheny County Department of Health. Copies of the applicable permits and approvals issued by the County Health Department must be submitted to the Borough and/or shall be displayed and on file in the food truck.

2.	Food trucks are permitted in the C-2, C-3, and P Districts but shall not park in one place for more than four (4) hours at a
 

time, unless granted specific permission by the Borough to park for a longer period of time.

3.	Provided permission is granted by the applicable property owner, food trucks are permitted on site and in parking areas in all public buildings, public parks,  and school buildings located within the Borough.

4.	Provided permission is granted from the applicable property owner, food trucks are also permitted in parking lots of area places of worship to support special events and fundraising efforts of said establishments.

Section 407	Oil and Gas Operations and Facilities

A.	Oil and Gas Operations and Facilities shall be permitted in the I-2 Zoning District subject to the following conditions outlined in this section.

1.	Before filing an application, the Applicant shall meet with representatives of the Borough of Coraopolis to discuss (1) the proposed use; (2) site location; (3) the time frame for development;
(4) traffic routes; (5) the condition of Borough roads as a part of said
traffic route and the potential need for advance repairs or upgrades;
(6)	plans for potential excess maintenance of said traffic routes; and,
(7)	traffic safety.

2.	The Applicant shall submit five (5) copies of the application and supporting materials to the Borough. The application filed with the Borough must include the following information:

a.	A written narrative signed and dated by the applicant, describing the proposed use and outlining an approximate timeline for the proposed development;

b.	A site plan, or a copy of the Applicant's Erosion and Sediment Control Plan if said plan has been prepared by a licensed professional (e.g. engineer, surveyor, geologist or landscape architect) who is registered in Pennsylvania and who has attended up-to-date training provided by DEP, Office of Oil and Gas Management on erosion and sediment control and post-construction stormwater management for oil and gas activities;

c.	A road access plan showing both temporary and permanent access routes and identifying all ingress and egress points;
 

d.	If any weight-restricted Borough roads will be used by the Applicant for any oil and gas development or operations, the Applicant shall comply with any applicable road bonding requirements and provide proof of bonding of said roads. In lieu of road bonding, the Borough and the Applicant may enter into a road maintenance agreement, a copy of which will be included;

e. A copy of the Applicant's Preparedness, Prevention and Contingency Plan;

f. A copy of the Applicant's Erosion and Sedimentation Control	Plan and Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan;

g.	A copy of any State permits, including the ESCGP 1 or 2, Well Permits, Highway Occupancy Permits and other permits already obtained at the time of the application submission.	An applicant may submit an application without the necessary and approved state permits but final Borough approval shall be contingent upon receipt of all required said State permits. The applicant shall submit to the Borough a true and correct copy of all permits issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) and other State permitting agencies prior to beginning any work on an approved Oil and Gas Development site;

h.	Written authorization from the property owner(s) who has legal or equitable title in and to the surface of the proposed development. A copy of the oil and gas, mineral or other subsurface lease agreement or similar document vesting legal or equitable title to the surface will constitute written authorization;

1.	The name of an individual and emergency contact number that the Borough or residents 24 hours a   day   for   each day of the week to report emergencies;

J.		When applicable, a copy of Applicant's FAA Form 7460-1 "Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration" showing that there is no interference with air traffic; and,

k.  The number of trailers to be located on the site.

3.	Recognizing that the specific location of equipment and facilities is an important integral part of oil and gas operations and facilities, as
 

a part of the planning process, the Applicant/Operator shall strive to consider location of its temporary and permanent operations, where prudent and possible, so as to minimize interference with Borough residents' enjoyment of their property.

4.	Oil and gas operations and facilities shall only be permitted to be located on property that is a minimum of five (5) acres or larger. Multiple properties may be combined to meet the five (5) acre mm1mum.

5.	Oil and gas operations and facilities shall meet the location restrictions established by  the Commonwealth, its regulatory agencies and found in those Environmental Acts. Oil and Gas Operations shall additionally meet all applicable front, rear and side yard setbacks as provided for in this Ordinance.

6.	Applicant/Owner shall take the necessary safeguards to ensure that any Borough roads utilized shall remain free of dirt, mud, and debris resulting from development activities and/or shall ensure such roads are promptly swept or cleaned if dirt, mud and debris occur.

7.		Applicant/Owner shall take all necessary precautions to ensure the safety of persons in areas established for road crossing and/or adjacent to roadways (for example, persons waiting for public or school transportation). Where necessary and permitted, during periods of anticipated heavy or frequent truck traffic associated with development Applicant/Operator will provide flagmen or other alternative and approved safety mechanism to ensure the safety of children at or near schools or school bus stops and include adequate sign and/or warning measure for truck traffic and vehicular traffic. Applicant/Operator will coordinate its efforts with school districts so as to minimize heavy truck traffic during the hours school buses are picking up or dropping off children.

8.	Prior to the commencement of drilling activities, no construction activities involving the alteration to, or repair work on any access road or well site shall be performed during the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

9.	Applicant/Owner shall take the necessary  safeguards  to  ensure appropriate dust control measures are in place.

10.	All oil and gas operations and facilities must comply with the noise requirements outlined in this Ordinance.
 

11.		All work-over operations shall be restricted to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., except in the event of an emergency, as reasonably determined by the Operation. "Work-over operations" shall mean the process of performing major maintenance or remedial treatments on an oil or gas well.

Section 408	Miscellaneous Regulations and Requirements

A.	Amusement Enterprises

1.	There shall be at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area per pool table in a pool hall and at least forty (40) square feet of floor area for each machine in an electronic game parlor including aisles at least four (4) feet wide through the games area leading directly to a marked exit. An adult supervisor shall be present at all times while a pool hall or electronic games parlor is in operation, responsible for customer conduct.

B.	Wireless Communication Facilities

2.	Regulations Governing All Communication Antennas

a.	A building-mounted  Communications Antenna  shall not be  located on any  single-family  dwelling,  two-family dwelling, triplex or quadplex, or multi-family apartment building.

b.	A building-mounted Communication Antenna shall be permitted to exceed the height limitations of the applicable Zoning District by no more than twenty (20) feet.

c.	An omnidirectional or whip Communication Antenna shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and seven (7) inches in diameter.

d.	A directional or panel Communication Antenna shall not exceed five (5) feet in height or three (3) feet in width.

e.	Any applicant proposing a Communication Antenna to be mounted on a building or other structure shall submit evidence from a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer certifying that the proposed installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the building or other structure, considering wind and other loads associated with the antenna location.
 


f.	Any applicant proposing a Communication Antenna to be mounted on a building or other structure shall submit detailed construction and elevation drawings  indicating how the antenna will be mounted on the building or structure for review by the Borough Engineer for compliance with Borough building regulations and other applicable laws.

g.	Any applicant proposing a Communication Antenna to be mounted on a building or other structure shall submit evidence of agreements and/or easements necessary to provide access to the Building or structure on which the antenna is to be mounted so that installation and maintenance	of the antenna and any other communications related equipment or buildings can be accomplished.

h.	A Communication Antenna shall comply with all applicable	standards established  by  the  Federal Communications	Commission governing  human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.

L	A Communication Antenna shall not cause radio frequency	interference with other communication facilities located within the Borough.

J.		All Communications  Antennas    structures shall be designed to withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition to the standard designed by the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics  Industry Association,	and       Telecommunications  Industry Association  (ANSI/TIA-222, as amended).

k.	Communications Antennas shall be permitted to co-locate upon non-conforming Communications Towers and other non-conforming	structures. Co-location of Communications		Antennas upon existing Communications Towers is encouraged even if the Communications Towers are non-conforming as to use within a zoning district. Such applicants must obtain proper Borough approvals for non-conformance.

1.	A Communication Equipment Building shall not exceed twelve	(12)   feet   in   height.   Any    Communication
 

Equipment Building accessory to a Communication Antenna mounted on an existing Public Utility Transmission Tower, Building or Other Structure, shall not exceed one hundred ( 100) square feet in footprint area and shall be subject to the setback requirements of the applicable zoning district for a principal building or structure.
m.	The l'.lwner or operator of any Communication Antenna
shall be licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to operate such antenna.

n.	Communications Antenna Applicants proposing the modification of an existing Communications Tower shall obtain a building permit from the Borough. In order to be considered for such permit, the Applicant must submit a permit application to the Borough in accordance with applicable permit policies and procedures.

o.	The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual costs in reviewing and processing the application for approval of a Communications Antenna, or $1,000, whichever is less.

3.	Requirements   for  Communications  Antenna   located   inside  the Public Rights-of-Way

a.	Communications Antennas in the ROW shall be co­ located on existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light poles. If co-location is not technologically feasible, the Applicant, with the Borough's approval, shall locate its Communications Antennas on existing  poles or freestanding structures that do not already act as Wireless Support Structures.

b.	Communications Antenna installations located above the surface grade in the public ROW including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and utility poles, shall consist of equipment components that are no more than six (6) feet in height and that are compatible in scale and proportion to the structures upon which they are mounted. All equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive equipment feasible.

c.	Communications Antennas and Related Equipment shall be  treated  by  the  Communications  Antenna  owner  or
 
Applicant to match the Wireless Support Structure and may be required to be painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the support structure upon which they are mounted.
d.	The Borough shall determine the time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all Communications Antennas in the ROW based on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the Borough and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.

e.	Communications Antennas and Related Equipment shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the Borough. In addition:

f.	Ground-mounted Related Equipment shall be located between the sidewalk and the curb. For reasons of safety and aesthetics, such equipment shall neither protrude onto the curb, nor obstruct the sidewalk.

g.	Ground-mounted Related Equipment that cannot be placed underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to the satisfaction of the Borough.

h.	Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened to blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Borough.

L	Any graffiti on any Wireless Support Structures or any Related Equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner within thirty (30) days of notification by the Borough.

J.	Any proposed underground vault related to Communications	Antennas shall be reviewed and approved by the Borough.

4.	Requirements for Communication Towers
 

a.	The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to operate a Communication Tower and Communication Antenna, as applicable.
b.	The   applicant   shall   demonstrate   that   the   proposed
Communications Tower and Communication Antenna proposed to be mounted thereon shall comply with all applicable standards established by the Federal Communications Commission  governing  human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.

c.	A Communication Tower  shall  comply  with  all applicable	Federal       Aviation       Administration, Commonwealth   Bureau    of  Aviation,  and   all   other applicable Airport Zoning Regulations.

d.	The shared use of Communication Towers and sites is encouraged. Any applicant proposing construction of a new Communications Tower shall demonstrate in writing that a good faith  effort has been made to obtain permission to mount the Communication Antenna on an existing building, structure or tower. A good faith effort shall require that all owners of potentially suitable building, structure or communication tower within a one­ half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed Communication Tower site be contacted and that one (1) or more of the following reasons for not selecting such building, structure or communication tower apply:

1.	The proposed antenna and related equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing building, structure or communication tower	and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.

11.		The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause radio frequency interference with other existing equipment  for that  existing building, structure or communication tower and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.

111.		Such   existing    building,      structure or communication tower does not have adequate location,	space, access  or     height    to
 

accommodate  the proposed  equipment  or to allow it to perform its intended function.

iv.	Addition of the proposed antenna and related equipment would result in electromagnetic radiation from such building, structure or communication	tower exceeding the applicable	standards established by the Federal	Communications Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.

v.	A commercially reasonable agreement could not be   reached  with  the   owners  of  such building, structure or communication tower.

e.	Access shall be provided to the Communication Tower and Communications Equipment Building by means of a public street or easement to a public street. Any such easement shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and shall be paved to a width of at least ten (10) feet with concrete, bituminous asphalt or bituminous  seal coat for its entire length and in accordance with applicable Borough ordinances governing the construction of public streets.

f.		The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the Communications Tower is the minimum height necessary to perform its functions. For any proposed Communications Tower with a height  in excess of seventy (70) feet, the applicant shall deposit with the Borough an engineering review  deposit as may be deemed appropriate by the Borough Engineer, which deposit shall be in addition to any other required application and/or engineering fees. This deposit shall be used by the Borough to retain an engineer knowledgeable in the field  of Communications Towers to  review the application and to express an opinion as to the minimum height necessary for the proposed Communications Tower to perform its function. In the event that the fees actually incurred for said engineering review exceed the amount of the deposit, the applicant shall tender payment of the balance owed. In the event that the fees actually incurred for said engineering review are less than the amount of the deposit, the balance shall be refunded and/or credited to the applicant. At its sole discretion, the
 

Borough may, in lieu of  designating the qualified engineer, accept a report from a qualified engmeer selected by the applicant. The applicant shall be responsible for the costs of such report.

g.	The foundation and base of any Communications Tower shall be set back a minimum of sixty (60) feet from any property	boundary line and any overhead utility transmission line.

h.	The maximum height of any Communications Tower shall be seventy (70) feet; provided, however, that such height may be increased by no more than an additional one hundred (100) feet as long as the engineer retained under item .6 above expresses an opinion that the additional	height is necessary for the proposed Communications	Tower to perform its function. Regardless of height, all Communications Towers shall remam subject to the setback requirements outlined herein.

1.	A permitted Communications Tower shall only be constructed in a monopole fashion, with a maximum diameter of five (5) feet at the base of the tower and a maximum diameter of three (3) feet at the top of the tower. Guy wires are prohibited.

J.		Communications  Towers  shall  employ      Stealth Technology.  All  Communications  Towers  and Related Equipment shall be aesthetically and   architecturally compatible with the surrounding  environment and shall maximize the use  of  a  like  facade to blend with the existing surroundings and  neighboring buildings  to the greatest  extent  possible.     The  Borough  Council  shall consider whether its decision upon the subject application will promote the harmonious and orderly development of the zoning district involved; encourage compatibility with the character and type of development existing in the area; benefit neighboring properties by preventing a negative impact on the aesthetic character of the community; preserve woodlands and trees existing at the site to the greatest	possible extent; and encourage sound engineering	and land development design and construction principles, practices and techniques.
k.	There shall be a maximum of one (1) Communications Tower per lot.
 

1.	The applicant shall submit a plan to the Borough to mm1m1ze	any adverse visual effects of the Communications Tower on the surrounding environment. This plan shall consider items such as color and materials used	for the Communications  Tower, type of Communications Tower, and design considerations of the Communications Tower to help it better conform to surrounding land uses.

m.	To the extent permissible under applicable state and federal law, any Applicant proposing the modification of an existing Communications Tower, which increases the overall height of such Wireless  Support Structure, shall first obtain a building permit from the Borough. Non­ routine modifications shall  be  prohibited without such permit.

n.	Any Communications Tower structures shall be designed to withstand the effects of wind gusts of at least 100 miles per hour in addition to the standard designed by the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association,	and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/EIA/TIA-222),  as amended.

o.	The site of a Communications Tower shall be secured by a fence with a minimum  height of eight (8) feet and a maximum height of ten (10) feet and containing only self­ latching gates to limit accessibility by the general public. This fence shall be designed to be compatible with surrounding land uses.

p.	Two (2) off-street parking spaced shall be provided within the required fenced area.

q.	A Communications Tower may be permitted on a property with an existing use, or on a vacant parcel in combination with another use, except residential, subject to the following conditions:

I.	The existing use on the property may be any permitted use in the applicable district, and need	not be affiliated with the Communications Tower.
 

11.		The mm1mum lot shall comply with the requirements for the applicable zoning district and shall be the area needed to accommodate the Communications Tower and guy wires, the equipment building, security fence, and buffer planting if the proposed Communications Towers is greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height.

111.		The minimum distance between the base of a Communications Tower and any adjoining property line or street right-of-way line shall be equal to 115% of the height of the Communications Tower. The underlying lot must be large enough to accommodate Related Equipment, storm water runoff mechanisms, and all other features typically found within the immediate area of a Communications Tower.

r.	The base of a Communications Tower shall be landscaped so as to screen the foundation, base and Communications Related Equipment or Building from abutting properties. The applicant shall submit a landscaping plan to the Borough which conforms to the following requirements:

1.		Landscaping, consisting of trees and  shrubs, shall be required at the perimeter of the fence and	the     Communications       Equipment Building, as well as along all  property lines abutting  an existing  school,  park  or  church. Evergreen   trees   six  (6)   feet   in   height   at planting   shall   be   planted  at  a  maximum interval of twelve  (12) feet on center around the perimeter  of the fence. Areas  in between these    trees    shall  contain  shrubbery  and plantings at least four (4) feet in height.

11.	All Communications Towers  shall post  a sign in a readily visible location  identifying  the name and phone number  of a party to contact in the event of an emergency. The only other signage permitted on the  Communications Tower shall be those required by the FCC, or any other federal  or state agency.
 
111.		d Existing vegetation may be  used to satisfy landscaping	requirement     if    the   existing vegetation  meets  the  dimensional  standards identified in subsection 1, above.

s.	Communications Towers shall be operated and maintained so as not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under state law and the Borough regulations, except in emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where such noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.

t.	A Communications Equipment Building shall not exceed twelve  (12) feet in height, nor exceed a footprint of four hundred (400) square feet. The minimum setback for any Communications   Equipment  Building  shall  be  twenty
(20) feet.

u.	The applicant shall submit certification from a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer that any proposed Communications Tower will be designed and constructed in accordance with the current Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting		Structures published by the Electrical Industrial	Association/Telecommunications Industry Association and applicable requirements of the State or Borough Building Regulations.

v.	The applicant shall submit a copy of its current Federal Communications Commission license; the name, address and emergency telephone number of the operator of the Communications Tower; and a Certificate of Insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the minimum amount of  $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the Communications Tower and any Communications Antenna or Related Equipment or Buildings thereon.

w.	No signs or lights shall be mounted on a Communications Tower, except as may be required by the Federal Communications	Commission, Federal Aviation Administration or other governmental agency which has jurisdiction.


FEBRUARY   2020   .
 
x.	A Communications Tower shall be protected and maintained in accordance with the requirements of any State or Borough Building and Property Maintenance Regulations.

y.	Any Communications Tower that remains unused  for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner or operator shall dismantle and remove the Communications Tower within ninety (90) days of the expiration of such twelve (12) month	period. Failure to remove an abandoned Communications Tower within said ninety (90) day period shall be grounds for the Borough to remove said Tower at the owner's expense. In order to ensure the removal		of an abandoned Communications Tower pursuant to the requirements herein, the applicant for a proposed Communications Tower must provide the Borough with financial security, in a form acceptable to the Borough Solicitor, in the amount of ten thousand ($10,000) or in such greater amount as deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer given the characteristics of a proposed Communications Tower.

z.	All tower structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices as recommended by the tower manufacturer for the type of installation proposed.

5.	Requirements   for  Communications   Towers  Located  Inside  the Public Rights-of-Way

a.	Communications Towers in the ROW shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and are prohibited in areas in which utilities are located underground.
b.	Communications Towers shall not be located in the front
fa9ade area of any structure.
c.	The Borough shall determine the time, place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or removal of all Communications Towers in the ROW based on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner requirements  shall be consistent with the police powers of the Borough and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.

d.	Communications Towers and Related Equipment shall be located   so  as  not  to   cause  any  physical   or  visual
 
obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the Borough.  In addition:

1.	Ground-mounted Related Equipment shall be located between the sidewalk and the  curb. For reasons of safety and aesthetics, such equipment shall neither protrude onto the curb, nor obstruct the sidewalk.

1i.		Ground-mounted Related Equipment that cannot be placed underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to the satisfaction of the Borough Council.

111.	Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Borough Council.

1v.	Any graffiti on the tower or on any Related Equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner.

v.	Any underground vaults related to Communications Towers shall be reviewed and approved by the Borough Council.

e.	Communications Towers shall not be located in, or within seventy-five (75) feet of an area in which all utilities are located underground.
f.	The  Communications   Tower  shall  employ  the  most
current Stealth Technology available in an effort to appropriately blend into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the Stealth Technology chosen by the Applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Council.

g.	The Applicant shall ensure that the existing vegetation, trees and shrubs located within proximity to the Communications	Tower shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
 

h.	A security fence with a minimum height of four (4) feet and a maximum height of eight (8) feet, with openings no greater than four (4) inches shall completely surround any Communications  Tower greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height, as well as guy wires, or any building housing Related Equipment.

6.	Any wireless communication facilities located within a public right­ of-way shall be subject to a right-of-way fee as set and determined by Borough Council according to the Borough Fee Schedule.
 


ARTICLE V

STANDARDS AND CRITERIA FOR CONDITIONAL USES



Section 500	General Standards and Criteria for Evaluation

A.		Conditional  uses  for  each zoning  district  are  listed  m  Table  1 of this Ordinance.

B.	Any application for a conditional use shall demonstrate that:

1.	The proposed use complies with all applicable provisions and requirements for that type of use contained in this Article, and with other applicable Borough, County, and Commonwealth and Federal ordinances, laws and regulations. The proposed use shall obtain all applicable permits, licenses,  and approvals from the Borough of Coraopolis, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, and Federal agencies before final approval of the conditional use application shall be granted.

2.	The use will not endanger the public health and safety if located where	proposed and will not deteriorate the surrounding environment or generate nuisance conditions.

3.	The use can be accommodated on the site with none, or only minimal, variances required.

4.	The use is compatible with and/or will support surrounding land uses within the neighborhood  of the site. The use will not have a negative impact on the existing neighborhood or development.

5.	The proposed site for the conditional use is suitable  in terms of topography, soil conditions and size, based on the number of projected users and the frequency of use of the proposed use.

6.	The proposed use/development/redevelopment conforms to the scale, character, and exterior appearance of existing structures and uses in the neighborhood in which it is located.

7.	The proposed use and site provides for safe, adequate vehicular and pedestrian access. It has access from a street capable of handling the traffic generated by the proposed use, and it will not result in undue  traffic  congestion  and  hazardous  conditions  on  adjacent
 

streets. The use provides  for safe, efficient internal circulation of vehicles and sufficient off-street parking and loading.

8.	The  use  does  not  require  substantial  earthmoving,  rev1s10n  of drainage patterns, or create excessive traffic congestion.

Section 501 Procedure for Review and Approval of Conditional Use Applications

A.		The Borough Council shall hear and decide requests for conditional uses within 45 days after the last hearing before the governing body. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefore. Conclusions based on any provisions of this or any other ordinance shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts found.

B.		Where the Borough Council fails to render the decision within the period required by this subsection or fails to commence, conduct, or complete the required hearing as provided in Section 908(1.2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. Section 10908(1.2), within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request for a hearing or fails to complete the hearing no later than 100 days after the completion of the applicant's case­ in-chief, unless extended for good cause upon application to the Allegheny County Court of Common Pleas, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of failure of the governing body to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Borough Council shall give public notice of the decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner as required by the public notice requirements of this act. If the Borough Council shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.

C.	Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him/her no later than the day following its date.

D.	Given the requirements  of paragraphs  A through  C above, the Borough Council shall not evaluate a conditional use application unless and until:

1.	A developer proposing a conditional use shall submit to the Borough Secretary five (5) total copies of the following materials at least fifteen (15) calendar days before a regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
 


2.	A written statement supporting both the general criteria outlined in this Article for all conditional uses and the specific criteria for the specific proposed conditional use.

3.	A scaled illustrative site plan showing the arrangement of the proposed use on the site, including property lines, uses on adjacent properties, abutting streets, buildings existing and proposed on the site by use and height, points of access into the site, internal driveways, parking area layout with number of spaces noted, free standing signs, areas of earth moving with grade of finished slope noted, means of disposing of stormwater, proposed landscaping, and other pertinent information.

4.	The Borough Council, by recommendation of the Planning Commission or per its own recommendation and recourse, may waive parts of the site plan submission that are clearly irrelevant and/or not applicable in a particular case or application.

E.	The Planning Commission shall review the documents at its next meeting and may make a recommendation to the Borough Council within 30 days of the date of the Planning Commission meeting to approve the plan as submitted, reject it, approve it with specific conditions to be met by the developer, or table it for further information. Additionally, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the Borough Council to schedule a public hearing on the application to gather public opinion.

1.	The Commission shall note its discussion of the proposal and its recommendation to Borough Council in its minutes of the meeting and shall submit a copy to the developer and copies to Borough Council, together with the developer's submission.

F.	Borough Council shall review the Commission's recommendations  and shall hold a public hearing on the conditional use application pursuant to public notice, within the time periods and procedures required by the PA Municipalities Planning Code. The public hearing shall commence within 60 days of the date of the filing of an administratively complete application.

G.	In granting a conditional use, Borough Council may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards in addition to those expressed in this Article, as it may  deem necessary to implement the purposes of the Municipalities Planning Code and this Article and Ordinance.

2.	If Borough Council grants approval, it shall authorize the Zoning Officer to review building permit applications and supporting plans and issue a building permit for the proposed development.
 

H.	Expiration of Conditional Use Approval. Conditional use approval shall expire automatically without written notice to the applicant if no application for a grading permit, building permit or zoning certificate to undertake the construction or authorize the occupancy described in the application for conditional use approval is submitted within 12 months of said approval, unless the Borough Council, in their sole discretion, extends conditional use approval upon written request of the applicant received prior to its expiration. The maximum extension permitted shall be a 12- month extension.

I.	Expiration of Conditional Use Approval Granted Prior to the Effective Date of this Chapter. Conditional use approval granted prior to the effective date of this Chapter  shall expire  automatically without  written notice to the applicant if no application for a grading permit, building permit or zoning certificate to undertake the construction or authorize the occupancy described in the application for conditional use approval is submitted within 12 months of the effective date of this Chapter or as specified in the approval, unless the Borough Council, in their sole discretion, extends conditional use approval upon written request of the applicant received prior to its expiration. The maximum extension permitted shall be an extension of time between one (1) month and 12 months.

Section 502	Specific Criteria for All Conditional Uses

A.	Access: Vehicular access shall be clearly marked and located to provide maximum sight distance for traffic entering and leaving the property and on the intersecting public street.

B.	Parking: Parking areas shall be clearly laid out so that circulation within them is clear to drivers, and drive-through or service lines and truck loading areas function without causing hazard in parking areas.

C.	Screening of parking or outdoor storing area shall be provided to protect adjacent residences. Lighting of signs or outdoor areas shall be directed away from adjacent homes and streets and light levels shall be the minimum to provide safety and security.

D.	Any business shall be operated from a permanent enclosed building and no sales shall take place from a trailer or within a parking lot upon spaces set aside to meet with the parking standards.

E.	A manufacturing  or processing operation shall not create excessive noise, odors, vibration, sky-reflected glare or dust. All parts of such an operation shall occur within an enclosed building.
 

Section 503	Standards and Criteria for Specific Uses

A.	Adult-Oriented Business

1.	An Adult-Oriented Business shall only be established and operated in the I-2 Heavy Industrial Zoning District.

2.	Adult-Oriented Businesses shall not be located within 300 feet of any lot that is used for residential purposes.

3.	Adult-Oriented Businesses shall not be located within 500 feet of any existing school, day care center, hospital, group care facility, personal care boarding home, group home, public park or playground, community center, place of worship, public library or any establishment which is licensed to serve and/or sell alcoholic beverages.

4.	No Adult-Oriented Business shall be located within 2,000 feet of any other existing or proposed adult-oriented business.

5.	No advertisements  or  stock in trade  which  depicts,  describes  or relates  to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas shall be permitted to be viewed or viewable from the street, sidewalk or highway.

6.	No sign which can be viewed by the general public from outside of any  building or structure which depicts,  describes  or  relates  to specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas shall be permitted.

C.	Automobile Sales and Service

1.	Only vehicles in "showroom condition" may be displayed on the portion of the property that is visible to the public along the lot's frontage before the building setback line.

2.	All vehicles not in "showroom condition" (including but not limited to those received in trade, awaiting repairs, for lease, etc.) shall be stored behind the building setback line and screened from view from the right-of-way and from adjoining properties by a landscape screen or fence of appropriate design.

3.	Any vehicle or piece of equipment that is considered a junk vehicle is prohibited from the premises.
 
4.	The area used for display of merchandise offered for sale and the area used for the parking of customer and employee automobiles shall be continuously paved and maintained in a surfacing that is approved by the Borough Engineer.

D.	Bed and Breakfast

1.	No more than five bedrooms shall be available or used for lodging use in any building.

2.	Not more than one ground sign shall be permitted on the lot.

3.	Service meals shall be limited to breakfast only to overnight guests of the facility.

4.	The number of off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as defined by Article VI of this Ordinance. All parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with bituminous, brick, concrete, or stone block paving material.

5.	The owner and/or manager of the facility shall reside therein.

6.	An individual overnight guest shall not occupy the facility for more than 14 consecutive nights.

7.	Lighting shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle of illumination when measured from an adjacent lot line. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate outdoor lighting for the facility in order to prevent adverse impacts on adjacent properties.

8.	Vehicular and/or pedestrian access to the proposed development shall be designed and provided to maximize pedestrian and vehicle safety.

E.	Boarding House

1.	The number of off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as defined in this Ordinance. All parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with bituminous, brick, concrete,  or stone block paving material.

2.	The service of meals shall be limited to residents only.
 
3.	Under no circumstances shall a boarding house have more than five
(5) residents, unless  approved by Borough Council  as part of its decision.

4.	The owner and/or manager of the boarding house shall reside therein.

5.	Lighting shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and shall not  exceed 0.1 footcandle of illumination when measured from an adjacent  lot line. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate  outdoor lighting for the facility in order to prevent adverse impacts on adjacent properties.

6.	A boarding house shall have secured all required permits from the Allegheny County Health Department prior to the Borough issuing an occupancy permit for the facility.

7.	Vehicular and/or pedestrian access to the proposed development shall be designed and provided to maximize pedestrian and vehicle safety.

F.	Church/ Place of Worship

1.	All buildings shall be set back at  least  75  feet  from  the  lot lines ofresidentially  zoned  properties  and  from  the   right-of­ way of local streets.

2.	The point of vehicular access shall be located in a manner that minimizes	detrimental traffic impacts (both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood.

3.	A Church I Place of Worship located in a residential zoning district shall provide the required bufferyard as outlined in this Ordinance.

4.	The location of buildings and structures shall be designed to minimize impact on adjacent residential properties.

5.	Lighting shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle of illumination when measured from an adjacent lot line. Lighting  levels  visible  from  an  adjacent  lot line of a residential use or residential zoning district shall be reduced to at least half of the maximum permitted footcandles between 11:00 p.rn. and 6:00 a.rn., prevailing time. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate outdoor lighting for the facility in order to prevent adverse impacts on adjacent properties.
 

6.	Vehicular and pedestrian access to the proposed development shall be designed and provided to maximize pedestrian and vehicle safety.

G.	Commercial Multi-Family Plan

1.	The owners of any tract ofland in the R-3 zoning district may submit a plan for the development of the tract to the Planning Commission for one (1) or more buildings containing both apartments and commercial uses provided that:

a.	Apartments and the access to them inside the building occupy at least fifty (50) percent of the floor area of any building, including the street floor and floors above.

b.	Commercial activities are confined to the street level floor and are limited to bakery outlet, barber shop, beauty shop, candy and ice cream store, delicatessen, drug store, dry cleaning pick-up, laundromat, newsstand, or business or professional offices.
c.	Separate  entrances  and parking  areas on the property  are
provided for the apartments, separated from the commercial entrances and parking areas.

d.	All the dimensional standards that apply in the R-5 zoning district (see Table 2) shall apply for a commercial I multi­ family dwelling plan.

2.	Minimum Dimensions Between Multi-Family Buildings

a.	Minimum yard  depths  required  in  each  zoning district shall be maintained around the periphery of each multi-family plan.

b.	When several multi-family buildings occupy the same lot the minimum distances between them shall be:

c.	Main walls, front or rear, face each other: 60 feet.

d.	Side walls face each other:  20 feet.

e.	Main wall faces side wall:  30 feet.

f.	A main wall shall be considered one in which all the windows of any one apartment are located. All other walls shall be considered side walls.
 

I.	Walls shall be considered as facing one another if they are parallel or form an angle of not less than 45 degrees. If walls on neighboring buildings are not parallel, the average distance between them (closest and furthest points apart) shall be not less than the minimum distance.

ii. No two buildings shall be less than 15 feet apart at any point.

3.	Maintenance of Open Space

a.	The parking areas, access drives, walkways, recreation areas and landscaping in a multi-family plan shall be maintained by the property owner on a continuing basis.

b.	all areas in the plan, inside and outside, not to be sold or leased, shall be maintained by the association, which shall meet at least annually to establish assessments, authorize maintenance projects and pay bills.

H.	Community Unit Plan

1.	The owners of any tract of land in the R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning district containing an area of at least two (2) acres may submit a plan for the development of the tract to the Planning Commission, provided that:

a.	All buildings in the plan are one family detached dwellings, plus accessory structures and community facilities to serve the plan residents.

b.	The overall density on the tract, exclusive of public streets, does not exceed seven (7) dwellings per acre if the tract is in R-1 or R-3, or twelve (12) per acre if in R-2.

c.	A recreation area with appropriate equipment is provided for the residents of any plan containing twelve (12) or more dwellings, such recreation area not less than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet per dwelling.

d.	All the dimensional standards outlined in this Ordinance in the zoning district containing the tract shall apply with the following   exceptions: there shall be no minimum lot area
 
requirement and side yards in any zoning district may be not less than five (5) feet and rear yards not less than twenty (20) feet.

e.	Each lot to be sold in the plan shall abut a public street either existing or to be built by the developer m accordance with Borough street construction standards.

2.	The owners of any tract of land in the R-1, R-2, R-3 or C-3 zoning district containing an area of at least five (5) acres may submit a plan for the development of the tract to the Planning Commission provided that:

a.	The buildings in the plan are one-family, two-family, multiple-family or row dwelling buildings, plus accessory structures and community facilities to serve the plan residents.

b.	The overall density on the tract, exclusive of public streets, does not exceed seven (7) dwelling units per acre if the tract is in R-1, twelve (12) per acre if in R-2, or sixteen (16) per acre if in R-3 or C-3.

c.	A recreation area with appropriate equipment is provided for the residents of any plan containing twelve (12) or more dwellings, such recreation area not less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet per dwelling.

d.	All the dimensional standards outlined in this Ordinance that apply in the zoning district containing the tract shall apply except that the minimum lot area is waived and side yards in any zoning district may be not less than five (5) feet and rear yards not less than twenty (20) feet on one or two-family lots.

e.	Each lot to be sold in the plan shall abut a public street either existing or to be built by the developer in accordance with Borough street construction standards.
 
I.	Day Care Center

1.	The facility shall be licensed by the Department of Public Welfare, or other appropriate state agency. Proof of this valid license shall be provided to the Borough prior to the Borough's issuance of a zoning and occupancy permit for the use. Copies of this valid license shall also accompany the annual operating report to be filed with the Borough's Police Department and Fire Department.

2.	Ingress and egress to the site shall be designed to ensure the safe dropping off and picking up of children. All drop-off locations shall be designed so as to not interfere with the free flow of traffic on adjacent streets.

3.	A facility which provides child care shall provide a minimum area for  outdoor play at a ratio of 65 square feet per child using the outdoor  play area. Long, linear configurations shall be avoided to assure the functionality of the space as an outdoor play area.

4.	Outdoor play areas shall adjoin the building in which the facility is located, shall not be located less than 30 feet from a street right-of­ way, shall not be located less than 10 feet from an adjoining property line, and shall not be less than 20 feet in width at any point.

5.	A facility which provides child care shall provide a minimum area for indoor play at a ratio of 40 square feet per child.

6.	Depending on traffic and/or adjoining use of the premises, a fence with approved height and strength by the Borough may be required along the lot's perimeter for the protection of those using the day care center.

7.	The general safety of a day care center site shall be evaluated as it relates to the needs of small children.

J.	Dormitory

1.	Residents shall be limited to faculty,  staff, enrolled  students,  or authorized visitors only.

2.	The service of meals, if provided, shall be limited to faculty, staff, enrolled students, and authorized visitors only.

3.	All parking spaces and driveways shall be surfaced with bituminous, brick, concrete, or stone block paving material.
 
4.	Lighting shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle of illumination when measured from an adjacent lot line. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate outdoor lighting for the facility in order to prevent adverse impacts on adjacent properties.

5.	Vehicular and pedestrian access to the proposed development shall be designed and provided to maximize pedestrian and vehicle safety.

6.	The owner and operator of the facility shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the students, employees, visitors, faculty, and guests and shall be available to respond to inquiries and promptly resolve any issues caused by the students, employees, visitors, faculty, and guests.

K.	Fraternity/ Sorority House

1.	The service of meals shall be limited to residents only.

2.	Under no circumstances shall a fraternity or sorority house have more than fifteen (15) residents, unless approved by Borough Council as part of its decision.

3.	A fraternity or sorority house  must  be  affiliated  with  and/or sanctioned by an area college or university.

4.	Lighting shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle of illumination when measured from an adjacent lot line. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate outdoor lighting for the facility in order to prevent adverse impacts on adjacent properties.

5.	A fraternity or sorority house shall have secured all required permits from the Allegheny County Health Department prior to the Borough issuing an occupancy permit for the facility.

6.	Vehicular  and/or pedestrian  access  to  the proposed  development shall be designed and provided to maximize pedestrian and vehicle safety.

L.	Group Care Facility

1.	The number of residents shall be limited to no more than 14 persons, excluding supervisory adults and the children of supervisory adults.
 
2.	The applicant shall file a detailed statement of intent describing the proposed use of the dwelling or building. The statement shall provide detail on the number and nature of the anticipated residents or occupants.

3.	The operator of the facility shall provide the Borough with a floor plan, drawn to scale, clearly delineating all rooms or sleeping areas, all points of ingress and egress to the facility and the interior circulation plan indicating the flow of traffic on the site and primary point or points of vehicular access.

4.	No  group  care  facility  shall  be  established  within  1,000 feet  of another group care facility.

5.	A 12-foot wide fire/emergency access route shall be provided around the perimeter of each building. Topography or other characteristics of the site or the development that might affect the use of emergency equipment between buildings may dictate a greater separation of structures.

6.	Twenty-four hour supervision shall be provided by staff qualified by the sponsoring agency.

7.	Adequate open space opportunities for recreation shall be provided on the  lot for the residents consistent with their needs. All open space areas shall be secured by a fence with a self-latching gate.

8.	Where applicable, certification or licensing by the sponsoring agency shall be prerequisite to obtaining a certificate of occupancy and a copy of an annual report with evidence of continuing certification shall be submitted to the Borough Zoning Officer in January of each year.

M.	Home Occupation

1.	The home occupation shall be carried on solely within the principal building or accessory structures.

2.	No more than 15 percent (15%) of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling and any accessory structures used shall be devoted to the conduct of the home occupation.

3.	Articles not produced on the premises shall not be sold on the premises.
 
4.	There shall be no display of merchandise available for sale on the premises; however, merchandise may be stored on the premise for delivery off the premises.

5.	Exterior displays or signs other than those permitted in this Ordinance, exterior storage of material and exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal structure shall not be permitted.

6.	Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance, odors, heat, or glare shall not be produced. The use shall comply with any and all applicable performance standards as outlined in this Ordinance.

7.	The use shall not significantly intensify vehicular or pedestrian traffic, which is normal for the residences in the neighborhood.

8.	The use shall not require internal or external  alterations or construction features which are not customary to a dwelling  or which change the fire rating of a structure.

9.	There shall be no use of materials or equipment except that of similar power and type normally used in a residential dwelling for domestic or household purposes.

10.	The use shall not cause an increase in the use of water, sewage, garbage, public safety or any other municipal services beyond that which is normal for the residences in the neighborhood.

11.	The use shall not cause a negative impact on  lot values in the immediate neighborhood.

12.	The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for regular delivery of materials to or from the premises, and commercial vehicles shall not be permitted to be parked on the premises.

13.	The following uses shall not be considered home occupations and shall be restricted to the zoning districts in which they are specifically authorized as permitted uses or conditional  uses, including, but not limited to:

a.	Beauty  shops or barber  shops containing more than two  (2) chairs.
b.	Clinics, hospitals, or nursing homes.
 
c.	Kennels, veterinary offices, and clinics.

d.	Private instruction to more than three (3) students at a  time.
e.	Restaurants or tea rooms.

f.	Tourist or boarding homes.

g.	Vehicle or equipment rental, repair or sale.

h.	Auto repair garages, as defined in this Ordinance.

14.	Day Care Homes shall meet all of the foregoing requirements for a home occupation as well as the following additional requirements:

a.	Adequate areas for outdoor recreation  shall be provided  and shall be secured by a fence with a self-latching  gate.

b.	A safe area shall be provided for the drop off and pick up of children who do not obstruct the free flow of traffic on any public street.

c.	Off-street  parking  shall be provided  in accordance  with the requirements of Article VI of this Ordinance.

N.	Hospital

1.	The minimum site area required for a hospital shall be five (5) acres.

2.	The site shall be serviced by public water and public sanitary sewer systems.

3.	All hospitals shall be properly licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

4.	Water pressure and volume shall be adequate for fire protection.

5.	Ingress, egress, and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to ensure access by emergency vehicles.

6.	The plan illustrating parking and circulation shall be forwarded to the Coraopolis Borough Police Department for comments regarding traffic safety and emergency access.

7.	Depending on the adjoining uses (whether residential or other), all lot lines shall be screened by the required bufferyards as defined in this Ordinance.
 

8.	The landowner and/or developer shall complete a traffic impact analysis to demonstrate that the Borough's roadway network will maintain an acceptable level of service and roadway capacity based upon the proposed development's peak traffic volumes.

9.	Safe vehicular access and areas for  discharging and picking up patients shall be provided.

10.	The location of buildings and structures shall be designed to minimize impact on adjacent residential properties.

11.	The vehicular and pedestrian circulation system shall be designed to minimize conflict between vehicular and pedestrian circulation.

12.	A hospital's height shall not exceed 75 feet and, as applicable, shall not pose a hazard to the operations of the Pittsburgh International Airport.

1.	Hotel

2.	Service of meals and/or beverages must be secondary to the principal use of room or suite rental.

3.	Lighting shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and shall not  exceed 0.1 footcandle of illumination when measured from an adjacent  lot line. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate  outdoor lighting for the facility in order to prevent adverse impacts on adjacent properties.



4.	Vehicular  and/or pedestrian  access  to the proposed  development shall be designed and provided to maximize pedestrian and vehicle safety.

5.	The location of buildings and structures shall be designed to minimize impact on adjacent residential properties.

6.	The landowner and/or developer shall complete a traffic impact analysis to demonstrate that the Borough's roadway network will maintain an acceptable level of service and roadway capacity based upon the proposed development's peak traffic volumes.

7.	To ensure public health and safety, the site shall be served by and connected to a public sewer system and public water system at the cost of the landowner and/or developer.
 

8.	The owner and operator of the facility shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the employees, customers, visitors, and guests and shall be available to respond to inquiries and promptly resolve any issues caused by the employees, customers, visitors, and guests.

P.	Indoor Recreation

1.	All off-street parking areas located adjacent to existing residences shall reduce exterior lights to half power after 11 p.m. and shall be screened by the appropriate bufferyard as defined in this Ordinance.

2.	All off-street parking shall be located on the lot.

3.	The vehicular and pedestrian circulation system shall be designed to minimize conflict between vehicular and pedestrian circulation.

4.	All dumpsters, not incorporated into the principal building, shall be located in the rear yard setback and shall be screened with masomy or vegetation.  All screens shall be a minimum of 8 feet high and shall have a minimum opacity of 80 percent.

5.	All indoor recreation facilities shall have a maximum gross floor area of 40,000 square feet.

Q.	Kennel

1.	Kennel uses shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line adjoining a residential use or zoning district and at least 50 feet from any other property line.

2.	All outdoor kennel facilities shall be constructed for easy cleaning, adequately secured by a fence with a self-latching gate (or otherwise fully enclosed to ensure that a cat or another animal is not able to climb or jump out of the enclosed area), and screened by a six (6) foot high compact vegetative screen or 100% opaque fence on all sides which are visible from any street or residential property.

3.	If adjacent properties are developed for single-family dwellings, the kennel shall be soundproofed to minimize noise impact on adjacent properties.

4.	The kennel shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Allegheny County Health Department shall be maintained.
 

5.	At no time shall the animals be permitted to run loose on the property other  than in a completely enclosed area as described herein.

6.	This use shall be subject to periodic inspections to msure compliance with the conditions of approval.

7.	The location of buildings and structures shall be designed to minimize impact on adjacent residential properties.

8.	The owner and operator of the facility shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the employees, customers, visitors, and guests and shall be available to respond to inquiries and promptly resolve any issues and quell any disturbances caused by the employees, customers, visitors, and guests.

R.	Light Manufacturing

1.	All materials and equipment shall be stored within a completely enclosed building.

2.	The storage, use or manufacture of hazardous or potentially hazardous materials shall be limited to those materials required to be	used      by      or      produced      in      connection      with the light manufacturing activity, and the transportation, handling, use and disposal of such materials shall conform with all applicable regulations	and permit requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).

3.	Lighting shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle of illumination when measured from an adjacent lot line. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate outdoor lighting for the facility in order to prevent adverse impacts on adjacent properties.

4.	Vehicular  and/or pedestrian  access to the proposed  development shall be designed and provided to maximize pedestrian and vehicle safety.

5.	The location of buildings and structures shall be designed to minimize impact on adjacent residential properties.

6.	The landowner and/or developer shall complete a traffic impact analysis to demonstrate that the Borough's roadway network will
 
maintain an acceptable level of service and roadway capacity based upon the proposed development's peak traffic volumes.

7.	The location of buildings and structures shall be designed to minimize impact on adjacent residential properties.

8.	· The owner and operator of the facility shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the employees, customers, visitors, and guests and shall be available to respond to inquiries and promptly resolve any issues  and quell  any disturbances  caused  by the  employees, customers, visitors, and guests.

S.	Marina, Docks, Portals of Water

1.	Ingress and egress of the lot shall be approved by Borough Council.

2.	Outdoor storage of materials associated with maintenance shall not be permitted.

3.	As part  of all land development, the landowner and/or developer shall provide a plan for photometrics of the lot. Illumination, when measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of 0.1 footcandles. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate outdoor lighting for the facility in order to prevent adverse impacts on adjacent properties.

4.	The plan for the use shall be prepared and sealed by an architect, engineer or landscape architect showing the overall use of the site, structures and facilities, decks, ramps, etc. The plan shall conform to all safety requirements of the United States Army Corps of Engineers.

T.	Massage Therapy Establishment

1.	State or national certification from one of the following entities shall be required for all employees, excluding administrative staff: National	Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork; American Massage Therapy Association; Association of Bodywork	and Massage Practitioners; National Certification Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine; International Massage Association; or a Borough Council approved equivalent. In addition, all employees, excluding administrative staff, must have at least 500 hours of professional training and provide a certificate or equivalent that proves the training hours that have been met.
 
2.	Hours of operation shall be restricted to 8 a.m. to 8 p.m., prevailing time. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate the hours of operation for the facility in order to prevent adverse impacts on adjoining properties.

3.	The facility shall operate in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Allegheny County Health Department.

4.	A massage therapy establishment shall obtain an initial license from the Borough Secretary and must renew this license each year thereafter that the massage therapy establishment  intends  to continue operation as a massage therapy establishment in the Borough of Coraopolis.

5.	The location of buildings and structures shall be designed to minimize impact on adjacent residential properties.

6.	Lighting shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle of illumination when measured from an adjacent lot line. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate outdoor lighting for the facility in order to prevent adverse impact on adjoining properties.

7.	To ensure public health and safety, the site shall be served by and connected to a public sewer system and public water system at the cost of the landowner and/or the developer.

8.	The owner and operator of the facility shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the employees, customers, visitors, and guests and shall be available to respond to inquiries and promptly resolve any issues caused by the employees, customers, visitors, and guests.
 
U.	Medical Clinic

1.	Facilities and equipment to support overnight boarding shall not be permitted.

2.	The facility and use shall be licensed by the appropriate departments and/or agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Said valid license and all appropriate documentation shall be submitted to the Borough.

3.	The facility and use shall be conducted in a manner that does not violate any provisions of this chapter or any other federal, state, county, Borough statute, law, regulations, ordinance and/or resolution.

4.	The facility and use shall be staffed during all hours of operation by personnel licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health.

5.	Hours of operation must be appropriately scheduled to protect the surrounding neighborhood from detrimental noise, disturbance or interruption.

6.	The location of buildings and structures shall be designed to minimize impact on adjacent residential properties.

7.	Lighting shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle of illumination when measured from an adjacent lot line. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate outdoor lighting for the facility in order to prevent adverse impact on adjoining properties.

8.	To ensure public health and safety, the site shall be served by and connected to a public sewer system and public water system at the cost of the landowner and/or the developer.

9.	The landowner and/or developer shall complete a traffic impact analysis to demonstrate that the Borough's roadway network will maintain an acceptable level of service and roadway capacity based upon the proposed development's peak traffic volumes.

10.	The owner and operator of the facility shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the employees, customers, visitors, and guests and shall be available to respond to inquiries and promptly resolve any issues caused by the employees, customers, visitors, and guests.

V.	Nursing Home
 


1.	The minimum site area required for a nursing home shall be one (1) acre.

2.	To ensure public health and safety, the site shall be served by and connected to a public sewer system and public water system at the cost of the landowner and/or the developer.

3.	All  nursing  homes  shall  be  licensed  by  the  Commonwealth  of Pennsylvania.

4.	Water pressure and volume shall be adequate for fire protection.

5.	Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to ensure access by emergency vehicles. A twelve-foot wide fire/emergency access route shall be provided around the perimeter of each building. Topography or other characteristics of the site or the development that might affect the use of emergency equipment between buildings may dictate a greater separation of structures. The parking and circulation plan shall be referred to the Coraopolis Fire Department for comments regarding traffic safety and emergency access.

6.	Nursing homes shall have a bed capacity of at least 20 beds but no more than 200 beds.

W.	Office, Medical

1.	Lighting shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle of illumination when measured from an adjacent lot line if adjacent to a residential use. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate outdoor lighting for the facility in order to prevent adverse impact on adjoining properties.

2.	Vehicular and pedestrian access to the proposed development shall be designed and provided to maximize pedestrian and vehicle safety.

3.	The vehicular and pedestrian circulation system shall be designed to minimize conflicts between vehicular and pedestrian circulation.

4.	The location of buildings and structures shall be designed to minimize impact on adjacent residential properties.
 

5.	A trip generation analysis is required to better determine traffic issues associated with the proposed development.  As part of its decision, Borough Council may require a full traffic study depending on if the number of trips generated by the development exceeds 100 trips during peak hours.

6.	To ensure public health and safety, the site shall be served by and connected to a public sewer system and public water system at the cost of the landowner and/or the developer.

7.	The owner and operator of the facility shall be responsible for the conduct and safety of the employees, patients, visitors, and guests and shall be available to respond to inquiries and promptly resolve any issues caused by the employees, patients, visitors, and guests.

X.	Parking Lots

1.	Lighting shall be oriented away from adjacent properties and shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle of illumination when measured from an adjacent lot line if adjacent to a residential use. As part of its decision, Borough Council may further regulate outdoor lighting for the facility in order to prevent adverse impact on adjoining properties.

2.	Vehicular and pedestrian access to the proposed development shall be designed and provided to maximize pedestrian and vehicle safety.

3.	The vehicular and pedestrian circulation system shall be designed to minimize conflicts between vehicular and pedestrian circulation.

Y.	Place of Assembly

1.	A place of assembly's primary visitor drop-off and pick-up area shall be  located in a manner that minimizes detrimental traffic impacts (both pedestrian and vehicular) on the surrounding neighborhood.

2.	At  a  minimum,   a  trip  generation   analysis   shall  be  required.
Furthermore, a traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted whereas the proposed development which according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate 100 trips in  addition  to  the  adjacent  roadway's  peak  hour  volumes.  A description  of future  levels  of service  and their  compliance with standards for traffic capacity of streets, intersections and driveways shall be provided. New streets shall be designed for adequate traffic capacity. All reference to levels of service (LOS) shall be defined by  the  Highway  Capacity  Manual,  published  by  Transportation
 

Research Board. These standards may be waived by the Borough if sufficient evidence is provided that the criteria cannot be met with reasonable mitigation.

3.	The number of points of ingress/egress shall be based upon projected peak hour traffic for the use and approved by the Borough Engineer to ensure employee and visitor safety.

4.	Hours of operation and events shall be scheduled to mm1m1ze negative impacts on the surrounding neighborhood.

5.	The vehicular and pedestrian circulation system shall be designed to minimize conflict between vehicular and pedestrian circulation.

6.	For  parking  demands  greater  than  300  automobiles,  additional setbacks, screening and buffering of off-street parking and loading areas  may be required to be provided in order to protect the surrounding neighborhood from inappropriate noise, dust, light and other disturbances.

Z.	Printing/Publishing/Engraving

1.	The loading and unloading areas associated with any printing/ publishing/ engraving retail establishment shall be located so as to minimize negative effects on area traffic.

2.	Loading and unloading areas shall not be located in the street and must be provided for on site of the subject printing/ publishing/ engraving establishment.

AA.	School

1.		Operations shall be regulated so that nuisances such as visual blight, glare and noise shall not be created.

2.	The school shall be accredited by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

3.	Vehicular and pedestrian access to the proposed development shall be designed and provided to maximize vehicular and pedestrian safety.

4.	The vehicular and pedestrian circulation system shall be designed to minimize conflicts between vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
 

5.	The location of buildings and structures shall be designed to minimize impact on adjacent residential properties.

6.	Light fixtures for the illumination of parking and service areas shall be designed to minimize illumination levels to 0.1 footcandle when measured at the lot line of an adjacent residential use. Lighting levels shall also be reduced by one-half  their standard  operating power, between the hours of 11 p.m. and 6 a.m.

7.	At  a  minimum,   a  trip  generation   analysis   shall  be  required.
Furthermore, a traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted whereas the proposed development which according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate 100 trips in addition to the adjacent roadway's peak hour volumes. A description of future levels of service and their compliance with standards for traffic capacity of streets, intersections and driveways shall be provided. New streets shall be designed for adequate traffic capacity. All reference to levels of service (LOS) shall be defined by the Highway Capacity Manual, published by Transportation Research Board. These standards may be waived by the Borough if sufficient evidence is provided that the criteria cannot be met with reasonable mitigation.

BB.	Restaurant, With Drive Thru

1.	The hours of operation and activities for a restaurant with drive thru shall be appropriately scheduled to protect adjoining neighborhoods and uses from detrimental noise, disturbance, or interruption.

2.	At  a  minimum,   a  trip  generation   analysis   shall  be  required.
Furthermore, a traffic impact study shall be required to be submitted whereas the proposed development which according to the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards will generate 100 trips in addition to the adjacent roadway's peak hour volumes. A description of future levels of service and their compliance with standards for traffic capacity of streets, intersections and driveways shall be provided. New streets shall be designed for adequate traffic capacity. All reference to levels of service (LOS) shall be defined by the Highway Capacity Manual, published by Transportation Research Board. These standards may be waived by the Borough if sufficient evidence is provided that the criteria cannot be met with reasonable mitigation.

3.	The number of points of ingress and egress shall be based upon projected peak hour traffic for the use approved by the Borough Engineer to ensure employee and patron safety.
 


4.	As part of all land development, the landowner/developer shall provide a plan for photometrics of the lot. Illumination, when measured at a lot line, shall be a maximum of 1 footcandle.

5.	All dumpsters shall be located in the rear setback yard and shall be screened. All screens shall have a height of 8 feet and shall have a minimum opacity of 80 percent.

6.	Mechanical  equipment  locations  are subject to Borough  Council approval and shall be designed and screened so that visibility from an adjacent property is minimized to the greatest extent possible.

CC.	Veterinary Clinic

1.	Such uses and structures shall be located at least 100 feet from any lot line adjoining a residential use or zoning district and at least 50 feet from any other lot line.

2.	Animal holding areas shall be within an enclosed building.

3.	The facility shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the local/County Health Department shall be maintained.

4.	Vehicular and pedestrian access to the proposed development shall be designed and provided to maximize vehicular and pedestrian safety.

5.	The vehicular and pedestrian circulation system shall be designed to minimize conflicts between vehicular and pedestrian circulation.

6.	The location of buildings and structures shall be designed to minimize impact on adjacent residential properties.
 

ARTICLE VI

OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS



Section 600	General Requirements for Parking

A.	All development proposals, whether new construction,  renovation  to accommodate a new use or expansion of an existing use, shall include off­ street parking in accordance with this section.

B.	Each single family and two-family dwelling shall be provided with two (2) off-street spaces for each dwelling unit. The spaces shall be located on the same property as the dwelling.

C.	Any  proposal  involving  a  commercial,   industrial   or   multi-family development (more than two dwelling units in a building or more than one dwelling building  on the  same property)  shall include  a scaled  drawing showing the location of the parking on the property in relation to buildings, access to the parking, layout and number of spaces, and dimensions across a parking aisle and for a typical space.

D.	As the result of renovation or development of a lot, the number of existing parking spaces shall not be reduced in number to less than what is required for the new use.

E.	When the calculation of required parking and/or loading spaces results in a requirement of a fractional parking space, any fraction 0.5 spaces or greater shall be counted as one parking space. Fractional spaces less than 0.5 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.

F.	When more than use exists on a lot or in a building, parking and loading requirements for each use shall be provided.

G.	A landowner or developer shall follow the specific requirements of the American Disability Act of 2004 (or most recent edition) for  off-street parking spaces.

Section 601	Dimensional Requirements

A.	Parking Space Dimensions: Each parking space in a parking lot shall contain at least one hundred sixty-two eighty (162) square feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall have minimum dimensions of nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length.
 

B.	Parking Aisle Dimensions: The minimum dimension, including  access drives or aisles, across a double-loaded parking aisle with parking spaces at right angles to the access lane shall be at least sixty (60) feet, and for a single-loaded aisle at least forty-two (42) feet. Where parking lanes form a forty-five (45) degree angle with the  access lane the dimension across a double loaded aisle (including the full depth of the spaces) shall be at least fifty-four (54) feet and across a single loaded aisle thirty-two (32) feet. A parking aisle includes the access lane and parking spaces for which the lane provides access. A double-loaded aisle has parking spaces on both sides of the access lane. If cars are to be parked parallel to the edge of a parking area, such spaces shall be at least eight (8) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long and abut an access lane at least ten (10) feet wide.

C.	Location of Parking Spaces:  Parking spaces to serve any non-residential use shall be no more than six hundred (600) feet from the building containing the use to be served and spaces to accommodate a multi-family residential use shall be not more than two-hundred (200) feet away. Distances shall be measured from the building entrance to the nearest edge of the parking area.

D.	Off-Site Parking Lots: Required parking shall be on the same property as the use served unless a second property in the same ownership as the one containing the building to be served is provided for parking within the distance limits established in Section 613 above, or a second property is leased for such parking. In either case, the second property shall be available for the life of the use to be served and guaranteed as such by covenant filed with the Borough.

E.	Parking Space Credits: In determining the number of spaces to be provided for a commercial use, the developer may subtract from the number required fifteen (15) percent of the spaces within a Public Authority lot the nearest edge of which is not more than six hundred (600) feet from his building entrance plus any space in the street abutting his property.

F.	Sharing of a Parking Lot: Where several uses share the same property, the parking required for each use shall be added together to determine the total number of spaces needed for the property. Additional regulations and requirements are located in Section 660 of this Article.

G.	Use of Parking Lots: Parking areas and lots shall be used only for the storage of passenger cars and trucks with a gross weight of not more than one-half (Yz) ton. No storage of derelict or unlicensed vehicles shall occur in a parking lot or area and no repair services other than windshield replacement and emergency road services shall take place in a parking area or lot.
 

Section 602	Design Standards

A.		Surfacing: Parking areas or lots serving any commercial, industrial, public or semi-public use or any residential development where more than two (2) dwelling units share the same parking area shall be surfaced and maintained. Surfacing shall be supported by four and a half (4Yz) inches of well-choked and compacted crushed limestone or slag base course and shall consist of a one (1) or two (2) layer bituminous surface course not less than two (2) inches in depth provided and placed in accordance with current PennDOT specifications.

B.		Slope of Lots: Parking lots or areas shall be sloped not less than one half of one percent (Yz%) and not more than six percent (6%) towards an acceptable storm drainage system.

C.	Storm Drainage: Drainage from any parking lot or area shall be gathered on the same property and directed to a public storm sewer. In no case shall stormwater flow on the surface across a street or onto a neighboring property. If the existing storm sewer is likely to be unable to handle the added flow from the lot or if no storm sewer is available, the developer shall handle drainage from his site in accordance with the provisions outlined in this Ordinance and the Borough's Stormwater Management Ordinance, Ordinance No. 1806.

D.	Slopes Abutting the Lot: Where the grade beyond the edge of a parking area slopes downhill and parking spaces are arranged at right angles to the edge, stop bars or a curb shall be provided along the edge. Embankments shall be placed in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Ordinance. Where the grade slopes uphill from the edge of the  lot a swale shall be provided adjacent to the paved surface sloped to the storm drainage system.

E.	Striping: Parking spaces shall be marked off in yellow or white traffic paint stripes at least four (4) inches wide the full length of the space.

F.	Setbacks and Screening: Whenever a parking lot occurs in a residential zoning district, the edge of the parking surface shall be set back from the side or rear property lines not less than two (2) feet, and from abutting streets not less than the minimum front yard setback required in the zoning district, or the building setback on adjacent lots if that is less to accommodate a planted hedge to be installed and maintained at a height of not less than four (4) feet. The full width of the setback areas shall be landscaped. In lieu of a hedge, a four (4) foot high masonry wall or solid wood fence may be substituted for the hedge. If natural changes of grade or landscaping define the edges of the parking lot, the Planning Commission may recommend, and Borough Council may approve, adjustments in the setbacks and screening to fit the circumstances.
 


G.	Access: Entrances to parking lots shall be not more than twenty-five (25) feet in width, not including curved returns at street curbs. Entrances shall be located as  remotely as possible from nearby street intersections, and secondarily from adjacent residential properties.

H.	Lighting and Signs: Parking lot lighting shall be arranged so that the light source is not visible from adjacent or nearby residential properties or streets and so that the light level on the parking lot surface does not exceed three
(3)	foot candles at any point.  Any signs in a parking lot shall be strictly
functional, denoting only information relevant to the use of the lot. Section 603	Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements
A.	The following table of parking requirements specifies the number of spaces required for various land use categories defined in this Ordinance.

TABLE 4: MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS

	
Principal Use	
Minimum Parking Requirements
	
Residential	
1.	Conversion Apartment	1.5 spaces per unit
2.	Efficiency Apartment	1 space per apartment
3.	Garage Apartment	1 space per apartment
4.	Single-Family Detached Dwelling	2 spaces for each dwelling unit
5.	Two-Family Dwelling	2 spaces for each dwelling unit

6.	
Garden Apartment	2 spaces for each unit if less than 20 units; 1.5 spaces for each unit if 20 or more units

7.	
High-Rise Apartment	2 spaces for each unit if less than 20 units; 1.5 spaces for each unit if 20 or more units
8.	Townhouse/Triplex/Quadplex	2 spaces for each dwelling unit
	Non-Residential	

9.	
Adult-Oriented Business	1 space for every 100 square feet of gross floor area

10.	
Animal Grooming Facility	1 space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area plus one space per employee on peak shift

11.	
Amusement Enterprise	1 space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area

12.	
Auto Repair Garag	
e	2 spaces per repair bay plus 1 space per employee on peak shift plus 1 space per business vehicle 	
 

	
Principal Use	
Minimum Parking Requirements
13.	Automobile Sales & Service	5 spaces per employee on peak shift

14.	
Bakery Shop	1 space per every 150 square feet of gross floor area plus  1 space per employee on peak shift

15.	
Bank/ Financial Institution	1 space per every 300 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space per employee

16.	
Bed & Breakfast	1 space per guest room and 1 space per permanent resident
17.	Boarding House	1 space for every two beds

18.	
Brewery or Micro-Brewery	1 space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area

19.	
Business Services	1 space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area

20.	
Candy or Ice Cream Store	1 space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area
21.	Car Wash	3 stacking spaces per wash bay

22.	
Church/ Place of Worship	1 space for every 3 seats or 80 linear inches of pew

23.	Club, Fraternal, or Service Organization	1 space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area

24.	
Commercial Multi-Family Plan	As determined by the Borough following a parking needs analysis

25.	
Community Facilities	1 space for every 300 square feet of net floor area

26.	
Community Unit Plan	As determined by the Borough following a parking needs analysis
27.	Communication Antenna	Not Applicable
28.	Communication Tower	1 space per facility

29.	
Contractor Storage Yard	2 parking spaces plus 1 space per employee normally in attendance at the facility at any time

30.	
Convenience Store	1 space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area
31.	Crematorium	1 space per employee

32.	
Day Care Center	1 space per staff on peak shift plus 1
space for every 5 students

33.	
Delicatessen	5 spaces for customer take-out/pick- up plus 1 space per employee on peak shift

34.	
Distillery	1 space per employee on peak shift and 1 space per every 100 square feet of net floor area
 

	
Principal Use	
Minimum Parking Requirements

35.	
Drug Store/ Pharmacy	1 space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area plus one space per employee
36.	Essential Services	1 space per employee on peak shift

37.	
Feed & Grain Business	1 space per every 300 square feet of gross floor area

38.	
Flex Space	1 space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area

39.	
Florist	1 space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area plus one space per employee

40.	
Food & Grocery Store	1 space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area

41.	
Fuel Sales	1 space for each employee plus one space for every 2 fuel dispensers

42.	
Funeral Home	1 space for every 3 seats in the first viewing room parlor plus 10 spaces for each additional parlor

43.	
Fraternity or Sorority House	1 space for every two residents at peak capacity

44.	
Garden Supply/ Plant Material Store	1 space for every 200 square feet of sales area plus 1 space for every 2 peak hour employees

45.	
Group Care Facility	1 space for each 2 full time staff plus 1 space for every 5 residents

46.	
Group Residence	1 space for every 4 residents plus 1 space per employee on peak shift

47.	
Half-way House	1 space per employee and 1 space for each resident

48.	
Health Club	1 space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area

49.	
Heavy Manufacturing	1 space for every 750 square feet of gross floor area
50.	Home Occupation	1 space per dwelling unit

51.	
Hospital	1 space for every 2 beds plus 1 space per employee on peak shift



52.	


Hotel	1 space for every sleeping room plus 1 space per employee on peak shift plus additional regulations for restaurants, bars, conferences as required by this Ordinance and Chapter
 

Principal Use	Minimum Parking Requirements

1 parking space for every 4 seats
 
53.	Indoor Recreation
 
plus 1 parking space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area
 
54.	Kennel		1 space for each employee plus 1 space for everv 1,000 square feet

55.	Laundromat		1 space for every four washing machines
56.	Life Care Facility	1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for every 3 beds or residents
57.	Light Manufacturing		1 space for every 750 square feet of gross floor area

58.	Liquor Store		1 space for every 250 square feet of gross floor area
59.	Marina		As determined bv a Parking Study
60.	Massage Therapy Establishment	1 space for each table, plus one
space oer emplovee on peak shift
4 spaces for each doctor, licensed
61.	Medical Clinic	physician assistant, and licensed nurse practitioner, plus 1 additional
space per employee
62.	Mixed Use Building		Sum of parking requirements for individual uses
63.	No-Impact Home-Based Business	1 space per dwelling unit
64.	Nursing Home		1 space for each employee, plus 1 space for every 3 beds or residents
65.	Office, Business or Professional	1 space for every 300 square feet of
net floor area
66.	Office, Medical		1 space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area
67.	Oil and Gas Operations and Facilities	1 space per employee on peak shift
and 1 space per facility
68.	Outdoor Recreational Facility	As determined by the Borough
following a parking needs analysis
1 space for every 200 square feet of
 
69.	Personal Services
 
net floor area plus one space for every 2 employees on peak shift
 
70.	Pilot Manufacturing		1 space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area
1 space for every 75 square feet of
 
71.	Place of Assembly
 
net floor area (for a theater - 1 space for every 3 seats)
 
72.	Printing/Publishing/Engraving	1 space for every 750 square feet of
net floor area
 

Principal Use	Minimum Parking Requirements

73.	Public Building	As determined by the Borough following a parking needs analysis

74.	Public Recreation Uses	As determined by the Borough following a parking needs analysis

75.	Research & Development		1 space for every 500 square feet of gross floor area
76.	Restaurant, High-Turnover	1 space for every 50 square feet of
net floor area
77. Restaurant, Low-Turnover	2 spaces for every 75 square feet of
net floor area
78.	Restaurant, With Drive-Thru	1 space for every 50 square feet of
net floor area
79.	Retail Store		1 space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area

80.	School		1 space per employee plus I space for everv 10 students
1 space for every 10 storage spaces
 
81.	Self-Storage Facility



82.	Service Station


83.	Studio -Art, Dance, Martial Arts,
 
plus 1 space per employee on  peak shift
4 spaces per bay plus 1 space per employee on peak shift plus 1 space for everv business vehicle
1 space per employee and I space
 
Music	for every 350 square feet of gross floor area
1 space for every 75 square feet of
 
84.	Tavern/Bar
 
net floor area plus I space per employee on peak shift
 
85.	Trucking Terminal		1 space for every 750 square feet of net floor area

86.	Veterinary Clinic		1 space for each employee plus 2 spaces for everv exam room
87.	Warehouse		1 space for every 750 square feet of net floor area
88.	Wholesale Business		1 space for every 750 square feet of net floor area
1 space per employee on peak shift and 1 space per every 500 square
 
89.	Winery
 
feet of retail gross floor area and 1 space per every 1,500 square feet of outdoor related activities
 
90.	All Other Uses Not Specifically Listed	As determined by the Borough
Planning Commission
 



Section 604	Off-Street Parking Reduction Areas

A.	Given the density and development patterns of the Borough of Coraopolis, several off-street parking reduction areas have been designated throughout the Borough. Within the designated Parking Reduction Zones, certain percentage decreases in the required number of parking spaces are permissible.  The reduction is based on the area and zoning district in which a particular development is located, the availability of nearby parking (primarily public parking either along the street or in a surface parking lot), and the proposed use. Parking Reduction Zones for the Borough of Coraopolis are outlined in the following table:

TABLE 5: PARKING REDUCTION AREAS




must be located within 600 feet from the property where the use is located


Section 605	Bicycle Parking Requirements

A.	To allow flexibility and equity in addressing vehicle parking issues and to present a menu of parking allocation strategies, this section requires and incentivizes bicycle parking in the Borough of Coraopolis. The bicycle parking incentives aim to facilitate the lessening of car-related congestion in the Borough by promoting bicycle commuting by requiring the provision of adequate and safe  facilities for the storage of bicycles. Further, this section allows a reduction in required number of automobile parking spaces when bicycle parking is accommodated, creating a benefit for meeting the requirements set forth herein. Requirements and details for bicycle spaces are outlined as follows.

1.	A Bicycle Parking Space shall be a four (4) feet by six (6) feet space provided for locking up to two (2) bicycles or a bicycle locker that can store up to two (2) bicycles per unit.

2.	A Bicycle Rack shall be a stationary device with a base that can wedge anchors for surface mounting, provides steel tubing one (1) inch to four (4) inches thick, containing locking points between one
(1)	feet and three (3) feet off the ground and a gap near the bottom
 

for pedal clearance, enabling one to lock a bicycle frame and one (1) of the wheels with a standard U-Lock. Such a rack must be able to accommodate at least two (2) bicycles upright by rack frame.

3.	Bicycle parking shall be provided in a well-lighted area.

4.	Bicycle parking shall be at least as conveniently located as the most convenient automobile spaces, other than those spaces for persons with disabilities. Safe and convenient means of ingress and egress to bicycle parking facilities shall be provided. Safe and convenient shall include, but is not limited to  stairways, elevators and escalators.

5.	Bicycle parking facilities shall not interfere with accessible paths of travel or accessible parking as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.

B.	Specific requirements regarding the layout and location of bicycle spaces are as follows:

1.	All bicycle parking areas shall afford a four (4) foot wide access aisle to ensure safe access to spaces.

2.	Bicycle parking and automobile parking  shall be located so as to protect bicycles from damage.

3.	In cases where Bicycle Parking Spaces are not visible from the primary street, signage shall be used to direct cyclists safely to bicycle parking areas.

4.	All bicycle racks  and  lockers  shall be  securely  anchored  to the ground or building structure.

5.	Bicycle  Parking  Spaces  shall   not   interfere   with   pedestrian circulation and shall adhere to ADA requirements.

6.	Bicycle parking shall be an integral part of the overall site layout and designed to minimize visual clutter.

7.	All Bicycle Parking Spaces outside of a building  shall be located within  a one hundred (100) foot diameter of the primary building entrance.

8.	Bicycle Racks may be placed in the public right-of-way provided that the building owner obtains an encroachment permit for the installation of racks in the public right-of-way from the Borough.
 

C.	Bicycle Parking Requirements. The following table provides the number of bicycle parking spaces required per square foot of gross floor area. Bicycle spaces are only required in the Borough's C-2 and C-3 Zoning Districts, as follows:

TABLE 6: BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS

GROSS FLOOR AREA	REQUIRED MINIMUM NUMBER OF BICYCLE PARKING SPACES
0-5,000 square feet	0
5,001-20,000 square feet	1
20,001 or more square feet	1 per every 10,000 square feet (or fraction thereof)


D.	Street Parking Reduction for Bicycle Parking. A reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces required (excluding parking spaces for persons with disabilities) shall be permitted for the provision of bicycle parking provided that:

1.	No fee is required for using the bicycle parking made available.

2.	When calculation of the maximum number ofreduced parking spaces results in a fraction, the resulting number shall be rounded to the next highest integer.

E.	The reduction in the number of automobile parking spaces shall be reduced by no more than one (1) space for each Bicycle Parking Space, but by no more than thirty (30) percent of the total required spaces.

Section 606	Shared Parking Requirements

In order to accommodate the usage of the same parking spaces for two or more different land uses in the same building, requiring different principal hours of use, a lower number of required parking spaces may be permitted. All uses shall be located on the same lot under the same ownership. Parking can be provided on a different lot ifthere is a written and signed agreement in place. Subsequent changes in land uses within any mixed use buildings shall require a new occupancy permit and proof that sufficient parking will be available.  The following provisions apply to shared parking:

A.	The required parking for mixed use buildings shall be computed as follows:

1.	Determine the minimum amount of parking required for each land use as though it were a separate use.
 

2.	Using the table below, determine the number of spaces needed by each use for each of the four time periods by multiplying the parking required for each use by the corresponding percentage of use for that time period.

3.	Calculate the total number  of spaces needed for all uses for each time period.

4.	The time period with the highest number of parking spaces required for the sum of all uses shall be the number of parking spaces required.

TABLE 7: CALCULATING PARKING FOR MIXED USE BUILDINGS








100% 	



B.	To apply for usage of the shared parking requirement, a table shall be submitted showing the breakdown of the gross floor area devoted to each of the land use categories listed in Table 7. Uses that do not fit into any of the categories shown in the Table shall not be eligible to use this provision. The total amount of required parking shall be tabulated by use and time period. The time period requiring the highest number of parking  spaces shall be selected as the basis for the shared parking requirement.

C.	A shared parking plan shall be enforced through written agreement. An attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record shall be submitted to the Borough, which shall forward a copy to the  Borough Solicitor for review and approval. Proof of recording of the agreement shall be presented to the Borough prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. The agreement shall:

1.	List the names and owner interest of all parties to the agreement and contain the signatures of those parties.

2.	Provide a legal description of the land.

3.	Include a site plan showing the area of the parking parcel.
 
4.	Describe the area of the parking parcel and designate and reserve it for shared parking encumbered by any conditions which would interfere with its use.

5.	Agree and expressly declare the intent for the covenant to run with the land and bind all parties and all successors in interest to the covenant.

6.	Assure the continued availability of spaces for joint use and provide assurance that all spaces will be usable without charge to all participating uses.

7.	Describe the method by which the covenant shall, if necessary, be revised.

D.	If the agreement expires, each owner shall provide  the required parking spaces for their principal use.

E.	Shared parking provided can be located on a separate, different lot than the subject building which houses the businesses, so long as there is a shared parking agreement in place that meets the criteria outlined in Section 663 above for shared parking agreements.

Section 607	Parking of Commercial Vehicles in Residential Areas

A.		The storage and parking of commercial vehicles or box trucks with more than two axles or two wheels per axle shall not be permitted along the street or public right-of-way in residential areas.

B.		Commercial vehicles and/or box trucks may park in available driveways or other parking areas nearby and are prohibited from parking in the street.
 
Section 608	Off-Street Loading

A.	Any development proposal, whether new construction, renovation to accommodate a new use, or expansion of an existing use shall, where an alley does not exist adjacent to the property, provide off-street loading in accordance with this Ordinance.

B.	The off-street loading space or spaces shall be at least ten (10) feet wide by thirty-five (35) feet long with a clear height of fourteen (14) feet. The space or spaces shall be located so that trucks may enter and leave the property moving in a forward direction. The loading spaces and access to them shall not interfere with the use of, or be considered a part of, any required off­ street parking on the property.

C.	When several buildings comprise the same use, one building may be designated to receive and/or ship goods but the floor area of all the buildings shall be combined to determine the number of loading spaces to be provided.

D.	Loading areas shall be sloped, paved, drained and screened as for parking areas.

E.	Minimum Loading Requirements

5.1	Multiple Family Dwellings: One (1) space for the first thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of floor area plus one (1) additional space for each additional forty thousand (40,000) square feet of floor area, except that no space shall be required for any building with less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area.

5.2	Commercial and Industrial Uses: One (1) space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area, except that no space shall be required for any use with less than three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area.

5.3	Warehousing, Storage or Terminal Operations: One (1) space for each seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of floor area.
 

ARTICLE VII SIGNS

Section 700	Signs - General

A.	Signs shall only be erected and maintained in compliance with the provisions of this Article, other Articles and Parts of this Chapter, and any and all regulations of the Borough relating in any way to the erection, location, size, height, use, number, lighting, operation, alteration, or maintenance of signs, billboards, banners, and other similar advertising devices as defined herein.

B.	No sign shall be erected, altered, painted, relocated, remodeled, expanded, or maintained in any manner that is inconsistent with the provisions of this Article and all other applicable Borough ordinances. A sign permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Officer prior to the erection or alteration of any sign. The Zoning Officer shall review and approve all sign applications and sign permits.

Section 701	Definitions of Terms Related to Signage

A.	Arcade Sign: A sign suspended beneath a ceiling of an arcade, a roof, or marquee containing only the name of a business for the purpose of assisting pedestrian traffic traveling under the arcade, roof, or marquee to identify the location of establishments within a shopping center or similar building.

B.	Awning Sign: A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or surfaces of an awning.

C.	Billboard: An off-premises sign which advertises a business, organization, establishment, activity, event, person, product,  or service not principally located or sold on the premises where the billboard is located.

D.	Bulletin Board Sign: A changeable sign, in the form of a freestanding ground sign, designed and used to announce events, such as those used by places of worship and schools.

E.	Business Identification Sign: A sign which contains the name, address, and/or goods, services, facilities, or events available on the premises.

F.	Changeable Copy Sign: A sign that is designed so that characters, letters, or illustrations can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign, including:
 

1.	Electrically Activated Changeable Copy Sign: A changeable copy sign whose message copy or content can be changed by electronic or digital means on a display surface. Illumination may be integral to the components, such as characterized by lamps or other light­ emitting devices or it may be from an external light source designed to reflect off the changeable component display. Electronic message signs, animated signs, and digital signs shall  be considered electrically activated changeable copy signs.
2.	Manually  Activated  Changeable  Copy  Sign: A  changeable  sign
whose message copy or content can be changed manually.

G.	Construction Sign: A temporary sign announcing the name of contractors, mechanics, or artisans engaged in performing work on the premises.

H.	Development Sign: A  temporary  sign  erected  during  the  period  of construction and/or development  of  a  property  by  the  contractor  and developer or their agent.

I.	Electronic Message Sign: An electrically activated changeable copy sign whose variable message capability can be electronically programmed.

J.	Flashing Sign: Any illuminated sign or device in which the artificial light is not maintained stationary and/or constant in intensity and color at all times.

K.	Free-Standing  Sign:   A sign permanently  affixed to the ground and not attached to any building or any other structure, including:

1.	Ground Sign: A sign that is affixed to the ground by means of a permanent foundation other than a freestanding frame, mast, or pole.
2.	Pole Sign: A sign erected and maintained by  on a free-standing frame, mast, or pole.

L.	Gross Sign Surface Area: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding necessary supports or uprights upon which such sign is placed. For signs utilizing individual letters, figures or characters mounted directly on the wall or face of a structure, the gross sign surface area shall be the entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the sign. For two-sided signs, only one sign face is counted in computing the gross sign surface area of the sign.

M.	Identification Sign: A sign used to identify only the name of the individual or organization occupying the premises, the profession of the occupant, the
 

name of the building on which the sign is displayed, and the address of the property.

N.	Indirectly Illuminated Sign: A sign which is lighted by means of lamps or lighting devices external to, and reflected on, the sign, which lighting is stationary and constant in  intensity and color at all times and which is shielded so that the illumination is concentrated on the face of the sign and there is no spillover of illumination or glare beyond the face of the sign.

0.	Internally Illuminated Sign: A sign which is lighted by means of lamps or lighting devices internal to the sign, which lighting is either behind the face of the sign or is an integral part of the sign structure and the advertising effect.

P.	Memorial/Historical Plaques: Commemorative plaques placed by a recognized agency of the Borough, County, State, or Federal government.

Q.	Menu Board: A freestanding sign oriented to the drive-through lane for a high-turnover restaurant that advertises the menu items available from the drive-through window of such restaurant.

R.	Moving Sign:  Any  sign or any part thereof  located on said sign which oscillates, rotates, or moves.

S.	Notification Sign: Signs bearing legal and/or property notices such as "no trespassing,"   "private  property,"   "no  turnaround,"   "safety  zone,"  "no hunting," and similar messages, and signs posted by a governmental agency for traffic control or the safety of the general public.

T.	Off-Premises Directional Sign: A sign, other than a Billboard, erected by a governmental agency and which directs  the public to an establishment, activity, person, product, or service which is not sold, produced, or available on the premises on which the sign is located.

U.	On-Premises Directional Sign: A sign which directs and/or instructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic to parking areas, entrances, exits,  loading areas, and similar facilities on the premises on which the sign is located, and which shall contain no advertising other than the business name or logo.

V.	Overhanging Sign:  A sign, other than a wall sign or arcade sign, affixed to a building or wall whose leading edge extends beyond such building or wall more than 12 inches including marquees or similar structures used for business identification.
 

W.	Political Sign:  A  temporary  sign  which  indicates  the  name,  cause,  or affiliation of anyone seeking public  office  or which  refers  to  an  issue concerning which a public election is scheduled to be held.

X.	Portable Sign: A sign that is not attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located and which advertises the business conducted on the premises.  This definition includes a wheeled sign.

Y.	Real Estate Sign: A temporary sign advertising the sale or rental of a premise.	The sign may also bear the words "sold," "sale pending," or "rented" across the sign face or attached.

Z.	Residential Identification Sign:  A  sign  containing  only  the  name  and address of the occupant of the premises.

AA.	Residential Plan Identification Sign: A permanent wall or free-standing ground sign containing only the name and address of a subdivision plan or a multi-family building or development.

BB.		Sandwich Board Sign: A temporary sign which is placed in front of the entrance to the premises and advertises daily specials or other current matters related to the business conducted on the premises, and which is removed at the close of each business day.

CC.		Sign: Any surface fabric, device, or structure bearing lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter intended, designed, or used to convey information visually and exposed to public view, which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business. The term "sign" does not apply to a flag, emblem, or insignia of a nation, political unit, school, or religious group.

DD.	Sign Area:  See "Gross Sign Surface Area."

EE.		Sign Face: The area or display surface of a sign, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding, used for the message on a single panel.

FF.	Temporary Community Event Sign: A temporary sign of a decorative, festive, and/or informative nature announcing activities, promotions, or events having a broad community interest.

GG.		Temporary Special Event Sign: A temporary sign that may include a banner, flag, pennant, or similar display constructed of a durable material, whose sole purpose is to advertise a special event.
 

HH.	Wall Projecting Sign: A sign attached or affixed to a wall of a building or structure and protruding from the wall surface in such a way that more than one face of the sign is visible.

II.		Wall Sign: A sign attached to and erected parallel to the face of an outside wall of a building, projecting outward no more than 12 inches from the wall of the building.

JJ.	Window Display Sign: A sign or group of signs affixed to the inside of a display window in a commercial establishment which advertises a product or service available on the premises or which announces or promotes a special event or sale.

Section 702.	General Sign Provisions

A.	Lots with Multiple Street Frontage: In all zoning districts, lots fronting on more than one street shall be permitted to have one sign of authorized sign types as defined in this Article.

B.	Visibility: No sign shall be located in such a position that it will cause a hazard by obstructing visibility for traffic on a street or obstructing a traffic signal or other traffic control device. No sign, other than official traffic signs, shall hang over or be erected within the right-of-way of any street.

C.	Illumination: Illumination, when authorized by this article, shall be directed upon the sign face and not towards the adjoining lots or streets. Flashing or oscillating signs shall not be permitted. Lighting shall be stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times. The intensity of any sources of illumination of any sign, whether indirect or internal, shall be controlled so as to not create glare and to be compatible with the intensity of ambient light and illumination on surrounding lots.

D.	Maintenance and Inspection: All signs must be constructed of a durable material, maintained in good condition, and otherwise comply with other applicable codes and ordinances of the Borough.

E.	Removal of Signs: Whenever any business, activity or product on a lot is discontinued, vacated or no longer sold, all signs  relating to the discontinued or vacated business shall be removed within 30 days of the vacation or discontinuance of the business or activity. If the landowner and/or developer fails to remove the sign within the 30 day period, the Borough shall be permitted to remove the sign at the owner's expense.

F.	Permits:  No permit  shall be required for the following types of signs as described herein: Notification, Real Estate, Political, and Construction Signs.  Permits shall be required for all other signs authorized by this Article
 

and Ordinance. The Borough Zoning Officer shall issue the  required permits upon submission of an application that complies with all applicable provisions of this Article and payment of the required fees established from time to time by the Borough Council.

G.	Expiration of Permits: Any permit issued by the Zoning Officer for erection, alteration, replacement or relocation of any sign shall expire automatically within six (6) months of the date of issuance if work authorized by permit has not been initiated or diligently pursued.

H.	Sign Location: Except for billboards and political signs, as defined herein, where authorized by this Article, all signs shall be located on the premised which they are intended to serve and promote.

I.		Sign Height: The height of a sign shall be measured from the ground elevation nearest to the sign to the highest elevation of the sign. Signs shall not exceed the height limit established for structures in the applicable zoning district, or the lowest point of the roof line of an existing principal building within 100 feet·of the sign, whichever is lower.

Section 703	Sign Limitations

A.	No animated signs, involving the entire sign or any parts thereof, whether mechanically or wind activated, shall be permitted.

B.	No signs illuminated by a flashing, pulsating or intermittent source and no strings of bare bulbs shall be permitted.

C.	No signs lighted in such a manner or sited so as to create glare conditions on adjacent or nearby streets or residential properties shall be permitted.

D.	No sign shall be placed on the roof of any building, or placed to project above the top of a wall or above a gutter line, or to extend beyond the ends of a building wall.

E.	No sign shall by reason of location, lighting or height create a traffic hazard by  obstructing sight distances or vision of traffic control devices, or by confusing motorists.
 

Section 704	Sign Exemptions

A.	The following types of signs shall  require no permit but shall be otherwise subject to the regulations of this Article:

1.	Any sign erected by any level of government or government entity;

2.	Memorial tablet erected by a  public or non-profit organization;

3.	Unlighted real estate sales or lease sign placed on the property for sale or lease;

4.	Non-illuminated temporary political signs erected during a political campaign. A political sign shall not be erected more than 45 days prior to the election in which the candidate is pursuing office and shall be removed within five (5) days after the election for which it was erected.

5.	Unlighted sign of contractor placed on the property on which the firm is doing work, to be removed upon completion of work;

6.	Sign identifying the name of a building but including no advertising;

7.	Sign identifying the name and address of the occupants of a residential property, or a home occupation;

8.	Holiday decorations and national and state flags;

9.	Bulletin board of a public, charitable or religious institution on the same  property  as  the  institution  provided  the  sign  is  internally lighted.

Section 705	Permits

A.	A permit issued by the Zoning Officer shall be required before any sign that may be erected, changed or moved, except for those signs which are exempt.

B.	All proposed development shall be required to submit a sign package to the Borough for its approval prior to any sign permits being issued to businesses.

C.	Sign permit application packages shall contain the following information, provided by the applicant:
 

1.	Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, the contractor who will erect  the sign, and the owner of the property, and address of the subject property if different from the owner;

2.	Statement of permission granted by the property owner for erection of the sign if  owner and applicant are not the same;

3.	A survey or lot plan showing the proposed location of the sign on the subject property relative to buildings and property lines.

4.	Any building elevations showing the proposed locations of the sign.

5.	A drawing prepared to scale, of the proposed show which shows the following: all sign dimensions, including the height of the sign and grade level of the base of the sign, sign materials, and sign colors.

6.	The sources of sign illumination and applicable details of the fixture and screening.

7.	Evidence that the applicant has insurance in force that will absolve the Borough from any liability as a result of a bodily injury or property damage caused by the sign's collapse during erection and afterwards.

D.	The  cost  of  sign  permits  shall  be  established,  from  time  to  time,  by resolution of Borough Council.

Section 706	Signs in Residential Zoning Districts

A.	Permitted Types of Signs

1.	Property identification sign limited to name and address  of occupants and/or name and nature of a home occupation conducted dwelling, such sign not more than (2) square feet in area each face;

2.	Sign indicating property for sale or lease identifying broker or owner's name, address and telephone number and nature of proposed transaction, such sign not greater than sixteen (16) square feet each face;

3.	Sign or bulletin board identifying a public or semi-public institution and activities carried on by the institution, such sign not greater than thirty-two (32) square feet  in area;

4.	Sign identifying a contractor employed on a property, such sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area each face and limited to
 

one per contractor. The aggregate contractor sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet, regardless of the number of contractors on site.;

5.	Temporary sign advertising affairs of a cultural, religious, political, educational or public organization, limited to sixteen (16) square feet in  area each face;

6.	Temporary private garage or porch sale sign, limited to two (2) per sale event, each not greater than eight (8) square feet in area each face, for no more than seven (7) days once in each calendar year;

7.	Sign erected by any level of government;

8.	Memorial tablets erected by a public or non-profit organization, holiday decorations and state and national flags.

B.	Location of Signs

1.	Signs shall be located only on the property containing the use identified by the sign except for public or temporary signs.

2.	Signs shall be located only in a yard or on the face of a building abutting a street, and shall not extend into a public right-of-way.

3.	Signs may be free-standing, attached to a fence or private lamppost or applied flat to a wall of the principal building on the property.

4.	No more than two (2) signs shall be permitted on a property at any time,  except that if the property abuts two (2) or more streets, two
(2)	signs may be present on each street frontage.

5.	No sign shall be lighted except signs identifying public or semi­ public institutions, provided such lighting is internal or from an indirect, hidden source, and signs erected by a public body.

6.	No  sign shall  exceed ten  (10)  feet  in height  measured  from  the topmost part of the sign to the ground below.

Section 707	Signs in the Commercial Zoning Districts

A.	Permitted Types of Signs

1.	Any sign permitted in the Residential zoning districts.

2.	Sign identifying a business on the same property as the business.
 


B.	Maximum Size of Signs

1.	The total area of all permanent signs (wall signs and free standing signs) on any property shall not exceed one square foot of sign are per lineal foot of the property's street frontage, not including any frontage on an alley.

2.	Regardless of the frontage, any property shall be entitled to at least thirty (30) square feet of signage, and no property shall have signage exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area.

3.	Free-standing signs shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet each face.

4.	Wall signs shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the wall to which they are attached, including the area of doors and windows.

5.	Buildings are entitled to one wall sign per building or per business in the building. Total aggregate sign area shall be in accordance with Section 707.B.1.

6.	Projecting signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area each face and shall not extend more than three (3) feet from the face of the wall to which they are attached.

7.	Signs attached  to or painted on the edges of a marquee or an awning shall not extend above or beyond the edge, but shall not be more than three (3) feet in height, whichever is less.

C.	Location and Illumination of Signs

1.	Free-standing signs shall be located between the principal building on the property and an abutting public street and shall not extend into the public right-of-way.

2.	Wall signs and projecting signs shall be located between the heads of doors and windows on the first floor of the building and the sills of second floor windows, or the top of the parapet or the gutter line if the building is one story in height.

3.	Where a building wall coincides with, or is less than three (3) feet from a street right-of-way line, wall signs and projecting signs may extend into the right-of-way.
 

4.	Businesses occupying upper floor offices may paint identification signs on their windows, limited to one (1) such sign per business, or two (2) if the office has windows  on two streets, such signs allowed in addition to others permitted on the property.

5.	Signs may be illuminated from within or from a light source that is not visible from adjacent or nearby streets or residential properties.

6.	No commercial  sign face shall be lighted that is parallel to and directly across the street from a residentially zoned and occupied property.

D.	Temporary Signs

1.	Temporary  free-standing  signs not  exceeding  in area thirty-two
(32) square feet each face may be approved by the Zoning Officer for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days provided such sign meets all requirements of this article and no more than one (1) such sign is present on the same property at the same time. A second permit for such a sign may not be issued until at least thirty
(30) days after expiration of the first permit.

2.	Temporary flags, banners and streamers may be approved for special  promotions  or  events  at  the  discretion  of  the  Zoning Officer.

3.	Sandwich board signs are permitted, provided that they are removed at the close of each business day and provided that they do not obstruct sidewalks or vehicular traffic.

Section 708	Signs in the Industrial Zoning Districts

A.	Permitted Types of Signs

1.	Any sign permitted in the Commercial zoning districts;

2.	Billboard.
 

B.	Maximum Size of Sign

1.	Free-standing signs shall not exceed one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet on area each face;

2.	Wall signs shall exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the wall to which they  are attached,  including the area of doors and windows;

3.	Projecting signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area each face, shall not extend more than four (4) feet from the wall face, or be less than ten (10) feet above the ground level below.

4.	Billboards shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet, nor be less than one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet in area.

5.	No sign shall extend more than fifty (50) feet above ground level.

6.	No billboard shall be located directly  across the  street  from,  or within one hundred (100) feet of a residentially zoned property.

C.	Illumination of Signs

1.	Signs may be illuminated from within or from a light source that is not visible from adjacent or nearby streets or residential properties.

2.	No sign face shall be lighted that is visible or partly visible from a residentially zoned property.

Section 709	Sign Maintenance

A.		All signs must be constructed of durable material and be kept in good repair at all times. All parts and supports shall be painted or maintained as necessary to prevent rusting, rotting, illegibility, or other deterioration. All broken or missing parts shall be promptly replaced. All seams between panels or other components of the sign shall be maintained in a sealed condition. Any sign found to be in an unsafe conditions upon inspection by the Zoning Officer shall be declared to be a public nuisance and an enforcement notice shall be issued to the owner to repair or remove the sign within a reasonable time period. Upon failure of the owner to comply, the Borough shall remove the sign at the owner's expense.

B.	If the Zoning Officer shall find any sign or sign structure to be unsafe or to have been erected or maintained in violation of this Ordinance, he shall give written notice to the owner citing the conditions found and the actions needed to gain compliance.
 

C.	If, after thirty (30) days from the date the notice was sent, the corrections have not been made, the owner shall be subject to summary proceedings as provided by Section 1240, and in addition the Zoning Officer may cause to have the offending sign repaired or removed with the costs assessed the owner, who shall be denied any further sign permits until such costs have been paid in full.

D.	Signs which are found to be causing an immediate menace to the public may be removed or caused to be removed immediately by the Zoning Officer without notice and the costs assessed the owner.
 

ARTICLE VIII

NON-CONFORMING  USES


Section 800	Application

A.		The provisions of the Article shall apply to buildings, structures, signs, lands and uses which were legal prior to adoption of this Ordinance but which would not be permitted as the result of the application of this Ordinance to their location or use in the Borough of Coraopolis, or as a result of the reclassification of the property containing them, or of the adoption of other amendments to this Ordinance after its initial passage. This Article is concerned with properties of inadequate area and/or frontage, uses of land and/or structures for activities  not permitted in the zoning districts where such land and/or structures are located, and structures placed on a property that are too close to property boundary lines or too high for compliance with standards of the zoning district in which they are located.

Section 801	Non-Conforming Uses of Lands and Structures

A.	Where at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance lawful use of land, or land and the structure or structures on it, exists and is made no longer permissible under the requirements of this Ordinance, as adopted or amended, such use may be continued indefinitely, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided the following conditions are applied.

B.	No such non-conforming use of land shall be extended by acquisition of additional land to  occupy a greater land area than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, nor shall such non-conforming use be expanded to occupy an area on the lot more than twenty-five (25) percent larger than was occupied at the date of adoption of this Ordinance, or adoption of an amendment that made the use non-conforming, without seeking the proper approvals from the Zoning Hearing Board.

C.	No structure containing a non-conforming use but capable of being enlarged without violating setback or height requirements in the zoning district where it is located may be increased in volume more than twenty-five (25) percent over the volume of such structure at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments that made the use non-conforming. A non­ conforming use which occupies part of a structure may be extended throughout the structure it occupied at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or subsequent amendment that made the use non-conforming, but the expansion under such circumstances may not be extended to occupy land outside the original structure.
 


D.	If any such non-conforming use of land or use of land and structures in combination ceases or is abandoned for any reason including destruction of buildings, for a period of at least one (1) year, any subsequent use of such land, or land and structures in combination, shall conform to the regulations for the zoning district where such land is located, except that where a hardship to the operator of the non-conforming use clearly exists as a result of financial, health or other calamity, the Zoning Hearing Board may grant an extension of the one (1) year limit consistent with the hardship, but not more than one (1) additional year.

E.	Assuming no structural alterations are made to the building containing a non-conforming use, the use may be changed to a second non-conforming use but only after an application has been filed with the Zoning Hearing Board and the Zoning Hearing Board concludes that the second use is more compatible with the uses permitted in the zoning district than is the original non-conforming use.

F.	Each succeeding owner of a non-conforming commercial or industrial use shall secure an occupancy permit from the Zoning Officer who may ask the Zoning Hearing Board for a decision if he has reason to doubt that the non­ conforming use will be continued in the same manner as formerly or in a manner more compatible with the permitted uses in the zoning district.

G.	The non-conforming use of  a structure and/or land, or combination of structure and land be superseded by a use permitted in the zoning district where the property is located and the use of the premises shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district.

H.	Where a non-conforming use of structure and premises exists in combination, the removal of the structure and/or use in the structure shall terminate the non-conforming use of the premises.

I.	The maintaining or strengthening to a safe condition of any non-conforming structure shall not be interpreted as being denied by any portion of this Article.

Section 802	Non-Conforming  Structures

A.		Where a structure exists on a property at the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendment to it and does not conform to the requirements regarding height or minimum setbacks from adjacent streets or lot lines, such structure may remain indefinitely subject to the following provisions.
 

B.	No structure may be enlarged  or  altered  in  a way  that  creates  a non­ conformity or increases an existing non-conformity unless approved by the Zoning Hearing Board.

C.	Any replacement of a non-conforming structure shall be made in compliance with the regulations governing development for the zoning district in which the property is located, except that if a hardship is alleged by the owner, he may request the Zoning Officer to approve replacement on the same foundation that supported the structure to be replaced, but in no case a location that was more non-conforming than the original location.

D.	If a non-conforming structure is moved, it shall thereafter conform to setback requirements regarding location on the property.

Section 803	Record of Non-Conforming Uses

A.	The Zoning Officer shall identify and register all uses of land and structures in Coraopolis Borough made non-conforming as a result of adoption of this Ordinance.

B.	The Zoning Officer shall keep the data current by  the addition of non­ conforming uses as amendments to this Ordinance are adopted and by the deletion of non-conforming uses as they are eliminated.

C.	The record may be kept by map or written documentation.

D.	Any property owner of a non-conforming use may request a certificate of non-conformance from the Zoning Officer, guaranteeing the owner the rights of this Article. The Officer shall inspect the property and shall issue the certificate if he verifies a non-conformity exists. The certificate shall describe the non-conformity specifically. One (1) copy of the certificate or letter of certification shall be retained in the Zoning Officer's file and one copy sent to the applicant.

Section 804	Non-Conforming  Signage

Any nonconforming sign may be continued only as provided in this Section.

A.	Nonconforming signs may be repairs or reconstructed, provided that no structural alterations are made which increase the gross surface area of the sign. However, nonconforming signs which are damaged or destroyed to an extent of more than 50 percent of their replacement cost at the time of destruction shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Article.
 

B.	Nonconforming signs may not be enlarged added to or replaced by another nonconforming sign, use or structure, except that the interchange of poster panels shall be permitted.

C.	A conforming sign shall not be erected on the same premises as an existing nonconforming  sign until  the nonconforming  sign has been  removed  or changed to a conforming sign.  However, for multi-occupant land uses, the fact that one particular establishment therein has a nonconforming sign will not prohibit  a different establishment therein from erecting a conforming sign on the same premises.

D.	A nonconforming sign shall be made to conform with the requirements of this Article whenever there is a change in the use or occupancy of the building which the sign serves, or whenever the building or structure which the sign serves is externally expanded or remodeled.

E.	Whenever the use of a nonconforming sign, or the use which the sign serves, has been discontinued for a period of six (6) consecutive months, or whenever it is evident that there is a clear intent on the part of the owner to abandon the use of a nonconforming sign, or the use which the sign serves, then the sign thereafter shall be made to conform with the provisions of this Article.

F.	Ifa nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of fifty (50%) percent or more of its replacement value at the time of the damage or destruction (based on prevailing costs), then the sign thereafter shall be restored to conform to the provisions of this Article. However, if the damage or destruction is less than fifty (50%) percent of the replacement value, then the sign may thereafter be restored to its original condition, so long as restoration or repair of the sign is completed within six (6) months after the date of damage or destruction. The repaired or reconstructed sign shall be made to conform to all applicable ordinances, regulations, and codes of the Borough of Coraopolis.

G.	Any sign erected following the effective date of this Ordinance that was not previously approved by the Borough of Coraopolis and that does not conform to these regulations (illegal signs) shall be immediately removed at the expense of the owner, upon notice from a duly authorized agent of the Borough.
 

ARTICLE IX ZONING HEARING BOARD

Section 900	General

In accordance with the Law, the Borough Council shall appoint and organize a Borough Zoning Hearing Board, which said Zoning Hearing Board may adopt rules to  govern its procedures. The Borough Zoning Hearing Board shall hold meetings, keep minutes, and, pursuant to public notice, shall conduct hearings, compel the attendance of witnesses,  take testimony under oath, and render decisions in writing within 45 days after the hearing or continued hearing, in accordance with the requirements of Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53. P.S. Section 10901 et. seq. A fee shall be charged in accordance with a schedule affixed by Resolution for any appeal or proceeding filed with the Borough Zoning Hearing Board.

Section 901	Functions of the Board

A.	Appeals from Decisions of the Zoning Officer:

1.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed procedures or has misinterpreted or misapplied any provision of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order, or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming  use, structure, or lot.

2.	An appeal may be filed with the Board in writing by any landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Borough, or any person aggrieved.

B.	Challenges to the Validity of an Ordinance or Map:

1.	The Board shall hear challenges to the validity of any part of this Ordinance or amendment thereof, unless such challenge is accompanied by a curative amendment or challenges the procedure of adoption of the Ordinance or any amendment.

2.	In the case of a challenge to the process of adoption, appeal from the  action  of  Borough  Council  shall  be  made  directly  to  the
 

Allegheny County Courts.  If the challenge is accompanied by a curative amendment, appeal shall be made to Council.

3.	In challenges of the validity of this Ordinance, the Board shall take evidence and make a record thereon. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board shall decide all contested questions and shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact which shall become part of the record on appeal to the Courts.

4.	A challenge may be filed with the Board in writing by any landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Borough, or any person aggrieved.

5.	The written request of a landowner shall include a short statement informing the Zoning Hearing Board of the matters that are at issue and the grounds for the challenge as well as a certification by the landowner that he was not aware that the Borough was considering a scheme of rezoning that would detrimentally affect a plan he proposes and that such a scheme would be inconsistent with his proposed plan. The request shall be accompanied by plans describing the proposed use.

6.	A person aggrieved by a development on lands of another but in conformance with the Ordinance may challenge the Ordinance by filing a written request with the Zoning Hearing Board that it hold a hearing on the  challenge. The request shall contain a short statement reasonably  informing the Board of the matters that are in issue and the grounds for the challenge.

7.	The Zoning Hearing Board may hear challenges to other Borough Ordinances or regulations that apply to the same plan for which a zoning challenge has been brought, but in such a case the Board shall have no power to pass on the non-zoning issues and shall merely take evidence of such issues and include them in the record.

C.	Variances

1.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions  of the Zoning  Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. An appeal for variance may be  filed with the Borough Zoning Hearing Board by any landowner or any tenant with the landowner's permission.

2.	A variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board unless a written application for a
 

variance  is  submitted  to  the  Borough  Zoning  Hearing  Board demonstrating all of the following findings are made:

a.	That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions	including but not limited to irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of this Ordinance in the neighborhood in which the property is located;

b.	That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;

c.	The such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant;

d.	That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood in which the property is located	nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property or be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.

e.	The variance if authorized, shall represent the minimum variance necessary to afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.

3.	Ifthe Zoning Hearing Board finds in favor of the appellant, it may prescribe	appropriate conditions and safeguards deemed necessary to implement the purposes and intent of this Ordinance.

4.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall prescribe a time limit, consistent with the nature of the variance granted and the conditions surrounding the property, within which the action for which the variance is granted shall be completed. Failure to comply with the time limit shall render the variance void. In no circumstance shall the time limit prescribed exceed one year.



Section 902	Operation of the Zoning Hearing Board
 

A.	Membership

1.	The membership of the Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three
(3)	persons, all residents of Coraopolis Borough, who shall be appointed by the Borough Council and may be reappointed upon completion of a term.

2.	Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other office in the Borough.

B.	Term of Office

1.	Members of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be appointed for three
(3) year staggered terms, with one appointment each year to refill a completed term.

2.	Appointments  to  fill  vacancies  shall  be  made  by  the  Borough Council for the unexpired portion of a term only.

C.	Removal of Members

1.	Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or non-feasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of Borough Council, taken after the Board member has received at least fifteen (15) day notice such vote will be taken.

2.	The Board member thus accused may request by written communication to the Borough Secretary no later than seven (7) days prior to the meeting of Council at which the vote for removal is to be taken, a hearing before Council after which Council, at its discretion, may take a vote for removal of the Board member.

D.	Organization of the Board

1.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall annually elect officers from among its   membership,   to   include   a  Chairman,   Vice   Chairman   and Secretary.

2.	The Zoning Hearing Board shall reorganize at its first meeting in each calendar year. Board members may succeed themselves in their positions.

3.	The Chairman shall call and chair all meetings of the Board. The Vice Chairman shall act in the absence of the Chairman and shall assist the Secretary.
 

4.	The Secretary shall keep the minutes of the proceedings, recording the vote of each member; shall transcribe and distribute, or arrange to have transcribed and distributed, all testimony given at hearings under procedures described herein; shall draw up the agenda for each meeting; shall be responsible for placing of notices for public hearings; and shall handle all correspondence.

5.	The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter or rescind rules and forms for its procedure consistent with this and other Ordinances of the Borough and the laws of the Commonwealth. It may establish a regular monthly meeting date for conducting business.

6.	The Board shall keep full public records of its business and shall submit an annual report of its activities to Borough Council not later than sixty (60) days after the start of the subsequent year.

Section 903	Hearings Procedure

A.
The first hearing before the board or hearing officer shall be commenced within 60 days from the date ofreceipt of the applicant's application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the board or hearing officer shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant shall complete the presentation of his case-in­ chief within I 00 days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the board or hearing officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings within the I 00 days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of their opposition to the application within I 00 days of the first hearing held after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. And applicant may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete his case-in-chief provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an equal number of additional hearings.  Persons opposed to the application may, upon the written consent or consent on the record by the applicant and municipality, be granted additional hearings to complete their opposition to the application provided the applicant is granted an equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
B.	Hearings shall be conducted by the Zoning Hearing Board and the Board
may appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision, or findings where no decision is called for, shall be made by the Zoning Hearing Board, but the parties may waive a decision or findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.

C.	The parties to the hearing shall be the municipality, any person affected by the application who has made timely appearance of record before the board,
 

and any other person including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the board. The board shall have power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the board for that purpose.

D.	Before a hearing may commence all fees and costs relative to the proceedings shall be paid by the applicant. Fees shall be established by resolution of Borough Council.

E.	Public Notice

1.	Public notice of the hearing shall be placed in a newspaper of general local circulation twice, once in each of two (2) consecutive weeks, the first notice not more than thirty (30) days nor less than seven (7) days before the hearing. The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing.

2.	A mailed notice shall be sent at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to the applicant, to the Secretaries of Borough Council and Planning Commission, and to other parties who have filed a timely request to receive notice. In addition, when the hearing involves a particular property or properties, notice shall be sent to the owners of property within two hundred (200) feet of the edge of the affected property or properties. The applicant shall provide the Secretary of the Board with the names and addresses of the property owners to be sent notices.

3.	A copy of the notice shall be posted at the Municipal Building and, in a case involving particular properties, in a conspicuous location on the affected property.

F.	The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer presiding shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.

G.	The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and arguments and to cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply and irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.

H.	The board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer  shall be shared equally by the applicant and the board. The
 

cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the board if the transcript is ordered by the board or hearing officer or shall be  paid by the person appealing from the decision of the board if such appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such copy

I.	The Board, or the hearing officer, shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party, and/or representatives of any party in connection with any issue relevant to the hearing, except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; shall not take legal notice of any communications, reports or other materials unless all parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed; and shall not inspect any site or its surroundings with any party and/or representative of any party after the start of hearings unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.

Section 904	Hearings Procedure

1.	The Board or hearing officer shall render a written decision, or when no decision is required, written findings on the application, within forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of the hearing before the Board or hearing officer. Decisions shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based on them together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provisions of this Ordinance or any other Ordinance or regulation of Coraopolis Borough or the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why a conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts.

2.	When a hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there is no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties who shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to the Board's final decision and entry of findings, which shall occur not later than forty-five (45) days after the hearing officer's decision.

3.	When the Board or hearing officer fails to render a decision where it or he has the power to do so within forty-five (45) days after hearing the application or fails to hold a hearing within sixty (60) days of the applicant's request, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, and the Board shall place a public notice of the decision thus granted not later than ten (10) days after the expiration of the forty-five (45) day period in a newspaper of general local circulation. In addition the decision shall be posted on the affected property and sent by mail to all parties having an interest  in the decision. Any  extension  of the forty-five  (45) day
 

period for any other reasons shall be agreeable to both the Board and the applicant and shall be for a fixed period.

4.	A copy of the final decision, or the findings if no decision is required, shall be mailed to the applicant not later than the day after the date of the decision. All others requesting notice of the decision not later than the last day of the hearing shall receive by mail a summary of the findings or decision and a statement of the place at which the full decision or findings be examined. Any reproduction of the proceedings shall be paid for by the party requesting the transcription.

Section 905	Zoning Appeals

A.	No one shall be permitted to file an appeal with the Board later than thirty
(30) days after an application for development, whether preliminary or final, has been approved by the Zoning Officer or Borough Council if such appeal is intended to reverse  or limit the approval in any manner. Only if the appellant is able to prove he had no notice or knowledge of the approval can the Board extend the time limit. Successor owners shall be bound by the knowledge of their predecessors in interest.

B.	Upon the filing of an appeal, and while an appeal is pending before the Board, any development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body and all official action thereunder shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay could cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by the Court.

C.	Zoning Appeals to Court

1.	The Courts may act upon appeals from the decisions of the Board and findings and conclusions of the Board in proceedings to challenge the validity of the Ordinance or other development regulations of the Borough.

2.	The court having jurisdiction shall be the Allegheny County Court of Common Pleas.

3.	Zoning appeals may be taken to court by any party before the Board or any officer or agency of Coraopolis Borough.

4.	All zoning appeals shall be filed not later than thirty (30) days after issuance of notice of the decision or report of the Board.
 


5.		A developer having  received approval from the Borough for his development and faced with an appeal brought by others before the Board may petition the Court to order those bringing the appeal to post a bond in an amount established by the Court as a condition of the appeal's continuation before the Board. The Court shall hear the petition, determine whether the appeal is frivolous or is designed to delay, and if so may require the posting of the bond.

D.	Ifany application for a variance, or appeal from the zoning officer is denied by the Board, another application for the same request shall not be filed within a period of one (1) year from the date of denial except upon order of the Court or if the application is substantially changed.

Section 906	Mediation Option

A.	Parties to proceedings authorized in this Ordinance may utilize mediation as an aid in completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the Borough Zoning Hearing Board, in no case shall the Borough Zoning Hearing Board initiate mediation or participate as a mediating party. Mediation shall supplement, not replace, those procedures in this Part once they have been formally initiated. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as expanding or limiting municipal police powers or as modifying any principles of substantive law.

B.	Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. Any municipality offering the mediation option shall assure that in each case, the mediating parties, assisted by the mediator as appropriate, develop terms and conditions for:

1.	Funding mediation.

2.	Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and demonstrated skills in mediation.

3.	Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.

4.	Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this Chapter or in  the  Pennsylvania  Municipalities  Planning  Code,  53  P.S.
§10101 et seq., provided there is written consent by the mediating parties, and by an applicant or Borough decision­ making body, if either is not a party to the mediation.
 

5.	Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to participate.

6.	Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.

7.	Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the parties, and become subject to review and approval by the appropriate decision-making body pursuant to the authorized procedures set forth in this Ordinance.

C.	No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
 

Article X ADMINISTRATION

Section 1000  Duties of the Zoning Officer

A.	The Zoning   Officer  shall  administer  and  enforce  this  Ordinance  in accordance with its literal terms. He shall be appointed by Borough Council and may hold no elective office in Coraopolis Borough.

B.	Applications for  building and occupancy permits shall be made to the Zoning Officer, who shall process the applications in accordance with the provisions set forth in this Ordinance.

C.	The Zoning Officer shall investigate alleged violations and take action to gain compliance in accordance with this Article. He shall also testify at hearings of the Zoning Hearing Board on contested decisions he has made.

D.	All questions of interpretation of this Ordinance shall be first presented to the Zoning Officer and such questions shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Officer.

Section 1001   Building Permits

A.	No building or structure including a mobile home shall be erected, moved, or enlarged unless a permit for such action has been issued by the Zoning Officer.   Building Permits shall not be required for the erection of paved walks, patios,  residential driveways, children's play equipment, or garden sheds. Nor shall a permit be required for painting, for replacement of siding, roofing, windows, doors, soffits or gutters, for repointing masonry, or for altering interior partitions or  doorways when no structural changes are needed. Permits shall be required for permanent roofs over open porches or patios or for closing in such areas with screening or windows.

B.	An application shall include the following in duplicate on forms provided by the Zoning Officer:

1.	A description of the proposed work and the proposed use of the structure, if a new building, indicating the number of dwelling units or commercial units the building is designed to accommodate.

2.	A site plan drawn to scale showing the boundary lines of the property to receive the new construction, if a new building or expansion of an existing building is proposed, indicating bearings arid distances of each line, area of the property and name of owner of record.
 


3.	The site plan shall also show the building setback line from each property boundary, public roads abutting the property, public utilities serving the property and the location of free-standing signs and of parking areas, with the number of parking spaces indicated, if a multi- family residential, commercial or industrial development.

4.	The proposed building or addition shall be shown on the site plan, with dimensions and height noted and distances indicated between it and adjacent streets and property lines.

5.	Existing  buildings  already  on the property  and topographical features  such  as steep  slopes,  swamps  and  streams  shall  be shown if on the property.

6.	If the building is for commercial, industrial, multi-family or public use, a certificate of approval from the State Department or Labor and Industry shall be provided.

7.	The applicant shall swear that all the information given on the form and drawings shall be true and correct to the best of his knowledge.

C.	If the application is satisfactory, the Zoning Officer shall inspect the premises where the construction is proposed to occur. If new construction is proposed, the Zoning Officer shall verify on the site the location of the construction relative to adjacent property lines and may order the owner to have stakes positioned by a registered surveyor to indicate the property line and outline of the new construction. Upon completing his inspection and finding the application and premises  compatible, the Zoning Officer shall approve the application and return one (1) copy of the construction documents together with a signed building permit authorizing the applicant to proceed. The applicant shall post the permit prominently on the building site during construction and shall keep one (1) set of the documents available on the site as well.

D.	Ifthe application is not satisfactory, the Zoning Officer shall return one (1) set of the application documents together with a letter indicating the specific reasons why the application cannot be approved and the changes needed to make it acceptable.

E.	The Zoning Officer shall from time to time visit the property whereon the approved construction is taking place in order to assure himself that the work is proceeding  in accordance  with the application documents.     The
 

Zoning Officer shall not be denied access to the property during working hours in order to inspect the construction in progress and may order the work halted pending appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board or corrected to conform to the permit.

F.	If an applicant wishes to amend the use, arrangement or construction of his building from that shown on the permit after the permit is approved, he shall file with the Zoning Officer an application for an amended zoning permit.

G.	A building permit shall become void, if after six (6) months from the date of issue, construction has not commenced and been vigorously pursued. The life of a building permit shall be one (1) year from the date of issue. Permits may be extended for not more than one (1) additional year on large projects or where the applicant can prove to the Zoning Officer a hardship exists making it impossible to complete the project in one (1) year.

H.	The Zoning Officer shall keep records of all applications either approved or disapproved, including one (1) copy of each permit issued, shall maintain a journal of his activities, and shall submit an annual report to Borough Council detailing building activity in the Borough during the preceding year.

Section 1002   Occupancy Permits

A.	For new uses or expansion of existing uses:

1.	Upon completion of a commercial, public, semi-public or industrial building, or a structure containing more than two (2) dwelling units, or the placing of a mobile home on its foundation, the contractor or builder shall apply to the Zoning Officer for an occupancy permit.

2.	The Zoning Officer shall inspect the premises and if satisfied that all conditions of the building permit have been met, shall issue an occupancy permit certifying that the premises comply with the pro­ visions of this Ordinance and may be used for the purposes set forth on the building permit.

3.	If the Zoning Officer upon inspection finds the premises to have been developed in violation of any of the conditions of the building permit, he shall order the violations corrected to conform to the building permit and shall not issue an occupancy permit until satisfied these corrections have been made. The contractor shall be responsible for requesting another inspection after violations have been corrected and the Zoning Officer shall not issue an occupancy permit until he verifies all violations have been corrected.
 

4.	It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for a new structure covered by this section to be occupied without an occupancy permit first having been issued.

B.	For changing existing uses:

1.	If a property owner wishes to change the use of any building, structure or premises, or if a new owner seeks to occupy a property that has been used for commercial or industrial purposes, he shall apply to the Zoning Officer for occupancy permit. Changes for which an occupancy permit shall be required include addition of a dwelling unit or units in the structure, introduction of a home occupation, conversion of premises to a different commercial or industrial use, or continuation of the use of a commercial or industrial property by a new owner. The Zoning Officer shall first determine that no building permit is needed to effect the proposed change, but if so the developer shall proceed as under the provisions of this Ordinance.

2.	If the Zoning Officer is satisfied that such change or addition is in conformance with all requirements of this Ordinance, he shall issue an occupancy permit.

3.	It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a property to determine that any persons leasing or subleasing the premises will use them only for activities permitted by this Ordinance, and if a use is contemplated or undertaken by a leasee or subleasee which is not permitted, or is permitted only as a conditional use, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to either secure permission from the Borough for the use or to remove the use from the premises.

Section 1003. Enforcement and Penalties

A.	If the Zoning Officer shall find that any provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify the owner of the property upon which such violation is allegedly occurring by certified mail, return receipt requested, such notice being deemed adequate if persons other than the owner are perpetrating the alleged violation.

B.	Communications regarding violations shall indicate the nature of the violation by specific paragraph of this Ordinance relied on and shall order the action necessary to correct it.

C.	Such communications shall order the discontinuance of illegal uses of land or structures, or the removal or moving of illegal structures or additions or alterations thereto, as well as other action necessary to assure compliance
 

with or prevent violation of this Ordinance and shall indicate the owner's alternative actions under the terms of this Ordinance.

D.	The Zoning Officer shall allow a period not to exceed thirty (30) days from date of notice within which a violation shall be corrected. The Zoning Officer shall inspect the site of the violation at the conclusion of the period specified and if he finds the violation still not corrected, shall take the owner before a magistrate, who if he finds the owner guilty, may assess penalties in accordance with this Article.

E.	Continuation of a violation of this Ordinance beyond the thirty (30) day period shall constitute a summary offense. Any person, partner or officer of a corporation who violates this Ordinance, or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus costs of prosecution. In default of payment of the fine, such person, the members of such partnership, or the officers of such corporation shall be liable to imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days. Each day each violation continues may be considered a separate offense. All fines collected for the violation of this Ordinance shall be paid over to the Borough.

F.	The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains a violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.

G.	Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough from taking such other lawful action as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, or to bring an action to enjoin any violation of this Ordinance.

H.	The granting of a building or occupancy permit shall not constitute a guarantee of any kind by the Borough or any official or employee thereof for the safety of any structure from any cause whatever and shall create no liability against any Borough official or employee for any structural or other failure that may result therefrom.
 

Section 1004   Schedule of Pees

A.	A schedule of fees for building permits, occupancy permits, sign-permits and applications for petitions to amend this Ordinance, or to initiate action on conditional uses before the Planning Commission or action on variances, challenges to the validity of the Ordinance, or challenges to a decision of the Zoning Officer before the Zoning Hearing Board shall be established by resolution of Borough Council, posted conspicuously in the Borough Building, and  subsequently amended only by action of Council.

B.	No permit, certificate, application, or variance shall be  issued unless, or until such established costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full; nor shall any actions be taken on proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full.

Section 1005   Amendment of the Ordinance

A.	An amendment,  supplement, change, or repeal of this Ordinance may be initiated by:

1.	A resolution or request by Borough Council;

2.	An official proposal by the Planning Commission; or

3.	A petition presented to the Planning Commission by a property owner or a person who has entered into an agreement to purchase a property in the Borough.

B.	Procedure

1.	Upon receipt of a petition from a property owner for an amendment to this Ordinance or its map, the Planning Commission shall review the proposal and submit recommendations, with specific reasons in support of either adopting the proposal, rejecting it or adopting it with conditions, to Borough Council not later than the third meeting after which the Commission officially received the petition.

2.	Council shall review the Planning Commission's recommendations and shall call a public hearing, properly noticed, after which Council shall vote approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment. Procedures for conducting the Public Hearing shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.	At least thirty (30) days prior to the hearing the Board shall submit the amendment proposal to the Allegheny County Department of Economic Development for comment.
 

3.	If a proposed amendment is revised before final approval to include property not previously affected or to further altar the text, Council shall hold another public hearing before proceeding to vote on the change.

4.	The hearing record shall be kept by stenographic or sound recording and copies may be provided any party to the hearing at cost.

5.	Appeal from a decision of Borough Council on an amendment proposal shall be to the County Courts of Common Pleas.

C.	Public Hearing Requirements

1.	Public hearings shall be held in accordance with the requirements of the Planning Code.
2.
Public notice shall be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
3.	A notice shall simultaneously be posted at a conspicuous location at
the Municipal Building and at least one (1) location on property or properties to be affected by the proposal, if it  involves an amendment to the zoning map.

4.	Owners of property within two hundred (200) feet of any boundary of a property or properties or portion of a property for which a change in the zoning district boundaries is sought shall be informed by mail at their addresses of record by letter sent at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, indicating the date, time and place of the hearing and describing the proposed change.

5.	The placing of public notices, posting of affected properties and mailing of letters to property owners in the vicinity of a proposed zoning district boundary change shall be the responsibility of the Borough Secretary, who may assign all or part of this work to the Zoning Officer.

D.	Curative Amendments

1.	Landowner  Curative  Amendment:	A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of any portion of this Ordinance which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest may submit a Curative Amendment
 

to  the  Borough  Council.	The  request  shall  include  a  written statement informing Council of the matters that are in issue and the grounds   for  the   challenge,   the   proposed   amendment   as  the landowner  wishes   it  to  be   adopted,  and  proposed   plans   for development  of  the  land  in  question  that  are  frustrated  by  the existing   zoning	in	accordance	with	Section   916.1   of   the Pennsylvania	Municipalities   Planning   Code   53   P.S.   Section 10916.1,  as  amended.		Council  shall  seek	comments  from  the Borough and Allegheny County Planning Commission at least thirty
(30)  days  prior to a  public hearing to which  shall be  held, with
proper  public  notice,  not	later  than  sixty  (60)  days  after  the landowner request is received at a regular meeting of Council.  A stenographic   record of  the hearing shall be   kept unless Council and  the appellant agree in writing to a tape recording and  Council shall  have  the power  to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, compel the attendance of witnesses and  production of relevant  documents. The parties may be represented by counsel which present evidence and cross examine adverse witnesses.  The  landowner's  proposed amendment shall be considered denied when Council informs the landowner it will not adopt the amendment, when Council adopts another	amendment  unacceptable  to	the  landowner,  or  when Council fails to act on   the landowner's  amendment within thirty
(30) days after the public hearing unless the time period is extended
by mutual consent.

2.	Municipal Curative Amendment: Borough Council may by official vote declare any part or all of the Ordinance invalid and propose to prepare a curative amendment to overcome the invalidity. Within thirty (30) days thereafter, Council by resolution shall specify the portions of the Ordinance to be cured and shall commence preparation of the amendment. The consideration of the amendment shall include review by the Borough and County Planning Commissions and public hearing before Council, properly noticed as specified herein. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the declaration	of invalidity, Council shall adopt the Curative Amendment or reaffirm its Ordinance as it stood prior to the declaration. While a Municipal Curative Amendment is in process, Council shall not be required to receive any landowner's Curative Amendment nor shall any rights accrue to a landowner as a result of Council's action relative to a Landowner Curative Amendment. The Municipal Curative  Amendment procedure may not be used by Council for at least thirty-six (36) months after Council's decision on a previous amendment unless State law compels Council to act sooner.
 
E.		Rehearing: If a petition for amendment, supplement, change or repeal of this Ordinance is denied by Borough Council, another petition for a similar change shall not be filed within a period of one (1) year from the date of denial, except upon the initiation of Council and recommendation of the Planning Commission based upon a change in circumstances which would warrant a rehearing.

Section 1006   Enactment of the Ordinance

A.		This Ordinance is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare and shall be effective upon its passage and signing.

B.	 


ATTEST:	·
(; .·	./	.
BorQ. gh Se retary	May






























 
FEBRUARY 2020
 


137
 
y(C	Jldct	/1ff






















Coraopolis Borough Zoning Ordinance
 
INDEX
CORAOPOLIS BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE


 
Accessory Uses
 
Conflict with Other Ordinances
 
120
 





 
Setback and Yard Co,ierage Amendments
 
613
 

Signs Department Store
 

900
 










 

In Commercial Buildings Conversion
Gara&e Apartments
 
667
665
666
 

Along property lines Industrial fences Appeals
 
642
647
649
 















 

Book, Card or Stationery Sales Building Pennits
Buffer Screens Industrial Districts
 
220
1210

575
 

Height of Buildings Exceptions
Residential Districts Commercial Districts Industrial Districts
 


620
441
531
571
 








 
Conditional Uses Definition
Residential Districts Conunercial Districts
 

228
420
520
 
Residential Districts Conunercial Districts
Lot Frontage
Residential Districts
 
447
536

443
 



18
 
;	Dimensions Between	653	Definitions	900
Maintenance. of Open Space	654	In Residential Districts	940
Non-Conforming Lota	1010	In Commercial Districts	950
Non-Conforming Structures	1030	In Industrial Districts	960
Non-Conforming Uses	1020	Exemptions	920
Expansion	1022, 1023	Limitations	910
Termination	1024	Maintenance	970
Changes of Use	1025	Pennits	930
Record	1040	Temporary Signs	954
Nursing Home	669	Site Grading	631
Occupancy Pennita	Site Restoration Bond	633
New Uses	1221	Storm Drainage	632
Changing Existing Uses	1222	Swinuning Pool Fence	648

Design Standards	820	Yards
Dimensional Requirements	810	Projections into Required Yard Areas	612
Off Site Parking Lots	814, 815	Reduction of Prohibited	314, 315
Spaces Required by Use	830	Setbacks on Partially Developed
Screening	826	Streets	611
821	Zoning District Boundaries










Commercial Districts	540	Operation 	1110



Principal Structures		Zoning Map Maximum on a Lot	602	Zoning Officer
Public Utility Lines	316	Appeal a From
Purposes of the Ordinance	130	Duties
Rear Lot	604	Enforcement
Rear Yard Depth, Minimum
Residential Districts	446
Cormnercial Districts	535
Industrial Districts	574


Retirement Home	669
Review, Annual of Ordinance	318
Service Station	267
Side Yard Depth, Minimum	
Residential Districts	445
Colll!lercial Districts	534
Industrial Districts	574
·-
 

ZONING ORDINANCE CORAOPOLIS BOROUGH
ALLEGHENY COUNTY 1 PENNSYLVANIA
Ordinance No.	A





Article I:	Preliminary Provisions
 

Section 100:
Section 110:
Section 120:
Section 130:
Section 140:
Section 150:
 
 
Enacting Clause	1
Short Title	1
Validity and Conflict	1
Purposes of the Ordinance	1
Community Development Objections	2
Filing	2
Section 200:	Generei Rules	3
Article III:	Establishment of Districts
Section 310:
Application of District Regulations
1.3
Section 400:	Permitted Uses	15
 
Article II:	Definitions
Section 210:	Specific Definitions	3
 
Secti(tn 300:
 
Official Zoning Ifap
 
12
 
Article IV:	Provisions Applicable in Residential Zone Districts
Section 410:	Accessory Uses	15
8ection 420:	Conditional Uses	15.
s ction 440:	Table of Dimensional Standards in the Residential Districts	16
Article V:	Provisions Applicable in Other Zone Districts
 

Section 500:
t1ect ion 510:
:-:ct ion 520:
:: .:.;ct ion 530:
;;)ection 540:
Section 550:
Section 560:
Section 570:
Section 580:
Section 590:
 
Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts	17
Accessory Uses in Commercial Districts	18
Conditional Uses in Commercial Districts	18
Table of Dimensional Standards in the Connnercial Districts	18
Review of Plans in the C-2 and C-3 Districts	19
Development in the Limited Industrial (I-1) District	19
Development in the Heavy Industrial (I-2) District	20
Table of Dimensional Standards in the Industrial Districts	20
Review of Plans in the I-1 and I-2 Districts	21
Public Recreation Zone District	21
 
Article VI:	Supplementary Regulations
Section 600:	Lot Exceptions	22
Section 610:	Yard Exceptions	22
Section 620: Height Exceptions	23
Section 630:	Site Grading and Drainage	24
Section 640:	Landscape Buffers, Fences and Hedges	25
Section	650:	Standards and Review Procedures for Community Unit Plans and	

Section	
660:	Commercial-Multi-Family Plans as Conditional Uses
Special Residential Uses	26
28
 

Article VII:	Evaluation and Processing of Conditional Uses
 

Section 700:
Section 710:
Section 720:
 
General Criteria for Evaluation	31
Procedure for Review	31
Specific Criteria to be Considered	32
 
Article VIII:	Off-Street Parking
 

Section 800:
Section 810:
Section 820:
Section 830:
Section 840:
 
General Requirements for Parking 	33
Dimensional Requirements 	33
Design Standards 	34
Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements 	35
Off-Street Loading 	36
 
Article IX:	Signs
Section 900:	Definitions of Terms Peculiar to this Article	38
Section 910:	Sign Limitations	38
Section 920:	Sign Exemptions	39
Section 930:	Permits	39
Section 940:	Signs in the Residential Zone Districts	39
Section 950:	Signs in the Commercial Zone Districts	40
Section 960:	Signs in the Industrial Zone Districts	42
Section 970:	Maintenance	42
Article X:	Non-Conforming Uses
 

Section 1000:
Section 1010:
Section 1020:
Section 1030:
Section 1040:
 
Application 	43
Non-Conforming Lots of Record 	43
Non-Conforming Uses of Lands and Structures 	43
Non-Conforming Structures 	44
Record of Non-Conforming Uses 	45
 
Article XI:	Zoning Hearing Board
Section 1100:	Functions of the Board	46
Section 1110:	Operation of the Board	48
Section 1120:	Hearings Procedure	49
Section 1130:	Zoning Appeals	51
Article XII:	Administration

Section	1200:	Duties of the Zoning Officer	
53
Section	1210:	Building Permits	53
Section	1220:	Occupancy Permits	55
Section	1230:	Enforcement and Penalties	56
Section	1240:	Schedule of Fees	57
Section	1250:	Amendment of the Ordinance	57
Section	1260:	Enactment of the Ordinance	60
 



Article I
PRELilHNARY    PROVISIONS

Section 100	Enacting Clause

Be it ordained and enacted by the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, assembled, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by the authority of the same, that from and after the passage and approval of this Ordinance, the several classes of districts specified herein shall be established an the following regulations shall be in full force and effect.

Section 110	Short Title

This Ordinance shall be known as, and may  be cited as, "The Coraopolis Borough Zoning Ordinance . ·

Section 120	Validity and Conflict

121.	If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for arcy reason held to be invalid or unconstitu ional, such action shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining sections, subsections, clauses or phrases.

122.	Where conflicts exist between this ordinance and other ordinances or regulations of the Borough, or of a higher level of government, or legal restrictive covenants applied by landowners to their property, the ordinance, regulation, or covenant establishing the higher standard for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare shall prevail.

123.	All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with this Zoning Ordinance, inconsistent with its provisions or less restrictive are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.

Section 130	Purposes of the Ordinance This Ordinance is deemed necessary to:
131.	To promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare;
132.	To encourage practical and coordinated community development;
133.	To establish proper density of population in the various districts and provide adequate light, air and amenity therein;

134.	To facilitate the economical provision of public highways and streets, vehicle parking, puclic transportation, water supply, sewage disposal, public schools, parks and open spaces and other public requirements;

135.	To prevent the overcrowding or improper or incompatible development or use of land, to prevent blighting conditions and congestion or hazard in travel and transportation;
136.	To secure safety of health, life and property from fire, flood, panic, noise, noxious fumes, explosion and other dangers;
 
137.	To conserve and stabilize property values through encouragement of the most appropriate uses of land in relation to one another;

138.	To preserve flood plains, steep hillsides and recreation lands from conflict with development and from erosion; and

139.	To facilitate generally, orderly and compatible gro	h and expansion within the Borough and the programming of public improvements.

Section 140 Community Development Objectives

In addition to the purposes listed in Secti n 130, the following specific Community Development Objectives are considered the basis upon which the zone districts and regulations of this Ordinance are established.	These Objectives are a statement of legislative findings of Borough Council and are concerned with land use patterns, density of population, and the location and function of streets and other community facilities and utilities.

141.	The existing municipal tax base should be preserved and enhanced.
142.	The spread of blight should be halted and older housing upgraded.

143.	Vacant or underutilized structures should be recycled for new uses or more fully used.

144.	Existing desirable commercial and industrial land uses should be encouraged to remain, improve and expand, and new business should be invited to establish in the Borough in appropriate locations.

145.	Further development in areas susceptible _to flooding or on steep slope land should be carefully regulated and recreational or open space uses encouraged in these areas.

146.	The private and public renewal of the Borough in the future should result in an inviting and compatible residential, commercial and industrial environment.

147.	Streets should function to move present and expected traffic volumes as safely and smoothly as possible and new development should not interfere with this objective.

Section 150 Filing

This Ordinance, including the zoning map and an,y subsequent amendments to the text and map, shall be on file and may be viewed by  an;y interested party in the Municipal Building during regular business hours.	·
 





Article   II DEJt'Il I'I'IONS

Section 200	General Rules

201.	Words used in the present tense include the future tense;

202.	The particular shall control the general;

203.	The singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular;

204.	The masculine gender includes the feminine;

205.	The vmrd PERSO! or the word. DEVELOFER includes a fim, association, partnership, tr.ist, compan;y or corporation as well as an individual;

206.	The word SP.LLL is mandatory; the word J.;Ay  is permissive;

207.	The word LOT includes "plot", "piece",	"parcel" or "tract•• of land;

208.	The words USED or OCCUPIEJ include the words "intended, arranged, rr.aintained or designed to be used or occupied,"

209.	Words used in this ordinance and not otherwise defined in Section 210 shall have the same meaning as in a standard dictionary.


Section 210	Specific Definitions

211.	access lar.e--t!:e drivewa;y dthin a parking lot designed to provide vehicular connection beh'een parking spaces and a public street.

212.	accessorJ use an activity that supports and is incidental to the
principal use on a lot.	b.r.  accessory use andlor the building it occupies,
if separate from the principal permitted use on the lot, shall not be installed or constructed in advance of the principal pennitted use.
Permitted accessory uses are listed in Sections 410, 510 and 552 of this Ordinance.

213.	alterations, structural--the removal or addition of supporting walls or members in a building including changes that increase or decrease a..riy exterior dimension cf a buildin .

214.	amend.ment--any addition, deletion or revision of any part of the text or z-oning map   officially approved by Borough Council after public hearing.
 
215.	amusement enterprise--premises on which recreation facilities, including but not limited to movie or live entertainment theatre, bowling alleys, dance halls, roller or ice skating rink, racquet ball courts, self defense instruction, bod;y building, pool and billiard halls, electronic games and similar uses are conducted entirely within an enclosed building, and involving no gambling or activities that appeal to the prurient interest
of customers.	Pool and billiard halls shall be premises with more than two (2) tables, while electronic game parlors shall be premises with more than two (2) coin-operated machines with or without a video display.
There shall be at least one hundred fifty (150)   square feet of floor area
per pool table in a pool hall and at least forty (40) square feet of floor area for each machine in an electronic game parlor including aisles at least four (4)  feet wide through the games area leading directly to a marked exit.	An adult supervisor shall be present at all times
while a pool hall or electronic games parlor is in operation, responsible for customer conduct.

216.	apartment--a suite of rooms compr1s1ng a dwelling in a building containing at least one (1)  other dwelling unit, each unit with its own cooking, food storage, bathing and toilet facilities for the excl'.lsive use of the resi­ dents of the unit, and each with access directly or by a common hallway to the outside.

a.	conversion apartment--a dwelling unit established from a portion of an already existing single family dwelling, each dwelling to contain its own cooking, food storage, bathing and toilet facilities and separate means of access to the outside.

b.	efficienc;y apartment--a dwelling unit designed as one room except for bathing and toilet facilities in one room and cooking and food storage in an alcove, closet or attached room.

c.	garage apartment--a dwelling unit located on the second floor of a building the first floor of which is devoted to automobile storage and access to the second floor only.

 
217.









218.




219.





220.
 
auto sales and service--premises devoted to the sales of new automobiles, light trucks, vans, motorcycles or farm and garden equipment, including service facilities completely within an enclosed building for the main­ tenance and repair of products for sale on the property, and including the sale of used autos, light trucks, vans, motorcycles or farm and garden.equipment only as an incidental part of the business.	All parts of the business shall be on the same or contiguous lots.

basement--story partly below grade but with at least half its height above the average level of adjoining ground and therefore capable of being occupied as a dwelling unit or for business purposes.

boarding house--a single family dwellin occupied in addition to the resident family, by   not more than two (2)	individuals who rent rooms in the dwelling and are provide meals for a fee.	If meals are not provided, such a house is a lodging house.

book, card or stationery sales--the selling of books, magazines, cards, novelties or other written or visual materials, including films shown on the premises, provided such materials do not appeal mainly to the prurient interests and/or are patently offensive because they affront contemporary comrn nity standards relating to the description or representation of sexual matters and are utterly without redeeming social value.
 
221.	building--an;r stractare having a permanent roof supported bJ' columns and/or walls bearing upon and coverine an area on the ground.

a.	building area--the arec.. of a lot \<:ithin the setback lines inside whicf. b·'1il:iing construction may occur.

b.	building, enclosed.--a building in which all exterior walls are solid except for windov.'S and. doors.

c.	building heig t the vertical distance between finished grade and the top of a wall parapet if a flat roofed building or halfway between the g'1tter and ridge lines if a sloped roofed building.
d.	building  line--the  setback  distance  from the  street  abutting  a lot behind  which building  constr ction may occur, such minimur.; distance specified. b;y this ordinance for ec:.ch zone district.

e.	building permit--a certificate issued by the z ning Officer attesting that a developer proposal meets all requirements of this ordinance
and authorizir.g construction to proceed.

222.	buffer--a fence, hedge, natural change of grade, or any combination of these that protect residential development from potentially denigrating influences of an adjacent, incompatible land use.	A buffer area is a land surface of a minimum require<i widt:t upon which a baffer element is located.

223.	cellar--a portion of a tuilding having one-half or more of its height below the average grade of the ad.joining ground and. not to be used as an apartment or to contain bedrooms.

224.	centerline--a line parallel i-vith the length of a street and equidistant from the right-of-.,, ay lines on either side of the street.

225.		club or fraternol organi zation--z. non-profit civic, social, ed cational, recreationa.l or cultural organization ctartered under laws of the Commonwe&lth t t not including residential accommod.ations except for the manager and. his far.iily.

226.	com:n'..i.ni t;r facil it ies--dl t::.ose services that support the everyde.y functionine:: of tr.e mur:icircli t;y  c.·tether provided 'cy a pu"blic body, public authority or a non-pr fit community-supported  organization.

227.	cor.1r:1uni ty unit plan--a proposa:: for development of a tract of land allowing  a more  flexible  arrar.gement  of lots or residential  buildings provided  an overall  density  estatlished  by  this ordinance  for the  zone district	containinc the tract  is not  exceeded  and recreation  area,s are  provided  for the  residents.

228.		cond.it ionc:.l use--tr.e use of a propert:v that may be permitted by  the Borough in accordance wit:r, b.rticle VII of this ordinance provided t:tat tte proposed use is listed as a conditional use in the zone district containing the lot and provided the Borough decides that the proposed use on the proposed lot will not d.o·,mgrade adjacent or nearby lots or
cause dangerous ccnuitions in the vicinity.	Conditional uses are listed in Sections 4201    520 1    and 553 of this ordinance.
 
229.	contour--a line connecting all the points that are the same distance aboje or below an established elevation, with each suet line e	idistant
verically from adjacent 1ines 1   this distance being the "contour interval".

230.	corner lot--a lot which a"t:its two (2) or more streets that intersect at one
(1)	or more corners of the lot.	Building setbacks on corner lots shall be
in accordance witt Section 420 of this ordinance.

231.	curative amendment--a proposed revision of this ordinance initiated by a landowner or by the Borough intended to correct a defect in the regulations contended by the initiatin6 party.

232.		cut--earth material excavated on a lot and moved elsewhere as part of a grading operation in connection with development of a lot.

233.		day care center--a facility for the day-time care of pre-school, elderly or disabled persons but including no overnight accommodations.

234.	density--a measure of intensity of residential development, usually the number of dwelling units per acre of land exclusive of public streets and grounds.

235.	department store--a retail sales outlet offering a variety of household, clothing and related goods under one roof, organized into sections offering comparison shopping and including no outdoor sales except as a temporary condition and not in an established parking or truck servicing area.

236.	d.eveloper--any party who erects, expands or alters a structure, subdivides land, changes or paves the land surface, or any or all of these actions.

237.	dwelling--a group of connected rooms or spaces in a building for the residential use of only one (1)  family and containing cooking, food storage, bathing and toilet facilities for the exclusive use of the resident family.

a.	one-fc:.rr.ily detached dv:elling--a dwelling completely surro·J.nded on  all sides by    outdoor open space on the same lot as the dwelling.

b.	two family detached d :elli c;-a detached building containing two dwellin£ units, each entirely separate from the other.

c.	dwelling unit--a d.\-.'elling,  or more often, one of several or many dwellings  in the sa. e building or in the same residential  plan.

d.	multiple  family  dwelling--a  building  cor.taining  three  (3)    or more dwelling units, each >·iith access via common hallwa rs, stairways and in some cases  elevators  to  the outside.
e.	ro\; d>-:elling--a dl:elling that is attached alo:ng one or two (2) common
;:alls to a neighboring d"\\ell ing, has no dwelling above or below it,
and has outdoor open s ace abutting at least the front and rear walls.
 
23 .		ec. tt r.1cver.1cnt  or f:r& ir..g--ti:e rec.rrc:..r .::'= .er:t  of tr.1.0  earth surface O!! e lot 1::y  mechanical  meanc   in  c.ccorC..ance  i:i th  an  approveC:.  plan  in tr..e co·1r2c  cf  C:.eYc:!.cj:r::cr.t  cf  r.  lot.

22S.		fe..r::il;y--:::r:  i:r.ciivicl.l:;;.l  er  a r;ro:J.}  cf  }: r:::or.s  relc:.i8 1::;:;'  lloo6 1    mc..rri&fc or  a·::o1;tion,   or  not   ::iore  tha:r.  it.re.:-   (3j  ur.relc..te.G.   ir:.ivid:cla.ls   livir1£; together   in  t:r.e   sc.r::e   d.\:sl J. ing  ar.it.

240.	fill--ec..rth rnc:terial  collectei else•:;!:er(; c..nd. d.epo:::ited O\'er undist'.lrted. e<:;.rth  as part  of  a c;ra:j.frt':'  o:;:erdion  in cormec:tion v;i tt de\·elop:nent  of
a  lot.

241.	findings--facts  developed  fror::  the  test ir.:0ny   of  «:itnesses  &::1d   conclusions cidcr1:1ine.i 1::,y  t:r.e  £)'.t:..7.ir ir.:: 1:oc3 : c:.::  t!".8  l::.::is for C:.eciciin;;: ar. e.p:te&.l raised. b;r ar?lic<...tion of  t:hs  re :.iirc;r;;.;:,r;t.o.  cf  thic or inc.:r.ce,

242.		floor are2  r<>.tic--tte  tctc.l  f2.oor  c.rec-  of  all floors   in  a 1::uil iin[ relative  to  the  lot  arec.. 1     1·:itr.  the  lot  arec.. beir.r   consi:iered  tte  whole number  one   ( 1).	:i:'loo:- c..rec. s:·.dl ic:cL.i:5.G all v;a:1_ls   &.nd  all space \·:ith a floor to  ceilir15 :r.ei[!-.t  of   s:x  (l) feet  or [TE:2":.er   arid   shall  excbde all  cell r  spec .

243.		focter ca:re--fu11-time cu::toC.:al  re::::;..io!v::i·:: ilit;y for childre:::, er ot!-.er individuals una:cle  to care for themsehes  'rJt.eri  s ch iri<iiviC.u2ls  have beer. place<i by  co:irt orC.er or ur.ier the  c;.s;:.ict:::::  of  a reccc-r.:zei  social  service agency 1  and are rr.aintc.ined ·..inc.er reGl-'lations of the Cor:u;iom\eal t:r..

24!,.		frcntar,e--ths i:idtl:: of  c..  lot  alo:r.:: tl-.E.  st:-eet  tl:at   provide::::   the  prir.cipal access  to  the  lot.	The   front  lot  line  iz  the  line   that is coterminous with the street right-of-\·:a;:; line.

245.		garage,   priva.te--a.n  accessor r  t:.rildin; o : a  re icie:r:tial  lot  that  ma,:.'  be attached   to  a  ch:ellinc;,  or  a  cpace  \!ittir: a  di·:ellinc baild.ir.[	for storin_; vehiclef' opsr&te. · t - the :coEii:.r.t.: of  t:C.e  C:::·ellin,::,  anc not to be  used  as  an  a'.lto  repc.ir  sho.r  except  for s··.lct  \reticles.

24E.	hc.lf-wa,y  house--a  residentic.l  facility thc:.t  provides  a superviseci
ey;,",:irorJT:ent  t.c  ta.2E the -Grc... . :i:io : o: i .: rc.3i:= _:r t  ·cs:;.;ei::r_ i2:stit:.J4:.:c:-.
livi:-,c an:i  ir.::.e:;::ar.:.c:-:t   lh·ir.t':',   a:ii  is  c-.i;-,:iuct ·.  ·Jr.dE:r  rc[,'Ulc.tionc  C'f
the Commonweal tt and the auspices of  a social service agency.

247.	teal tt clut--c:. fe.cilit;y  id€:;. .ed  to  rro\•ijs  ·,:tole::;cr:ie  exE.rcise,  e.tr.letic training  or practice  or pl: rsical  t!:er&.p2· 1   b"Jt  not  includin[ an:>'  activities that  appeal  r.-:c.inly  to  the  pruric:rt  ir.terests.

248.	hearing officer--an imiividual  :::er::ber of  the Zoning l:eG.rinc :Board  :;;pcinted
"ty  the Board  to  l::ear  an::i  provi:le  a decision  on  a  case before  t e l'oe:.rd,
such  decicior. a;?ealc:.l:li:.  to  ttG :Doc:.rG.  c.  a d.cle:.

245.	ho:ne  occupc::.tior:--a lusir,es:: cperc..ted ::itJ-.ir. 2  or-.e or t\·:o-fc:.:-::il ;  d;·dlir..::;
t·1il ding l;y  tr.e  res} ·:iei t::-  tr.erec:t',   ir:':c.:.·:i::1'.:.  r.c   exte:-icr  c!:c.:-:ces  tc  t!:e
di·;ellinE-;'s ar:i::earar.ce ar:a. no-i; crec:tir.::: r.·,1isr.::1ce or con':,'estior; conditior;s in  the  neic!:.tcrtood.  v:hcre  it  is locc.te .
 
250 •	hor:ie  Ot:r.erC 1     i?..SSOCi<::.tion--<:'"l   Crtanization  Of   all  the  prcpert;y   01::ners   in a   comrr:unity    unit   or  r.r..ilti-far.iil:.r    de\·elopr.:ent    plan   with    responsibility
tc m int ir. al ttc:e	rea of, an facilities withir. the plar. held ir.
conr:1011 t : t E: :;::rc;,ert;; Oi."Y.ers  if other than the developer or hii::  successors.

2:; 1.		loo.din[' area--a portior. of a lot occupied by multiple famil;r apartment buildincs,  co  ercial  or  incuEtrial  uses  intended  for  the  use  of  servicine vehicles    exclusively.

2.		lot--a. tract  of  land  sur:f'c.ce  at·-ttting  a  pu'tlic  street,  such  tract  ir. one ovmership  and s:irro·lr:de':i t,;· c:.  boundarJ that closes on itself.

25 .	a.	lot area--c;.11 the crcunci surface measured  1:ithir. the perimeter
line:: of  2 lot.

b.		lot  coverc..:e--tr.E:  ma..xif:"'..l17l   a.rec. within  the  setback  lines  in  a  lot that mcy 1:e occ:i.r;ie ! ty build.in.cs.

c.	lot  line--the  bc·.ln::!.ar:·  lir.e,  or part  of  such  line,  describing the perimeter of  a  let.	?!:e  fro 1t  lot line  acuto  the  street  to  v!hich the  lot ho:.:::   access  ani -;;he  rear let line  is the ·ooundary  most distant  fro::;  thE:  front  lot  lir.e.

d.	lot 1dcith--the ci.istance a.cross a lot l':leasured alone the front setback  1ine bet·,:eer. fr.e. si-::e lot  lines.

e.	lot  of  record-a  lot  of  ler.al  record  on file 1dtt. the Allegheny
Count · Recorder  of  Dee:is,  }rlrsu.ant  with  statutes eovernin.s  recording.

253.	mc:.n-J.facturinr;  ;-rocE:ss--tte  cre,:.tion  of  a marketable  product  from  rav: materials   or  pc.rtially   cor::pleteci  assemllies   prepared   elsewhere   with value adtleti as a res·..ilt  oi' t:te proceio:s.

254.	mobile :bo!:le--a sin(:.. e f;;;.r.:::.ly  d1·:elline man:1facture<i elsei-;here in one or two  s:tr-.ic-tura.112  inte;re.1 section::; that  cc;.n  be  tm·;ed  to  a lot or. its o;.m wheels:  and c.rrive::: rc.c:.c,::  for occupancy once the sections (if a  dou1:1e-wide)  are  joine:.:  and. attachment   is made  to  sewer  and  water
systems,  b'J.t  ca:r.e:.Ue  of  l.dnc later  disascemtled  and towed  to  a  second
lot.

255.	non-cor:!'or:::ic:c  lr"t--c:.  lot  rcc;;,:rdci  :prior  to  adoption  of   this ordinance co:.itaining  less  area  and. 'or  le<:::s   frontage  or  1-:id.th  than  required   for tl:e zone iistrict i:r. 1::-.:c::-. tr.c let is loc:::.teci.

256.	non-conforr..inc structure--a str-..tc :ire lasfully exii=ting prior to adoption of  ttis orC.ina!:ce  b·-<t  gr <: er  ir. t.eib'ht,  or located.  in whole  er in part closer to one or- mo::-e  lot li:::e::::  ttan permitted  by the setback ancllor heigl':t  re[ulatio::.s  goverr.:i::.:;  C.e\'elopr::ent   in the  zone  district where  the let  is  locrtd.

257.	non-conforr..fr.,: ·lse--<.:. use of  a let, or a portior: of  a lot 1   or of  e structure  or  part  of  a  ztr·.i.ct-.i:re   la\d;illy  existing  prior  to  adoption of  tr.is or:iir:c..r:ce  b" : not  perr.-.:.ttec.  b2r  rig:tt  or as a conditional  'J.Se in  the  zo:r.e  ciistrict  where  tl:e  lot  is  located.
 
258.	nursing home--a facility devoted to the long term skilled care of bed­ ridden patients, but not including hospital services.

a.	convalescent home--implies short term care for persons recovering from serious illnesses before returning to their homes.

b.	retirement home--provides long term residence for elderly persons requiring minimum care but may include communal dining.	Apartments in a retirement home shall be for not more.than two (2) individuals each, one of which shall be at lea.st 65 years old.

259. occupancy perrnit--a certificate issued by the zoning officer attesting that the construction for which a building permit has been issued has
been completed in accordance with the building permit and may be occupied,
or attesting that a proposed new occupancy or use on a lot, but not requiring
a building permit, is a permitted use or has been approved as a conditional use.

260.	open space--the area of a lot to be left permanently unoccupied by  buildings.

261.	ornamental fence or wall a vertical structure at least fifty (50) percent of the surface of which is opacs,.ue and the surface is enhanced by a pattern, color and/or texture or the use of living plants to soften the stark effect of an untreated fence or wall, but not including any advertising except a sign in accordance with this ordinance.

262.	parking, required--the minimum number of parking spaces to be provided in support of an activity on the same lot, or guaranteed in a nearby location, in accordance with this ordinance.

a.	parking lot--an area wholly outside any public street right-of-way constructed to accommodate the storage of vehicles and connected to a public street or streets by a driveway or access lane.

b.	parking space--an area within a parking lot intended for the storage of one (1)vehicle and adjacent to an access lane.

263.	permitted use--an activity that is expressly allowed by right as the principal use of a lot because the lot is located in a zone district where the activity or use is permitted.

264.	principal use of a structure or lot the main use to which a structure or lot is to be devoted, making all other activity on the lot accessory to the main use.

265.	public hearing--an official meeting called by   Borough Council, the Planning Commission or the Zoning Hearing Board for the purpose of taking testimony from all parties having an interest in the matter being heard, as a basis for the calling body to make a decision at a later time.

266.	right-of-way--a strip of land over which passage is guaranteed, either to the public for general or restricted vehicular and/or pedestrian passage, or to utilities as an easement for the passage and maintenance of segments of a distribution er collection system.
 
267.	service statior.--a comr.-iercial facility providing for the daily maintenance and supply of motor vehicles but not including auto body repair and refinishing, encine overt.&ul, or the accumulation of discarded parts or damaged vehicles on the premises.

268.	setback--the minimum distance that a building must be held back from an adjacent lot line, depending on the zone district in which the lot is located.	The setback line is a line within a lot parallel to an adjacent property line and distant from it the setback or yard depth required in the zone district containing the lot.	The front setback line is parallel to the front lot line and distant from it the depth
of the front ;rard.	The side and rear setback lines are similarly situated.

269.	storJ--the vertical dimension beh:een a building floor and the floor of the level next above or next belm·:, when the dimension between floors
is at least six (6) feet, or if no floor is above, then the ceiling above.	Basements but not cellars shall be counted as stories.

270.	street--the vehicular and pedestrian access to the lots that abut it, connecting witt other streets to provide circulation throughout the Borough.	A street sr.all be \.;ithin a right-of-way more than twenty (20) feet wide.		Streets of less width shall be considered alleys and may
not be the only access to a lot.	A public street is one maintained by the Borough or the Commom:eal th.

271.	structure--any permanent man-made construction in, on or over the ground surface and attached to the ground but not including surfaces treated for vehicular or pedestric.n passage.

272.	temporary building--a str- cture erected for a prescribed time period, to be removed from the lot at the end of the time period.

273•	tract--a lot or property of real estate in one ownership with a boundary that closes on itself described by bearings and distances.

274•	undisturbed earth--statilized ground surface that h s not been altered for at least t·:ro  (2);rears prior to ariy grading operations upon it.

275.	variance--a grar.t by  the Zoni!1t:; !!earing Board permitting a lot oi-mer to build on his lot not wholly in accordance with this ordinance because the 3oard finds th&t strict	onforma.. ce would be a hardship not created by the owner, depriving him rec.sonable use of the lot, and that
specific variations in the rec;:uirements that would normally apply will
not detrimentally affect abutting :;iroperties or the public.

276.	yard--the area of a lot betvreen lot lines and adjacent parallel setback lines in the let, the yard depth being specified for front, side and rear yards in each zoninf district.	h thin yard areas no permanent roofed str ct ra may be built.

a.	yard deptr.--the horizontal ciistance between a lot line and the parallel setback line in the property •



....


/0
 
b.	yard, front--t!le area of a lot beh1een the front lot line abutting tte street to which the lot has access and the front setback line, ar..d extending between the side lot lines.

c.	yard, rear--the area of a lot bet een the rear lot line and rear setback line and extending bettveen the side lot lines.

d.	yard, side--tt_e area of a lot between the side lot lines and side setback 1ines on eacl: side of the lot and extencling between the  front and rear yards.

e.	yard, required--the minimu depth of open space to be left on the front, side andlor rear of a lot between any lot line and the adjacent parallel building line.

277.	zoning district--a contiguous area of land on all parts of which the same uniform zor.ing controls apply.

278.	zoning district boundary--the perimeter line completely enclosing a zoning district.

279.	Zonine Eearing ?oard--a body appointed by Borough Council to examine and decide appeals for relief from strict conformance to this Ordinance or relief from a decision of the Zoning Officer and to hear testimony regarding the v.s.lidity of any regi.l.ldions upon d.evelopment in the Borough.

280.		zoning map--the  official	lan of zoning districts in the Borough showing precisely the to·..mdaries and title of each zoning district, such map a part of this Ordinar.ce.

281.	Zoning Officer--a person retained by the Borough to enforce the reg11lations of this Ordinance, ...-ith power to issue permits, to halt illegal constr ction, and to interpret literally the meaning of the vario s sections of the zoning ordinance subject to appeal to the Zoning Hearing ?oard.
 

Article III ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS


Section 300	Official Zoning Map

301.	The Borough is hereby divided into zones, or districts, as shovm on the Official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon,
is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.

302.	The ten (10) zone districts delineated on the Map are: R-1 .One Family Dwelling District;
R-2	One Family Dwelling District;
R-3	Two Family Dwelling District;
R-4	Two Family Dwelling District;
R-5	Multiple Family Dwelling District;
C-2	Central Business Commercial District;
C-3	Planned Shopping Commercial District;
I-1	Limited Industrial District
I-2	Heavy Industrial District;
P	Public Recreation District.

303.	No changes of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance.	Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance and punishable as provided under Section 1230 of this Ordinance.

304.	The Official Zoning Map, which shall be located in the Borough Office, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the Borough.

305.	Any amendments legally adopted to change any  district boundaries of the Official Zoning Map shall be noted on such map by ordinance number and date of adoption of the amendment.	The Official Zoning Map shall be changed to reflect the amendment within thirty (30) days of adoption.

306.	Interpretation of Zone Boundaries
306.1	Boundaries indicated as appearing to follow the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed as following such centerlines;

306.2	Boundaries indicated as appearing to follow property lines shall be construed as following such property lines;

306.3	Boundaries indicated as appearing to follow Borough limits shall be construed as following Borough limits.

306.4	Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
 

306 .5   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, or other boQies of water, shall be construed
as moving with the actual body of water and following the center­ lines thereof unless a surveyed Borough boundary governs the edge of the zoning district;

306.6	Boundaries indicated as parallel to a highway, property line or railroad shall be construed to be parallel thereto and at such a distance from the centerline indicated on the Map;

306.7	Boundaries whose location cannot be determined by any  of the above tests may be measured using the seale of the Official Zoning Map.

307.	Conflicts arising from interpretation - When there is disagreement on the location of zone district boundaries, a decision shall be rendered by the Zoning Officer, with appeal from his decision made to the Zoning Hearing Board.

Section 310	Application of District Regulations

311.	The regulations established by this Ordinance within each district shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land.

312.	No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure, or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified in this Ordinance for the district in which it is located, or unless a variance has been properly granted.

313.	Ho building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
313.	To exceed the height; .
313.2	To accommodate or house a greater number of families;

313.3	To occu y a greater percentage of lot area;
313.4	To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other cpen spaces than herein required; or in any   other manner contrer;>' to the provisions of this Ordinance.

314.	No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required adjacent to or iL connection with any  building for compliance with this Ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard,
open space, or off-street parking or loading space	similarly required
for any other building.

315.	No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall
be reduced in dimension Ol' area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein.	Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance
shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Ordinance.

316.	Railroad lines and public utility transmission lines and their supporting members, but not including above-ground buildings, shall not be required to be located on a lot, nor be held to reduce yard dimensions for other buildings on a lot.
 



317.	All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the Borough shall be placed in the R-1 One Family Dwelling District until the Planning Commission has made a thorough study of the newly annexed area, reported
its recommendations to the Borough Council, and Council has adopted a
final zoning district classification.	This study and report by the Planning Commission shall be made within six (6)   months of the time
of annexation.

318.	Once in each calendar year, not later than May .1,  the Planning Commission shall review the lists of permitted, accessory, conditional and/or special exception uses for each zone district, as well as the applicable bulk and dimensional requirements, and shall prepare for the review of Council a written statement of any proposed changes to enhance healthy growth and change in the Borough.	At least once annually the Commission shall
review the zoning map and shall in writing inform Council of any suggested revisions in zoning district boundaries or whether any   changes should be made.
 
Article IV
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE IN RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS

Section 400	Permitted Uses:
401.	One family detached dwelling:	R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zone districts;
402.	Temporary building and use for an approved construction project over a period
not exceeding one (1)year:	R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zone districts;
403.	Conversion apartment:	R-3 and R-4 zone districts;
404.	Efficiency apartment:	R-3 and R-4 zone districts;
405.	Two family detached dwelling:	R-3, R-4 and R-5 zone districts;
406.	Garage apartment:	R-4 zone district;
407.	Multiple-family dwelling:	R-5 zone district;	
408.	Row dwelling with not more than six (6)units in one building:	R-5 zone district.

Section 410	Accessory Uses
411.	Private garage and/or off-street parking area;
412.	Children's playhouse, garden equipment shed, and/or private greenhouse;
413.	Private swimming pool (see Ordinance 1480 or 1974) and/or court game area;
414.	Housing for domestic pets but not including the boarding or raising of pets
for a profit;
415.	Apartment over garage	(see section 666);
416.	Storage of boats, boat trailers and unoccupied house trailers owned by
residents of the dwelling;
417.	Fence or ornamental wall	(see section 640);
418.	Signs	(see section 940);
419.	Lodgers. or boarders not exceeding two (2) in a one-family detached dwelling.

Section 420	Conditional Uses
421.	Public, parochial or private school serving grades kindergarten through twelve
and accredited by the Commonwealth:	R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 zone districts;
422.	Church or similar place of worship if fronting on a street with a paved width
of at least thirty (30) feet:	R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 zone districts;
423.	Convant, monastery, rectory, or parish house in conjunction with a church or
similar place of worship on the same premises or nearby:	R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zone districts;
424.	Community unit plan	(see section 651):	R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zone districts;
425.	Commercial--multi-family dwelling plan	(see section 652) R-5 zone district;
426.	Home occupation	(see section 661) R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zone districts;
427.	Nursing, convalescent or retirement home	(see section 669) R-5 zone district;
428.	D care center	(see section 663) R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 zone districts;
429.	Foster care home or half-w house	(see section 664) R-3, R-4, R-5 and R-6 zone districts;
430.	Boarding or lodging home with not more than five (5)boarders or lodgers (see section 662) R-5 zone district;
431.	Fraternity or sorority house:	R-5 zone district;
432.	Public service facilities provided by any  level of government, a public utility
or a non-profit agency supported in whole or in part by public funds:	R-1,
R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zone districts;
433.	Parking lots to serve multiple family dwellings, public facilities, or uses in
adjacent commercial zone districts:	R-3, R-4 and R-5 zone districts.
 
Section 440	Table of Dimensional Standards in the Residential Districts

Dash means use is not permitted;	"none" means there is no requirement
 

441.	Maximum Height	(feet) Principal Building
Number of Stories Accessory Building
 
R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	R-5
 


442.	Minimum Lot Area	{Square	feet)	
	One-family Dwelling		8,700	6,ooo 3,600	3,600	8,700
	Two-family Dwelling			5,000	5,000	8,700
	Multiple-family Dwelling
Row Dwelling Building					none
10,890
	Individual Row Dwelling					2,700

443.	Minimum Lot Frontage	(feet) One-family Dwelling	
601	

50'	

30'	
30'	

50•.
	Two-family Dwelling			30'	30t	50'
	Multiple-family Dwelling					none
	Row Dwelling Building					751
	Individual Row Dwelling					161
 

444. Minimum Front Yard Depth	(feet) All Dwellings except
Multiple-family Dwellings

445.	Minimum Side Yard Depth	(feet) Interior lots, each yard Corner lots, abutting street
Lot with less than Minimum Frontage Percent of Lot Width, Each Yard Absolute Minimum Side Yard
 


35'



10'
30'
 


35'



8•
201

15%
5'
 


20'




5'
10 I

17%
2'
 


20 1



5'
10I

17%
2'
 


20 1
none


101
20'

17%
5'
 

446.	Minimum Rear Yard Depth	(feet)	
	Greater of Depth in Feet or Percent of Lot Depth		35'
20%	35'
2o%	20 1
2o%	20 1
20%	25'
	Accessory buildings (see section	613)					

447.	
Maximum Lot Coverage
All Buildings as Percent of Lot Area	

35%	

35%	

35%
	Multiple Family Dwelling			40%
	Total Floor Area to Lot Area Ratio			
	Multiple Family Dwelling			4
448.













:'c'
 
Article V
PROVISIONS   APPLICABLE   IN  OTHEH   ZONE  DISTRICTS


 
Section 500	Permitted Uses in Commercial Districts

*see definition section

.Amusement establishment* Appliance store
Automobile sales and service* Bakery shop
Bank or other financial institution
Barber shop
Beauty shop
Book, card or stationery sales*
Camera and photo supply store
Candy and/or ice cream store
Club or similar service or fraternal organization*
Delicatessen Department store* Drug store
Dry cleaning pick-up shop,
where cleaning is done elsewhere
Florist
1',ood, fruit and/or vegetable store
Furniture store
Garden supply store and/or plant materials sales
Gift shop
Hardware store
Health club*
Hobby shop
Laundry self-service
Liquor store
Meat market
Offices, business or professional
Office equipment sales
Parking lot or parking garage
Plumbing, heating or electrical contractor showroom
Restaurant, except drive-thru service
Restaurant with drive-thru service Service station and/or car wash* Shoe repair shop
Tailor, milliner or custom dressmaker shop
Tavern licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages
'11obacco store
Watch and jewelry sales and repair
 


Zone District Permitted

C-3
C-2	C-3
C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C 3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3

C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-3
C-2	C-3
C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-3
C-2	C-3
C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-3
C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
C-2	C-3
 













17
 

Section 510 Accessory Uses in Commercial Districts

511. Apartment of the owner of the building, operator of the business, or an
employee-caretaker;
512. Apartments on the second and/or third floor of a building with commercial uses on the ground floor, each apartment with not less than 400 square
feet of floor area;
513. Off-street parking area	(see section 833);
514. Off-street truck servicing area	(see section 840);
515. Fence or ornamental wall	(see section 640);
516. Signs	(see  section 950).

Section 520	Conditional Uses in Commercial Districts

521.	In the C-2 zone district uses similar to those listed as permitted in that district and compatible with central business district activity;
522.	In the C-3 zone district uses similar to those listed as permitted in that district;
523.	Community unit plan (see section 651.2) in the C-3 zone district;
524. Newstand or novelty sales (see section 220) in the C-2 and C-3 zone districts.

Section 530	Table of Dimensional Standards in the Commercial Districts "none" means there is no requirement
 

531. Maximum Hei ht	(feet) Principal building
Number of stories
532. Minimum Lot Area	(square feet)
533. Minimum Front Yard Depth (feet)
534.  Minimum Side Yard Depth	(feet) Abutting a residential zone district
Width of planted buffer strip
535. Minimum Rear Yard Depth	(feet) Abutting a residential zone district
Width of planted buffer strip
536. Maximum Lot Coverage
All Buildings as Percent of Total Lot Area
 
C-2	C-3

none	none
none	none

none	none
none	35'
none	none
none	50'
none	10'

12'	none
12'	50I
none	10'


none	40%
 












I   ,
 
Section	540 Review of PlanE in the C-2 and C-3 Districts
 
541.



542.
 

All commercial uses, except for a service station, shall be conducted wholly id thir. o.n enclosed building.	Portions of the property not covered  by building£  or  paved   shall  be  planted in grass or other ground cover and maintained.
Arzy   developer proposing to construct a new building or expand an
existing building shall piuvide the Planning Commission a scaled plan of his development showing
542.1	The bearings and distances of all lot lines;
542.2	The location and use of existing and/or proposed buildings or
additions, with distances to property lines as well as
building height noted;
542.3	Location of  right-of-was and curb lines and curb cuts abutting
the prope:rt;y;
542.4	Arrangement of parking spaces and truck servicing areas on ths
lot and internal vehicular circulation;
542.5	Location of any earthmoving and of the storm water drainage
systemj
 
542.6
542.7
542.8
 
Sidewalks,   wallsr   or  fences  on the property;
Landscape plan with particular attention to required buffer areas;
The location of signst including a sketch of each sign showing
its height, width and support;
 

543.


544.



545.
 
542.9	The  locc..tion,  direction and  shielding of  outdoor  lighting.
The Flannir.g Commission may waive inappropriate parts of the plan requirements when no off-street parking, landscaping an lor other exterior features are a part of the proposal.
The Commission shall review the submission at its next meeting relative to compliance with this Ordinance, the likely impact of the proposal upon traffic patterns  on adjacent streets, and provisions for protecting abutting residentially zoned properties.
The Commission shall render a decision to approve the proposal as
pre entP-d, arprove it with specific conditions or reject it for specific deficiencies within 95 da;ys of first reviewing the plan. The developer, if aggrieved by  the Commission's decision, may appeal
to Borough Council	nich may uphold the Commission's decision or
overturn it.
 

Section	550	Development in the Limited Industrial (I-1) District
551. Permitted Jsee
Animal hospital
Auto repair garage
Bakery
Buildir.g materials business
Carper.ter or cabinet-ma.kir.g shop
Clothing manufacture
Contractor's storage yard
:;)c.ir;y or milk ciiEt:ribution plant
Dry-cleaning plant
Feed gra.in business
Fruit  C ".lr.ing  and  packing
Ice plant or cold storage Laundry
 
Machine shop
Optical good factory
Paper box factOTJ'
Printing, publishing and/or engraving
Research and development organization Sheet metal shop
Steel fabrication
Storage firm Trucking terminal Welding shop Wholesale business

552.	Accessory Uses

Off-street parking lots (see section 834);
Off-street truck servicing areas (see section 840); Railroad sidings;
Outdoor storage of raw materials and/or finished products if screened from adjacent streets and properties;
Walls, fences and landscaping;
Offices of the business on the same property;
Incidental retail sale of products made on the premises;
Signs (see section 960).

553.	Conditional Uses

Any light manufacturing plant, business that sells principally to industry, or non-retail business similar to, and compatible with, the uses that are permitted.

Section 560	Development in the Heavy Industrial (I-2) District

561.	Permitted Uses
Any manufacturing process
562.	Accessory Uses
Any allowed in the limited industrial (I-1) district
563.	Conditional Uses None.

 
Section 570	Table of Dimensional Standards in the Industrial Districts

571.	Maximum Height (feet) Principal building
Number of stories
572.	Minimum Lot Area
573.	Minimum Front Yard Depth (feet)
574.	Minimum Side or Rear Yard Depth (feet) Abutting a street
Abutting a residential zone district
Abutting a railroad siding
575.	Buffer screens (see section 640)
Along street to screen parking and storage areas
Minimum width of planted area
Along property line abutting a residential district
or directly across a street from a residential district
Minimum width of lanted area
Minimum hei ht	mature he ·e fence or wall)
Maximum hei ht	mature hed e	fence or wall)
 


I-1	I-2

40'	none
3	none
none	none
50'	50'
15'	15'
50'	50'
40'	40'
none	none


5'	5'


8•	8•
6•	6•
8•	8'
 
Section	580	heview of Plans in the I-1 and I-? Districts
581. All industrial processes shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building except that storage of raw materials and/ or finished products may occur outside if  fully screened from adjacent streets and residentially   zoned  properties.	All  portions  of  an industrial
property not covered by buildings or paved shall be planted in grass or other ground cover a d maintained thereafter.
582. Any developer proposing to  construct  a new building or expand an
existing building  shall provide the Planning Commission a scaled
plan  showing:
575.1	The bearings and distances of all lot lines;
575.2	2	The  location  and  use  of  existing  and/or  proposed  buildings or  aciditions  with  distances  to  property  lines  as  well  as
heict1t  of  each building  noted;
582.3 Arrangement  of  parkine sp ces and truck  servicing areas on the property,   internEt.l  vehicular  circulation  and  curb  cuts;
582.4	Location  of  c:.n:y  eart:r...rr.oving,  elernents  of  the  storm  drainage system,   walls,    fences,    signs,   outdoor   lighting  and   land­ scaping,   Hith   particular   attention   Lo    recruired   buffer   areaGj
582.5	Statement by the developer of the type of industrial operations to be   carried. on \!i thin hi:::: proposeu. development or addition, with specific   reference  to  possible  emission  of  smoke,  dust,
fumes,  g<:w,  odors, noise or vibrations discernable beyond the property's   boundaries.
583. The Planning Commission may >-Jaive  inappropriate parts of the plan requirements   in  any  particular   submission.
584. ;I'he Corrunission shall review the submission c:.t  its next meeting relative to  compliance  with  this Ord.irmnce,  impact  upon  the  environment  in the
surroundirl0 area,  and provisions  for bufferinc; abutting residentially zoned prQperties.
585, 'I'he Commission shall render a decision to approve the proposal as presented,  approve  it with  specific conditions or reject  it for
specific  deficiencies  within  95 days of  first reviewing the plan. The developer,  if agcrieved by the Commission's decision, may  appeal
to Borough Council which mcy uphold the Commission's decision or overturn   it.

Section	590	Publl.c  Recreation  Zone  District
591. Permitted  Uses
591.1	Recreational  uses  open  to  and  operated  for  the  public;
r	91.2 Public  service  facilities.
2. Accessory Uses
592.1	Maintenance  facilities but  not   including  outdoor  storage of   equipment  or materials j.
592.2	Rest  rooms,  off-street  parking areas  and  food service facilities  in  support  of  recreational  uses  and open only when  the  recreational  uses  are  in operation.
593. Conditional  Uses
	None
594. Dimensional  standards
	No  building  shall  be  closer  than  twenty  (20)  feet  to  a
street right-of-way;
594.2	No  structure  shall  exceed  thirty-five  (35)  feet  in height.




,:
,.._   I
 
Article VI
SUPPLEMENTARY    REGULATIONS

Section 600	Lot Exceptions

601.	Lots of Record with Inadequate Area or Frontage
A lot legally recorded prior to adoption of this ordinance and containing
less area and/or having less lot frontage on a public street than required as a minimum for the zone district in which the lot is located, mcy be developed for any use permitted in the zone district without application being made for a variance provided the lot does not abut other properties in the same ownership and no reduction in depth of front, side or rear yards is required to accommodate the proposed development.

602.	Maximum Number of Principal Structures on a Lot
No more than one (1) principal structure, to be occupied by the principal
permitted use, shall be constructed on an undivided lot except for the
following:
	Industrial buildings complex;
	Community unit plan {see section 651); and
	A garage apartment in the R-4 zone district limited to one (1)
apartment per lot.
In all other cases additional structureo on the lot shall be considered as
accessory structures and mcy contain no dwellings.

603.	Lot Measurement
	Lot width shall be measured along the front yard setback line
between the side lot lines.
	Lot depth shall be measured between the center of the front lot line
and the center of the lot line furthest from the front lot line.

604.	Rear Lot
The Planning Commission mcy approve establishment of a rear lot whose only
access to a public street is a drivewcy at least twenty (20) feet wide,
provided that the area of the drivewcy is not included in calculating the rear lot or the remainder lot area and both lots meet all requirements of section 440.	The portion of the rear lot abutting the driveway shall be consi ered the front yard of the lot for purposes of locating a dwelling on the lot.

Section 610	Yard Exceptions

611. Front Yard Setback Line on Streets Partially Developed
When a vacant lot occurs between two (2) developed lots and the buildings on those lots are set forward of the front yard setback line applicable in
the zone district, development on the vacant lot may be set back from its
front lot line the average of the setbacks of the two developed lots.	If a lot on one side of a vacant lot contains a building set forward of the minimum front yard depth that applies in the zone district, development on the vacant lot mcy be set back from its front lot line the average of the setback of the adjacent building and the minimum front yard depth required for the zone district.
 
612. Building Projections Permitted in Required Yards
	A building may be set on its lot so that the average of the nearest and most rerr:cte points of a wall adjacent to a side lot line is no less than the minimum side yard depth required in the zone district containing the lot and the nearest point is no less than one-half the minimum side yard depth.	The same may apply to front or rear building walls relative to front or rear lot lines except that the nearest point of such wall to an adjacent front or rear lot line shall be not more than fifteen (15) percent less than the minimum front or rear yard depth.
	Chimneys, eaves, cornices, fire escapes, bay windows, balconies or
covered porches shall extend not more than two (2) feet into any
required yard on a lot.
	Driveways, uncovered patios or porches, parking areas and walkways shall
be located not less than two (2) feet from any  side or rear lot line
except for access to public streets, unless adjacent property owners
agree in writing that driveways, walkways, uncovered patios or parking areas may abut their mutual property line.
	All required yard areas for their full depth shall be open to the sky
except as noted in the preceding paragraphs of this section.
	For purposes of this section balconies shall be considered as supported
by a building and not touching the ground, porches as raised above the
surrounding ground level but not supported by a building, and patios as paved surfaces at ground level.

613. Setback and Yard Coverage of Accessory Buildings
	Accessory buildings not attached to the principal building on a lot shall be set back from a rear lot line not less than the minimum side yard depth for the zone district containing the lot.
	Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of
the rear yard area of the lot on which they are located.	Any accessory
stYucture built into the ground or not projecting at any point more
than two (2) feet above ground level shall not be included for purposes of this calculation.
	Where the rear yard of a lot abuts a public street, one-half the street
width may be included as part of the rear yard for purposes of rear
yard depth and area calculations except that no structure may extend into a public right-of-way and no garage may be within ten (10) feet of a rear street if the doors face the street.

Section 620 Height Exceptions
 
621.






622.




623.
 

Meas'..lrement of Height
Height shall be measured as the vertical distance along the wall of a structure between the average of the highest and lowest elevations at finished grade on the front or rear wall, whichever has the lower ground elevations, and the top of the parapet wall on a flat roof building, or halfway between the eave and ridge on the highest portion of the structure on a sloped roof building.

Height Exceptions
Chimneys, exhaust  stacks, ch'..lrch  steeples, flagpoles, water tanks, roof­
mounted air handling equipment and communications equipment meeting Federal
Communications Commission requirements shall be exempt from height regulations.

An ' struct1..lre exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height shall not be permitted for erection until the Allegheny County Department of Aviation has approved the construction as it may affect airplane traffic safety at Greater Pittsburgh
Airport.
 
,.., :;
,I.-·
 

Section 630	Site Grading and Drainage

631.	Site Grading

	Earth movement shall result in finished grades that do not exceed two
(2)horizontal to one (1)vertical unless a report prepared by a
professional engineer stipulates that specific steeper slopes in a
particular location will not compromise the stability of the completed
slope or areas above or below it, or threaten adjacent streets or property.
	Top soil and all vegetation existing on the area to be graded shall be
removed prior to grading.	Top soil shall be stockpiled for later return to the new slope and protected from storm water run-off.
	Graded slopes shall be planted with a fast-catching grass cover as
soon as grading is completed and protected by burlap or equivalent
covering until the grass is established.	'
	Where fill is used it shall be clean fill and placed in layers not exceeding eight (8)   inches in depth, thoroughly compacted, and keyed in to undisturbed earth at the edges of the fill.
	No grading shall be permitted except as part of a permitted construction project.
	Where a location off-site in the Borough is used to dump excess cut or borrow fill for an approved project, the off-site loca ion shall also be· a permitted construction project.

632.	Storm Drainage
 

632.1




632.2







632.3
 

Storm water shall not be permitted, as a result of development under­ taken after adoption of this ordinance, to collect upon any property, or to pass from one property to another in a concentrated flow without
benefit of a legal easement, or to cross a public street on the surface. In the case of a development in which the total of the building construction and paved surfaces on the site exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet, the developer shall provide, as part of his design, storm
water retention measures designed to hold the flow from the one-hundred (100) year storm of record (5.0 inches in 24 hours) for release at the five (5)  year storm of record rate (3.3 inches in 24 hours).	Rooftops,
parking lots and retention basins ma,y be used to satisfy the requirement.
In designing the storm drainage system the developer's engineer shall
use the publication "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds", technical release No. 55, U.S. Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, January, 1975, and as may be amended, and should consult the Allegheny County office of the Soil Conservation Service before developing his
storm drainage plan.
 

633.	Site Restoration Bond

	Council may require a developer, after receiving recommendations from the Borough Engineer, to provide a site restoration bond or other security payable to the Borough to guarantee that grading and drainage work approved in the development plan are completed.	The bond shall
be acceptable to the Borough Solicitor and shall be for one hundred ten
percent (110%) of the cost of the work as determined by the Borough
Engineer, plus ten percent (10%) for each year after the first anniversary of the bond that the work will be extended.	The stipulation that a site restoration bond will be required shall appear on the pennit authorizing the work.
 

	Council may invoke the conditions of the bond or other security if the developer fails to complete the work within the time limit
established in the bond, or an extension granted by Council. Proceeds from the bond may only be used to complete the work. left undone or not done in a satisfactory manner in the opinion of the Borough Engineer.

Section 640	Landscape Buffers, Fences and Hedges

641. Fences, hedges and or walls may be placed along lot lines provided they do not exceed four (4) feet in height if along a street right-of-way line or along a side lot line forward of the face of the building on the lot, and do not exceed six (6)   feet in height in all other cases.	Fences and walls shall be main­
tained in good repair and hedges trimmed to keep them within the height limitations.

642.		In the event a residence exists on an adjacent lot less than six (6) feet from the common lot line, a fence, hedge or wall along the line shall not exceed in height the horizontal distance between the residence and property line or
hedge for the full length of the residence.
643.	Planted buffer strips where required to screen residential zone \iistricts from adjacent commercial or industrial zones(see sections 530 and 570) or to screen a parking area serving a multi-family development from adjacent one-family or
two-family dwellings (see section 826) shall be at least fifty ('.Jo)  percent
opaque when viewed at ground level for their entire length.	Hedge plantings shall be at least four (4) feet high when installed.	The full width of the buffer shall be planted in grass or other ground cover and maintained.
644. The height of fences, hedges and walls shall be measured along the property lines where they are installed or along the inner edge of the sidewalk, or, if no sidewalk exists, along a street right-of-way line.

645.		Where changes of grade occur along a zone boundary or edge of a parking lot, or natural or existing planting or a building are already present there, the Planning Commission may recommend and Council approve adjustments to the screening requirements to fit the circumstances.

646.	At street corners fences, hedges and walls shall be set back at least twenty­ five (25)   feet from the point of intersection of the street curb lines, creating an open triangular area whose sides are at least twenty-five (25)   feet long.
The Zoning Officer may order a fence, hedge or wall removed or a hedge trimmed in a front or side yard when such obstruction clearly interferes with traffic safety on streets abutting the lot.

647.	A security fence protecting any  commercial, industrial, public or semi-public property may be extended to ten (10) feet in height provided any portions more than eight (8)  feet high are chain link-type metal fencing.

648. Any   outdoor swimming pool, defined as a container with water depth greater than eighteen (18) inches and surface area greater than sixty (60) square feet, shall be surrounded by a fence not less than six (6) feet high containing no openings greater than eight (8)   inches in any direction, access through which is controlled by a gate capable of being locked and/or through the main building
in the property.	Private swimming pools accessory to a one or two family dwelling and on the same lot shall meet setback requirements for dwellings in the zone district and all applicable public health and sanitary requirements.

649.	Appeals from strict adherence to these regulations, as they apply only to fences, hedges, walls and/or swimming pools shall be made to Borough Council.
 
Section 650		Standards and Review Procedure for Community Unit Plans and Commercial­ Mul ti-Family Plans as Conditional Uses

651.	Cor::m:.rni ty Unit Plan

	The owners of any tract of land in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, or R-5
zone district containing an area of at least two (2) acres may submit a plan for the development of the tract to the Planning Commission, provided that:
651.11	All buildings in the plan are one family detached dwellings, plus accessory structures and community facilities to serve the plan residents;
651.12	The overall density on the tract, exclusive of public streets, does not exceed five (5) dwellings per acre if the tract is
in R-1 or R-5 1   seven (7)  per acre if in R-2, or twelve (12)
per acre if in R-3 or R-4; and
651.13	A recreation area with appropriate equipment is provided for
the residents of any plan containing twelve (12) or more dwellings, such recreation area not less than two hundred fifty
(250) square feet per dwelling.
651.14	All the dimensional standards that apply in the zone district
containing the tract (see section 440) shall apply except that the minimum lot area requirement is waived and side yards ir. any   zone ma;y  be not less than five (5) feet and rear yards not less than twenty (20) feet.
651.15	Each lot to be sold in the plan shall abut a public street either existing or to be built by the developer in accordance with Borough street construction standards.

	The ov.:ners of any tract of land in the R-1 1    R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5 1    or C-3 zone district containing an area of at least five (5) acres may submit a plan for the development of the tract to the Planning Commission provided that:
651.21	The buildings in the plan are one-family, two-family, multipJe­
family or row dwelling buildings, plus accessory structures
and community facilities to serve the plan residents;
651.22	The overall density on the tract, exclusive of public streets
does not exceed five (5) dwelling units per acre if the tract is in R-1, seven (7)  per acre if in R-2, twelve (12) per acre
if in R-3 or R-41    or sixteen (16) per acre if in R-5 or C-3 and
651.23	A recreation area with appropriate equipment is provided for
the residents of any  plan containing twelve (12) or more
dwellings, such recreation area not less than two hundred fifty
(250) square feet per dwelling.
651.24	All the dimensional standards that apply in the zone district
containing the tract (see section 440) shall apply except
that the minimum lot area is waived and side yards in any   zone may be not less than five (5)  feet and rear yards not less
than twenty (20) feet on one or two-family lots.
651.25	Each lot to be sold in the plan shall abut a public street
either existing or to be built by the developer in accordance
with Borough street construction standards.








"L''·.r
 
652.	Cornmercial--Multi-Family Dwelling Plan

	The owners of any tract of land in the R-5 zone district ma,y submit a plan for the development of the tract to the Planning Commission
for one (1)or more buildings containing both apartments and commercial uses provided that:
652.11	Apartments and the access to them inside the building occupy
at least fifty (50) percent of the floor area of any building,
including the street floor and floors above;
652.12	Commercial activities are confined to the street level floor
and are limited to bakery outlet, barber shop, beauty shop,
candy and ice cream store, delicatessen, drug store, dry cleaning pick-up, laundromat, newsstand, or business or professional offices;
652.13	Separate entrances and parking areas on the property are
provided for the apartments, segregated from the commercial entrances and parking areas;
652.14	All the dimensional standards that apply in the R-5 zone
district (see section 440) shall apply for a commercial­
mul ti-family dwelling plan.

653.	Minimum Dimensions Between Multi-Family Buildings
	Minimum yard depths required in each zone district shall be main­ tained around the periphery of each multi-family plan.

	When several multi-family buildings occupy the same lot the minimum distances between them shall be:
653.21	Main walls, front or rear, face each other:	60 feet;
653.22 Side walls face each other:	20 feet;
653.23	Main wall faces side wall:	30 feet;
653.24 A main wall shall be considered one in which all the windows
of any   one apartment are located. All other walls shall be
considered side walls;
653.25 Walls shall be considered as facing one another if they are
parallel or form an angle of not less than 45 degrees.	If
walls on neighboring buildings are not parallel, the averace
distance between them (closest and furthest points apart) shall be not less than the minimum distance.
653.26	No two buildings shall be less than 15  feet apart at any point.
654. Maintenance of Open Space
654.1 The parking areas, access drives, walkwa,ys, recreation areas and landscaping in a multi-family plan shall be maintained by the property owner on a continuing basis.
654.2	In the event any   or all dwellings in the plan are to be sold, the owner shall establish a homeowner's association, the rules and regulations of which shall be reviewed and found acceptable by the Borough Solicitor as providing ad.equate protection for both the Borough and the plan residents.	Membership shall be a mandatory condition of purchase.	Voting power shall be based on one (1)vote per owned dwelling, vested in the owner.	Not less than twenty-five
(25)  percent of the members shall constitute a quorum for conducting
business and a majority of the quorum may pass a motion to take action on behalf of the association.

654.3	All areas in the plan, inside and outside, not to be sold or leased, shall be maintained by the association, which shall meet at least annually to establish assessments, authorize maintenance projects and pa,y bills.
 
655.  Submission Requirements

	An owner proposing to build a multi-family building plan shall submit to the Planning Commission at least three (3)  copies of the following
information, prepared by a registered architect or engineer on scaled drawings:
655.11	The bearings and distances of all lot lines;
655.12	The name and address of the owner and of the designer together
with the latter's seal, date of plan preparation, scale of the
drawing and north arrow;
655.13	Location of abutting streets, showing curb line, sidewalks,
utilities and access points into the property;
655.14	Location of building or buildings proposed on the property
with dimensions to property lines and street setback lines
and location of nearest wall of buildings on adjacent lots;
655.15	Location of parking area, showing each space and access drives;
655.16	Contours at two (2) intervals or less throughout the property,
elevations at each corner point, the location of any cut or
fill, indicating percent of finished slope in each area;
655.17	Storm water management plan, showing storm lines, connection
to existing storm set-1er 1   and any  retention devices.
655.18	Landscaping plan, indicating trees, hedges, shrubs and ground
cover; and
655.19	iieight of each building and number of dwellings in each.
656. Plan Review
	The Commission shall review the Submission at its next regular meeting relative to compliance with this Ordinance, the likely impact of the proposal on traffic patterns on adjacent streets and provisions to buffer adjacent properties.

	If the proposal is for a Community Unit Plan or a Commercial--Multi­ Family Plan, the Planning Commission shall call and hold a public hearing (see section 1253).
	The Planning Commission shall render a decision to approve the proposal as presented, approve it with specific conditions or reject it for specific deficiencies within 95 deys of first reviewing the plan.	The owner and Borough Council shall be informed immediately after the
decision in writing, with reasons for rejection or any attached conditions of approval noted.

	The owner, if aggrieved by the Commission's decision, may appeal to Borough Council which may uphold or overturn the Commission's decision.

Section 660 Special Residential Uses
661. Home Occupations
661.1	A home occupation may be approved as a conditional use by the Planning Commission for a single family or two-family dwelling provided:
661.11	No changes in the exterior appearance of the dwelling
are made to accommodate the occupation;
661.12	The occupation is operated by a resident or residents
of the dwelling without other assistance;
661.13	The business is of an office or personal service nature
with customers, clients or patients seen by appointment only;
 
661.14	Any retail sales transacted are incidental to the business; and
661.15	No part of the business except customer parking is outside the dwelling.
661;2	The following occupations shall be considered as home occupations:
661.21	Office of a doctor, dentist, chiropractor, lawyer, accountant, architect, engineer, insurance or real estate salesman or similar professional;
661.22	Barber, beauty operator, dressmaker, tailor, watchmaker, tutor or musical instrument instructor teaching one person at a time.
661.23	Similar service businesses that will not create traffic congestion or involve repair of items that cannot be carried in by an individual.

661.3	The Planning Commission shall review a home occupation proposal in tenns of the proposed location with reference to available off-street parking on the property, or parking on the street, and likely impact of the home occupation on neighboring properties.	The Commission may authorize the Zoning Officer to issue an occupancy permit if it approves the home occupation.

662. Boarding or Lodging Horne

	Any one-family detached dwel1ing occupied by and owned by a family whose members are related by blood, marriage and/or adopt on may also accept not more than two (2) boarders or lodgers, or one boarder and one lodger, provided one (1) off-street parking space is available for each boarder or lodger on the same property as the dwelling.

	Any one-family detached dwelling in the R-5 zone district may be rented to not more than five (5)  boarders or lodgers or combination totaling five (5), provided the proposal is reviewed and approved as a conditional use and the off-street parking area on the property for
five (5)   spaces is paved in accordance with section 820 of this Ordinance.

	Any boarding or lodging home covered by 662.2 shall have secured a permit from Allegheny County Department of Health before the Borough may issue an occupancy permit.

663.	Day Care Center

	Any one-family detached dwelling occupied by a family may also contain a day care center for not more than six (6) pre-school age children or dependent adults provided no overnight accommodations are included and the facility is approved by and operated under the requirements of the State Department of Welfare.

	A church or similar community organization may operate a day care center on its premises but not in a dwelling building for a number of clients approved by the Department of Welfare.

664.	Foster Care Home or Half-Way House
Any one-family detached dwelling may be converted to a foster care home or
half-way house provided any two (2) such facilities are at least 2,500 feet apart, the facility is operated by an agency licensed by the Commonwealth, trained staff are on the premises whenever the residents are at home, and the residents have been placed in the home by court order or by an agency of the Commonweal th or of Allegheny County.
 
665.	Conversion Apartment
Any one family detached dwelling in the R-3 or R-4 zone district ma,y be
converted to two (2) dwellings provided each dwelling contains at least 400 square feet, each has its o	private full bathroom (toilet, sink, shower or tub) and kitchen (stove, refrigerator and sink), each has its own access directly to the outside independent of the other, and each has one off-street parking space on the lot.
666.	Garage Apartment
In the R-4 zone district an apartment ma,y be erected over an accessory
garage, provided such apartment is not less than 400 square feet in area (not including access stairs), a full bathroom and kitchen facilities are provided, no more than one such apartment occurs on any  lot and one off­
street parking space is available for the apartment residents' use on the lot.
667.	Apartments in Commercial Buildings
In any commercial zone district apartments ma,y be constructed on the second
and/or third floor provided each such apartment contains not less than 400
square feet, each has its own full bathroom and kitchen facilities, each has access via a corridor and stairs to an outside entrance separate from any store access, and one off-street parking space for each apartment. is available on the lot or within 500 feet as a leased space in a parking lot.
668.	Individual Mobile Homes on Their Own Lots
A mobile home (see definition 254) ma,y be placed on a lot in any Residential
zone district provided the mobile home is the principal building on the lot,
the home is placed on concrete piers carried three (3) feet below grade, the
area between the bottom of the home and the ground is enclosed by a masonry
wall with vents, the home is secured by tie-downs attached to the piers, and the home is connected to public sewer and water lines, set on its piers with masonry skirting completed before an occupancy permit is issued.	No mobile home shall be permitted whose exterior length times width dimension is less than seven hundred twent;y (720) square feet.
669.	Nursing, Convalescent or Retirement Home
669.1	A nursing, convalescent or retirement home (see definition 258) whose construction or renovation and operation has been approved by the State Departments of Health and Labor and Industry ma,y be permitted
as a conditional use in the R-5 zone district.
669.2	In the event a former dwelling is proposed for conversion to such a home, no exterior changes shall be made to the building appearance facing a street to accommodate the conversion except for fire safety measures.
669.3	Off-street parking areas shall be paved and developed in accordance with Article VIII, particularly 831.5 or 832.3.
 

- .1.,. icle  VII

 



 

701.	Gor.ditional  :ises for  ea.ct  zone  d.istrict  <-ere   1istei in 'sections  420,  :120
C t:d   553.

 

7n2.	T'he  use '."ill  r.ot  er.C.;::;-.s<3r  - e 1:·1t-'lic  :-. :.lth ;.;-.:"..  s;:o.fety   if  J.ocat12d.
'·:l:e:'e  pr-c;:c::ed  ".nd  \,1 :'..ll  r..o  d.et<.:rio:n1te  .J;:C..e   .:;•wirorn:ient  or 5-:mer&te nuis.:;•.nce    conditions.

70 2 • 2	l'he  ·.iJe  c :. .,   ,,e	.cccrr..-:--.cd : :::ii   :)n t 1e   s it8   -it : : o :.e 1    0 r only min ir.r trn
vari nces	u:'..re .
702 • .3	?he '.<..:::e   i::  corr.pati'c1'2  :·1ith or -.;ill  2·..i.:.":c-rt  t::e u.se::  ir. the  :'iej_ghborhooC.
of  t!rn  si',e.
7c2.4	·:ihe  J.3c  ci(>3:-  rot  rGq:;.:.re  s·1tst L.tl J.  c. ..-. 'J:.:-:-:o'l::;.z,	"le"'Jisior1 of 1.ra.int?.Ge
patterns,  or create GLcessive traffic  ccn3estion.

 

711 •	;\..  -:10velc:""-er   ;.:---o .... ');:·!.:!s  a.   cr:clitio:.:.al   J. ;;  .-.r.c.J l   r-:.1:-::nit   to  -the  Boro igh
Secret2.ry fi.•.ro  (S) copiE:-s of	1:.e  follo;.,in · :'".ateri .ls  -::t  le.:.:st  five  (.J)
c21.endar  :lc /.=j  befc.re   2.	GJ.lar  ;neetins  of  "the   lG.r.r'"ir.2;	oi:irr1ission:

711.1		wri te  Gtat	e t : ?;orti 3 tte	8n rrl criteria o tli ed in Sectio:r 7')2 ::.tc·1e s.nd. 1]esc1·ibinc; ir. d.et::il   tl:e p:co ,;cosed 'Be;

711.2	·.   -:._;ce..le\:_   ill-_t2tra  i\;e	ite:   -1-:;.n   f:!".c:4·ir.0   -tl:e    :.:rrar..:;-.:-:r7'1t:r:t    of  t:1e
:r-ropos•Jd -:..1.:::e   en the ">ite,  incl•..<.dir.:;  ;rcperty Ji es, uses  on e.djacent pro;erties,  a'c,..i.ttinz  s+.reets,  cuilclin.:;s   €7.:ia"':.ir.;;;   :.w-:1  :;;roposed  on  the site by  use  2.L.d.  heigtt,  fOints of  ci.ccess   into the  site,  internal drivev:a,y':o 1   p .rking  r rea lc\yo;it  1t1ith  mur ber  of  s1:·aces  noted,  free­
st2,r:ding signs,  areas of  ee.rth r.1ovinl 1:ith 5r2.de of  finished slope noted. 1
r.:eans  of  disl;osing  of   '>torrn  :-:ater,	Jror:osed landsc-?pir...s c:11:d other
pertiri_ent  ir:forrr:atior...

711.3	'I'te  C:or:'.mi"..'Gicn  '112.J   wa ve  1j2::ts  of  tr.e  dte }:le.n  s·:cr.iiseion  that  e.re
clei:i.rJ.y  irrelevant  in a particular  co.se.
7i 2.	The Cor.lffiissicin shall revie1-1 the d.ocuments  a.t  its next  meeting  and ma.)"
::.p11N'Ne the	lan  a.s   subdtted,  reject  it,  a.pprove   it '"ith  specific  conditions to ·be  met  c r t1:e  develo;er,  table  it for further  information,  or scl::ed1ile
a public  he:;:.ring on· it to cather pu.bl ic opinion.

713.	'Phe Commiss5.on s-hall note its discussion of the ;::>ropos2.l and ite recommen­ dation to Joro:i.gh Council in its minutes of the meeting  and  shall  s:.ibmi t  a copy  to  the <:1.eveloper  and  copies  to Co1J.ncil,  toeether  with  the  developer's
:.;: 1CatisEion.

714.		Council  sta!l revie\·T the  or.u:iifJsion' s !'ecvnu:.e::C:.c.tior.s  2.t Ccntncil 's r.e::d regular  rr.eetine  and  shall  vote  to  accept  or  reject  tr.e  recommendations. A  copy cf  Cour.cil 's decision  sh2.ll be  3ent  to  t.r.e  Pl2nr:.ing  Commission and  the  develorer.
 
7 - <:; o	Co''.'.',Cl l 1 r:-    ( r r_1· 1·or.    '!--!"_. , -     "Ire•     •.. :::r··"-     r ......     ,...--
 
t 1    - y.: ...   ,  	
 
(r. .-..',     " .......  -	,.....("•     --  t'
 
_	_    --	_	--·-	_ ....         -	... L ...     v
 
i
A··'-.!"'-
 
:._ ..    J.J.J.·ac ......	.-:.• 1
 
u.... ...:,     c.,_•.1.t:.•	;-.E,
 
subrr:ission W::!E  fir2"'.  re'.rie·.-ec:. t;i· tl":e  r:<.-:--..r.inG  Gcr:i-:-isr.;io1:,  ?I'O\"iC.eC  the  pl -.
iE n0-t.  ,,_·i t.1... ::::..:·.-:.   c.. ..;.·!·       r :.--1·: :.::. "":'-"- .	71:tS:    :rt,_ ie.:   JF·:ri0i    s ·  J"'    Et ·ri  ("1\'-::r    :i . :11
rc-:.. · :·r.1:.. £[ ic· ...
716.	If  Council  gra.Ets  c_i:;ircval,   it shc.ll  authorizE:  t:1e  Zor... i:r.5 Of:f"ice:r  to  issu.;;­
a t ild.i:;,c per.:1:..t  for thi;: p::-opo:-::-e::".  de\•elo;r::e:r:t.

Section  720	SDecific Criteri& tc te Co si eref
?Z .	f-.cce.:s:	\ri::l:i.::·..rl ar·  aGci:_:::   c:!..c....::   l cle:.:- J   F.!t·.r -:-::  ...     c :le..   J C'cr-t c::1   tc.  ;:·:·c·1.'"lC.E
rr1a- :.imum  sicht C.i£ta:-!cer-:  :-oy  tr:""".:...j il!  e te:r·ir:::;  a :· J.c.: ...-ir..c;  tl1E-	;1·opert -    cJ:...
on ttE: inter;..ectinc p".l.blic  stred.

722.	Parki115:	 
t ;.e;.;  lf!  cle;_J· to \:)· -..r::.'l' s   C. '=.'   c.. ri\"C:--t ·rc·.;..:;f.   er  ·cr-_... i.(..  l· .:: :::-    .:: ...,..-.   :. J.G ·
lce· in:_:  c·.r-IJ J..f"     f u1ctior:.   ·..:t2 v·.;t   cc:· -::.1.:.,   Le. .:. .::.. .?'·:    i?	..   :·}:i.:.   C!.:Ct.: .r·

723.	SClee1 ir..::; of :c.rj:iE; c:.· 0:1 :':1-.:-r ::tc.r:...:.,·c :::.:rec::: 2}.2.J l le :rro·,ri << C' ;re-tee-\: adjacent resid.ences. Li,:;1:ti:1,:. of ::-icr.s  er o- tdco:r are2,s shr>l: be  directe-.: ffr.'EJ'  from af.jSiCeT't  1-io;1€S  :::.:r.:1.   ftt.rec.._,s  ar.-··  lie;Lt  l:,·,·d  L::J.l lE-  t:t.E. :::ir:i:rrr
to  rrov·ide  s.-_:.r;·"t:-   c:Y::.  scc: r:. ."' .

72!,.	fir("  1:·1l:Jinee;:   st::.11 be  o:r·erc:.tt;-:  f1•or.  U  r>CF.n£';._ey}:	:lG _,JEC )   b·J.i ::!ir_z:   a!'_,·l   no
r.;cle-:;  F1-c..ll  tfl:tC  ;· .r.:-E-  :r·£1:·. :  :rr:ile C!' 1::.thin  c  ...Jc:r -- _r:,:  le	.,: }C"Y: c ::c..cer
Get   c.r:.:il e   to  :"i1r·c:    ;,-:·c.. j_ .. :·.:  ...   -- ·  :.;-	3·!;t_:.......-t:. · :..
 
7: .	L r.:::..:..irc.ct·,:-. i:.:; 0r-  J:l'iY:.:.:c oil:.  .  r;
 

r:.:···-: :i.:-.;·:   ·-:..-.'.'.   net  Cl'f_, tc   E;yr;r • .JiY·o   :••:·i:::r 1
 



..,, /"
I•··•
 
odor;:,   vi'l.:'r tio:--1,    s}-: /-1·e:le:ctt::·:    :_;J -!-·t:   01   C.u.7-·t.	J.. 2  ;:c·.:."'tt.3 cf:::·..:..·_: ·"'  o.:-.
\; (:.-- .tier:    ;}·--::_	ocr::·.lj"' :·7 i_.; _i·-_ c.:. -::!-.:v:c:_.t:;- l':;.iJci::..::_: •
 





Article 'JIE

 


80

801.	All  develop er:.t  proposals,  i-:hetter  nev.·  constrtiction,  r-E.novetion   to acco:r r:·1ocate  c. ne1: use or m:pc:.r.sior:.  of  G..!l  existine- use,  sh2.ll  include o:f-Etret   rc-.rk ;:.=   ir.  acccd.c..nce  1:ith  this  section.

80:-i.	:::c-•.::;!:  s:.;;.:=;l_r!  :c-:-r:il;r c:.:'lc:  ti:o-fw,il2' ch elling sho.11 be p:rovided with tv:o (2) of'f-f:t:r·ec: sp:.ce::- for eo:..ci·:	1-:sllin5 i.lnit,  on the  sane property  as the dwell inc..

BJ3.	.1-:.:r:. ·    p:co:;-00.:::::.l     i :Yc1 }.vi::-,c  a  co:-:,:"lc --c id, inC:.'J.strinJ.   or  rr::il ti-fe..rr.ily  development
 
( ..."...1• e.
 
...I.>,_..".'.'  J-,• ·.o d·I·,el.11'y..,,.,
 
l...!.  •
 
1··•.•     c..  1Dt''1·1·11·11•-  or  1•nore  tl0- ··>..1 on- e  d< 1·, 'elli_1·iG-
 
builC.inc  oci  the  sc;. ;.e  p1·op:ort;;r)   E.f.2.ll   i;:clude  a.  sc&.led  dra1dn,:  shoidnc  the
loc&.tio1:  of  the  pe..rkinc  01•  tl.e  property  in  relation  to  buildinc;JS 1   ccces2
to  tt(:  l"' r ir.i ,   l :;o"'.lt  c..:.i-    r..  :-:-.lnr   of  E:;aces,   c:nd   dimensions  across  a  par-kins
c:.icJ.c:   e.r. .  for  c.  t;;.;ricd  s  "-ce.

804.	1'.s ihe  re:..; 1 t of  rc:10vatiorc  or- C:e:vdopr::ent  of  a. lot, the number  of  existinc p:.r::in:::.;  E'j_)<..Cf:f'  s}·.o..11  :not bs  !·e:::.1cec  i;, !l'..tr.:l::·e!'  to le :::;  th6.Yl  ret;:uired  for tr·e ne ·:  ace.

 

811.		ParJ:iric E}.'« ce: clime:::donc:	::::«.er"- ::o;c:.rl:in.:; space in o.  par :ing  lot  shaJ.l  contc:.in at  least  one hm1dred.  seventy  (170)  sc;:uc..re   feet   e::clusive of  access  lc..ne   and be  at  le2st  ni:r.e  a:r:C.  a heJf  (9-1-)  feet  in width,   centerline   to   centerline.

812.	Parkin::;  aisle dirr:en:::ions:	The r.iiniP.'lurr. climension,  includinc; access lc-.ne,.
acror s  a d.oulle-lo<:..d.ed.  pcrkin0  c.:.iele  i:ith  par dnc  spaces  at  right  ant;les
to  the  accesc  lane  shall be  at  le;;;.st  sixty-tl':o  (62)  feet,  and  for a  single­
loc.de'.".  aisle c..t  le;:d for"• ·-t,.;c1     (42)  feet.	1Jhere p.::..:rking  lanes fo:rm  a forty­ five  (4.S)  rie;;ree  EJJ_:-le  1.·itI'. t e &.ccess  lane the dimension  acrL)::.;s  a double load.ed.  aisle  (incluc.'..ing  tte fllll deptb  of  the  spacet;)   shall  be  at  least·
fifty-four  {5t;) feet and c:.cross a sinGle loaded  aisle thirty-two  (32)  feet.
!-. pc.rl:ir,.;  aisle incl '..ldes  the  access lane  and  po..rkin0  spaces  for which  the
lene  provides   access.	A  double-loaclec"t  c..isle has  parking spaces on both  sides
of tl-.e acce2c lo..:r:e.	If cc.r::  e-re  to be  parked  pa.re..llel  to the  edge  of  a parkinc area,  such  spaces  shell  be  at  least  eight   (8)  feet  1dcle by  twenty  (20)  feet
long and .::.but  an access lane at least ten  (iO) feet wide.

213.	Locdion oi' :r::..:d::Y:_:- sp .ce'::':	Lffking  S:;Jaces  to  serve  an;y  non-residential  use r:,he..11  be not  rr,ore  tlic:·.n  six :r unC.r8c   (6:)0)  feet  from the buildi:r.e  containine the u::::c  to l·c  serve  2.:.C.   s;:i<.·.cE::  to  accommodate   a multi-family  residential
Ute  i:hr-.11 'J::.€.  !1C't  more tr.2.i: t;,ro-::ur:dred  ( 200) feet aHa.Y.	Distances   shall  be
r.:eo:..sure(  frc .' tr.e  [:,iilC.i:-,:_;  er.tr :::e  to  the  neareE:t  edge of  the  pa.rkine  area.







33
 
814.		Off-site parking lots:	Required parking shall be on the same property as the use served unless a second property in the same ownership as the one containing the building to be served is provided for parking within the distance limits established in 813, or a second property is leased for such parking.	In either case the second property shall be available for the life of the use to be served and guaranteed as such by covenant filed with the Borough.

815.	Parking space credits:	In determining the number of spaces to be provided for a commercial use, the developer may subtract from the number required fifteen (15) percent of the spaces within a Public Authority lot the nearest edge of which is not more than six hundred (600) feet from his building entrance, 'plus any space in the street abutting his property.

816.		Sharing of a parking lot:	Where several uses share the same property, the parking required for each use shall be added together to determine the total number of spaces needed for the property.

817.	Use of parking lots:	Parking areas and lots shall be used only for the storage of passenger cars and trucks with a gross weight of not more than
one-half ( )ton.	No storage of derelict or unlicensed vehicles shall occur in a parking lot or area and no repair services other than windshield replace­ ment and emergency road services shall take place there.

818.		Joint use of a parking lot:	The Planning Commission may recommend, and Borough Council may approve, joint use of a parking lot or area when it is clear the uses, such as a church and a commercial venture, will not overlap on their use of the lot and the lot is posted to indicate when each use will be accommodated.

Section 820	Design Standards
'
821.	Surfacing:	Parking areas or lots serving any commercial, industrial, public
or semi-public use or any  residential development where more than two (2)
dwelling units share the same parking area shall be surfaced and maintained. Surfacing shall be supported by four and a half (4-t)   inches of well-choked and compacted crushed limestone or slag base course and shall consist of a
one (1) or two (2) layer bituminous surface course not less than two (2) inches in depth provided and placed in accordance with current PennDOT specifications.	'

822.	Slope of lots: Parking lots or areas shall be sloped not less than one half of one percent (- ) and not more than six percent (6%) towards an acceptable storm drainage system.

823.	Storm drainage:	Drainage from any parking lot or area shall be gathered on the same property and directed to a public storm sewer.	In no case shall storm water flow on the surface across a street or a neighboring property. If the existing storm sewer is likely to be unable to handle the added flow from the lot or if no storm sewer is available, the developer shall handle drainage from his site in accordance with section 632 of this ordinance.

824.	Slopes abutting the lot:	Where the grade beyond the edge of a parking area slopes downhill and parking spaces are arranged at right angles to the edge, stop bars or a curb shall be provided along the edge.	Embankments shall be placed in accordance with section 631.	Where the grade slopes uphill from the edge of the lot a swale shall be provided adjacent to the paved surface sloped to the storm drainage system.




-.  !'I
 
825.	Striping:	Parking spaces shall be marked off in yellow or white traffic paint stripes at least five (5)  inches wide the full length of the space.

826.	Setbacks and screening:	Whenever a parking lot occurs in a residential zone district, the edge of the parking surface shall be set back from side or rear property lines not less than two (2) feet, and from abutting streets not less than the minimum front yard required in the zone district, or the building setback on adjacent lots if that is less to accommodate a planted hedge to be
installed and maintained at a height of not less than four (4)  feet.	The
full width of the setback areas shall be landscaped.	In lieu of a hedge, a four (4)  foot high masonry wall or solid wood fence may be substituted for the hedge.	If natural changes of grade or landscaping define the edges of
the parking lot, the Planning Commission may recommend and Borough Council
may approve adjustments in the setbacks and screening to fit the circumstances.

827.	Access:	Entrances to parking lots shall be not more than twenty-five (25) feet in width, not including curved returns at street curbs. , Entrances shall be located as remote as possible from nearby street intersections, and secondarily from adjacent resider.tial properties.

828.	Lighting and signs:	Parking lot lighting shall be arranged so that the light source is not visible from adjacent or nearby residential properties or streets and so that the light level on the parking lot surface does not
exceed three (3)  foot candles at any point.	Any signs in a parking lot shall
be strictly functional, denoting only information relevant to the use of the lot.	·

Section 830	Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements 831.	Residential Uses
831.1	Building or group of buildings on the same lot containing three (3) or
more dwelling units:	two (2) spaces per dwelling unit if the total
number of dwelling units is less than twenty (20), or one and a half
(1t) spaces per dwelling unit if the total is twenty (20) or more;
831.2	Multi-fa.'7lily buildir:g to be occupied solely by elderly residents: one (1) space for each two (2) dwelling units;

831.3	Conversion apartment, efficiency apartment or garage apartment: one and a half (11z-) spaces per apartment;

831.4	Fraternity or sorority ho· se:	one (1) space for each two (2) residents at peak capacity;

831.5	Retirement home:	or.e (1) space for each three (3) apartments;

831.6	Boarding or lodging house:	one (1) space for each boarder or lodger;
831.7	Day  care center:	one (1) space for each four (4)  persons enrolled at the center;
831.8	Half-way house or foster care home:	one (1) space for each staff member on the largest shift plus one (1) space for visitors;

831.9	Home occupation:	one (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area used in the business.
 
832.	Public and Semi-public uses

	Church or other place of assembly, including a theatre:	one (1) space for each four (4)   persons who can be seated simultaneously, or one (1) space for each seventy-five (75) square feet of floor area in the assembly hall, whichever is greater;

	School:	two (2) spaces for each classroom, plus one (1) space for each four (4)  students in grades eleven or above or in vocational or technical training;

	Hospital, nursing or convalescent home:	one (1)  space for each two (2)
beds;
	Municipal, government or public utility service building:	one (1)
space for each five hundred (500) square feet of floor area.
833.	Commercial uses

	Retail commercial business, personal service shop, or medical or dental clinic or office:	one (1) space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area;
	Offices except medical or dental:	one (1)   space for each four hundred
(400) square feet of floor area;
	Restaurant or tavern:	one (1)  space for each three (3) persons who can be seated simultaneously, plus five (5)  spaces if take-out service is available as part of the operation;
 

833.4
833.5


833.6
 
Motel or hotel:	one (1) space for each sleeping room;
Roller rink or pool hall:	one (1)  space for each one hundred fifty
(150) square feet of floor,area;
Bowling alley:	six (6) spaces for each lane;
 
833.7 Funeral home:	ten (10) spaces for each reposing room;
833.8 Outdoor retaiJ sales:	one (1)  space for each six hundred (600) square feet of lot area devoted to outdocr sales.
834.	Industrial uses
	Manufacturing, processing or research:	one (1)   space for each two (2) employees on the largest shift or one (1)  space for each seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of floor area, whichever results in the larger figure.

834.2 Warehousing, storage or terminal operation: one (1) space for each one thousand five hundred (11 500) square feet of floor area and outdoor lot area used in the operatio .

Section 840 Off-Street Loading
641. Any  development proposal, whether new construction, renovation to accommodate
a new use, or expansion of an existing use shall, where an alley does not exist
adjacent to the property, provide off-street loading in accordance with this
subsection.
842.	The off-street loadi 1g s ace or si;aces shall be at least ten (10) feet wide by thirty-five (35) feet long with a clear height of fourteen (14) feet.	The space or spaces shall be located so that trucks may enter and leave the property
movine in a forward direction. The loading spaces and access to them shall not interfere with the use of, or be considered a part of any required off­ street parking on the property.
 
843.	When  several buildine;s  co:nprise  the se.me use,  one building may be desienated to  receive  and/or  ship goods  but  the  floor  area of  all  the  buildings  sha.11 be combined  to determine the number of  loadinc- spaces to be  provided.

844. Loading areas  shall be  slopt:d,  paved,  drained  and  screened  as for parking areas.
845. Minimum loading requirements
845.	Multiple family dwclline;s:	one  (1) spa.ce for the first thirty thousand (30 1000)  sque,re feet  of  floor area plus  one  (1)  additional  space for
ea.ch  additional  forty thousund  (40,000)  square feet  of  floor area,  except
that no  sp21.ce  shall be  rey_uired  for any buildin with  lt:sr.; than  ten thousand  (10 1000)  r.quv.re  feet of  floor area.•
     Commercicl   am1  industrial  uees:	one  ( 1) s11a.ce  for each t :n tho1lSand. ( 10,000)  squ&.re  feet  of   floor  ;:.rea.,  except  thut  no  space  ·:lwll  be
i·eqnir'::d fo1· w1y use 1·Jitl1 les:;;  tha.n  thre(; thom:;'.nd  (3,00.') squ< H3 feet  of   floor  area.

845.J Warehousing,  storage or terminc.l  operations:	one  ( 1) s11 ·.ce   for  each St:)Ven  thousand  five hundred.  (7,500)  Sliuare feet of  floot· o.ree..














































37
 

Article IX SIGNS

Section 900	Definitions of Terms Peculiar to this Article

901. Sign--a structure or device projecting a message by words, symbols and/or pictures designed to be viewed by the public from outside a building, but not including the physical support of the sign.	A sign may be self-supporting, attached to a building or another structure, or painted on a building.

902.	Sign area--all the area of the panel containing the sign message or all the area enclosed by connecting the extremities of the sign's interrelated parts. Where a sign has several faces the total area of all faces shall constitute a sign's area.
903. F'ree-standing sign--a sign supported entirely by its own structure set in or on the ground and not attached to a building or other structure.

904. Wall sign--a sign applied flat to, or painted on a building wall and projecting no more than eight (8)  inches from the wall face.

905. Projecting sign--a sign attached to a building wall along one edge, or attached to the wall by a bracket perpendicular to the wall surf ce.
906. Billboard--a sign advertising goods or services not produced or available on the premises containing the sign except incidentally but not including political, public or charitable agency signs.

907.		Marquee--a permanent shelter over a building entrance supported by the building and extending laterally from the building's face.
908. Temporary sign--a sign permitted to be in place for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days unless specified for a shorter period.

Section 910	Sign Limitations

911.		No animated signs, involving the entire sign or any parts thereof, whether mechanically or wind activated, shall be permitted.

912.	No signs illuminated by a flashing, pulsating or intermittent source and no strings of bare bulbs shall be permitted.

913.	No signs lighted in such a manner or sited so as to create glare conditions on adjacent or nearby streets or residential properties shall be permitted.

914. No sign shall be placed on the roof of any building, or placed to project above the top of a wall or above a gutter line, or to extend beyond the ends of a building wall.

915.	No sign shall by reason of location, lighting or height create a traffic hazard by obstructing sight distances or vision of traffic control devices, or by confusing motorists •










•
 

 

921.	The  follo1!ini:; types  of   signs  shall  require  no  permit  but  shall be  other\.. wise  subject  to  the  rel'.>-ulations  of   this  article:

921 .1  Any sign ereci.e<.l by any level of  government;

921 !2  Memorial  tablet  erected by  a public  or non-profit  organization;

921 ·.J  Unlichted  real  estate sales or lea::: sien placed on the property for  sale or  lease;
921.4	Unlic;hted  dgn of  contracto1· placed  on the  property  on which  the  firm
is doing Hork,  to be  removed  upon completion  of  \:Ork;
921 .15	Sit.Pl   identifying  the  ndffie   of  a building  but  includin_:;  no   advertising; 921 .6  Sien  identifyini; the  name   anJ  t:.d.d.ress   of  the  occupants  of  a  residential
property,  or  a home  occupation;
921 .;r	Holiday  decorc:.tions  and  national  and  date flaes;

921 .8  Bulletin bov.rd  of  a public,  ch ritable  or  religious  institution  on tht! uamc  propertj'  as · he ir,::::tituLion  provided the oii;n  is internally lighted.

Section  930	Permits

931.	A  permit  i:::rnut!d by the	on.in  Cfficer  shall  be  required  before   any  sign
mcy be  erected,  chant;ed,  or moveC,  except  for those  oigns  which  are exempt.

932.	SiLrn rie1·r,1i ts :::lrnll  cont'1.in  the  following  information,  provided by  the apyl icant:

932 .,1  Harne,  adcresi:  and  phone  numlier  of  applicant,  contractor to erect the siGn,  and owner  of  the  pro1.:iart:It  and  addrc::;s  of  property  if  different from  aimer;

932·. 2  Stc: tement of permission cranted by the r•i o?erty owner for erection of the sien if  otmer and  apvl icr.:.nt  are not  the  same;
932·. 3.  Location  of  the  sign  on  the  property  relative  to b1tilclines  and  property lines uwl  hei,)1t  of  sip1 from .;rounc.1. ·level to top of	>ign, with dimencione rtoted;
932 .4 A  co.fJ,Y  of  the drauin.::; f:n>ltl  >1hich the contractor will  erect the sii:;n, incluclinc an elev.:.i.tion viet-; am: method of  uttaching the sic;n to the ground  or  to  the  buildinc-;
932 .5 1vidence that  the  applicant La:;  insu.rance  in force that  will  absolve  the Borouch  frou nny  lic.t.1ility  u..;:;	...   re::;ult  of  bodily  injury or property darna.r:;e   caused by the siLrn's colla.1)Be  during erection f:!.nd   afterwards.

933.	The  co::;t  of  sicn permits  shall be  e:JtablisheLl by  resolution of J3orou&h Council.

Section  940	Ji;:;n:>  in  the  Tiecidentio.1  Zone  :lidrict::;

941. Permitted  tyves  of  sic:;h::>
941' . 1	Fro11Effty   identif'ico.t ion  ;ii:::;n  1ii.iii.€od  to  narne  ;incl  address  of  occupMts n:ncl/or  name  antl  nature  of  u  home  occupation  conducted  in the  di-rellinc; 1 mch  sicn not  more  thc..n  two   ( )  square  feet  in  area. each  fac12:;
 
941.2	SiGTi   indicating  property  for  sale  or  lease  identifying  broker  or  owner's nane,   address c:...nC.  phone num1Je.r  and nature of proposed transaction,  s"J.ch sic:i n9t   greater th2n  sixteen  (16) square feet  each face;

941.3	Sit;n  or bulletin board   identifying a public  or semi-public  institution and  activities carried on  by  the  institution,  such  sign not   greater  tha..."l thirty-h;o  (32)  square feet in area;
 

941.4
 

Sien identifying a contractor employed on a property,  such sign not exceeding  sixteen  (16)  square  feet  in area  each  face  and  limited  to  one per   contractor;
 

941 j Temporary si(pi advertising affairs of a cultural, religious, politic&l, educational or public orGa. ization, limited to sixteen (16) square feet in area e<?:.ch  face i

941.6	Ter.:porary  private  ca.race  or  porch  sale  sien,  limited  to  two  (2)  per se.le  event 1   each  not  gres.ter  than  de;ht  (8)  S(!uare  feet  in  arec:. eacl: face,  for  no  more  than  seven  (7)  de.ys  once  in  each  calendar year;
941.1	Siem:  erected  by  c.J1,)'   level  of  covernment;

941·.8	Kemori2.l  t:::J:lets  erected. b:,;  c:.  public  or non-profit  orGanizrttion,  holidt.\Y decorations   2.nd   st.de  a.'1.i    ne.tional   fle,es.
942.	Location  of  Si511s
 
942.


942. 2.


 


942.• 4



942.§



942.6
 

Sicns shall "be located only on the property containi.p.g the use identified
"t.y  the  si.';!1 e::-:cept  for  public  or  temporar.t  signs.

Sie;nc  shall be  loca.ted  only  in  a yard  or on the  face of  e. buildins abuttine; a dreet, and. sbt'.111  not  extend  into a P'J.blic  right-of-i·rr:y.

Sic;m: msy be free-stc..nd.in,;,  attached to a fence or private lamppost or  a,pplied  flat  to  a Kall  of  the  principal  building  on  the  property.

lfo  more  thc:.n  two  (2)  si;;ns  shdl be  permitted  on  a property  at  a...riy   time, except  that  if t:r..e  propert;i,r  abuts  two  (2) or more  streets, two  (2)
signs  rr.8J'  le present  on  ec.ch  dreet frontab"e•

l o  sigr, shall be  lighted.  e:.:cept  sigr.s  identifying  public  or  semi-public institut ion 1   pro\•ided  s'..lch  1i;:;htins  is internal  or  from  an  indirect, hid.den  so'..lrce 1  anO.  siois erected. by a public body.
:o sign  £he..l 1 exceed. ter•  ( 10) feet in height  measured.  fr<lr;: the topmost pi'.rt  of  the  sisn to the  c:;ro-..md  below.
 

Section  950 Si(',ns  in  the  Cor.ir.iercicl  Zo:r:.e  Districts

951.	Perr.iitted  types  of  Sisns
951.	.Ar.y  sicn permitted.  i:r:.  the  Residential  zone  districts;
951.2	Sign  identifying  a business  on  the  same  property  as  the  business.
952.	Ls..zim·J.m  si:1.e  of  sizns
The  tot2.1  area  of  all  permrn.ent   signs  on  any  property  shall  not  exceed
the propert;;'' s street frontage in lineal  feet, not  including any  frontage or,  ar:. alley.
 

952.2	Regardless of the frontage, any property shall be entitled to at least thirty (30) square feet o.f signage, and no property shall have signage exceeding one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area.
952.3	Free-standing signs shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet each face.
952.4	Wall signs shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the area of the wall to which they are attached, including the area of doors and windows.

952.5	Projecting signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area each face and shall not extend more than three (3) feet from the face of the wall to which they are attached.

952.6	Signs attached to or painted on the edges of a marquee or an awning shall not extend above or beyond the edge, but shall not be more than three (3)  feet in height, whichever is less.
952.7	NJ sign shall extend more than twenty-five (25) feet above ground level, measured from the topmost part of the sign to the ground below.
953. Location and illumination of signs
	Free-standing signs shall be located between the principa building on the property and an abutting public street and shall not extend into the public right-of-way.
	Wall signs and projecting signs shall be located between the heads of doors and windows on the first floor of the building and the sills of second floor windows, or the top of the parapet or the gutter line if the building is one story in height.
	Where a building wall coincides with, or is less than three (3) feet from a street right-of-way line, wall signs and projecting signs m extend into the right-of-way.
	Businesses occupying upper floor offices m paint identification signs on their windows, limited to one (1) such sign per business, or two (2) if the office has windows on two streets, such signs allowed in addition to others permitted on the property.

	Signs may be illuminated from within or from a light source that is not visible from adjacent or nearby streets or residential properties.
	No commercial sign face shall be lighted that is parallel to and directly across the street from a residentially zoned and occupied property.
954. Temporary signs
	Temporary free-standing signs not exceeding in area thirty-two (32) square feet each face m be approved by the Zoning Officer for a period not exceeding thirty (30) d s provided such sign meets all requirements of this article and no more than one (1) such sign is present on the same property at the same time.	A second permit for such a sign m not be issued until at least thirty (30) d s after expiration of the first permit.

	Temporary flags, banners and streamers m be approved for special promotions or events at the discretion of Borough Council.






4
 
Section 960	Signs  in  the  Industrial  Zone  Districts

961. Permitted  types  of  signs
	Any  sign  permitted  in  the  Commercial  Zone  districts;

	Billboard.

962.	Ifa.ximum  size of  signs
962 1	Free-standin;J  signs  shall  not  exceed  one  hundred  twenty-eight   (128)
oquare  feet on area each  face;
962•.2		Hull  signs  shall  not  exceed  ten  ( 10)  percent  of  the  area of  the  wall  to which  they  are  attached,  including the  area of  doors  and windows;

962:..3   Projectine siGl'J.S  shall  not  exceed thirty-two  (32) square feet  in area each face,  shall not  extend more than four (4) feet from the wall face, or be less than ten  ( 10) feet  above the ground level below.

962 .4  Billboards	hall  not  exceed  three  hundred  {300) squar·e  feet, nor be less than one hunrlred  tv-1enty-eight  ( 128) square  feet in area.•
962·•.5  llo  sign shall  extend  more  than  fifty (50)  feet  above eround level.

962,.6	1fo  bilJboard  shall  be  locc•,ted  directly  across  the  street  from,  or within one hu.ndred  ( 100) feet of  a re<.:iid.entially  zoned property.	·

963.	Illumination  of  sigm-;

963·		Siem; muy be illuminated from Hithin or from a lic;-ht source that is not visible  from  adjacent  or nearby  streets or residential  properties.
963 .2  No  sien face shall be  lighted that  is visible or partly visible from
a  residentitlly   zoned  proyerty.

Section  970	Hainten;.;,nce

971.		If the ZoninG Officer shall find any si,::n or sien structure to be unsafe or to have been  erected or maint ined  in violation  of  this Ordinance,  he shall give written notice to the owner citinc; the conditions found a.nd  the
;:;i.ctions  needed  to  e;ain  compl ic.nct:.

972.		If,· after  thirty-   (30)  U.o,ys   from  tho  date  the  notice  \.ras   sent,  the  correctiono have  not  l1een made,  the  aimer  8112.ll  be  subject  to  stunmary  proceedings  ac provided  by Section  1240,  and  in  <::.tlcli tion  the  Zonine; Officer  may  cause  to
ha.ve  the  offernlin11 sic:;n  repaired. or removed  with  the costs assessed the owner,  who  uht'.ll  be  denied  a:ny  further sign permits  until  such  costs have been  paid   in  full.

973.	Signa  which  aI'e  found  to be  cau8in:;  w1  inunecli;:1,te  menace  to  the  public  may  be removed  or  caused  to  be  removed.  h1medie.tely  by  the  Zoning  Officer  without notice  c..ncl  the  co:::ts  <:<.nse:::sed  the  ot.TL&r.

974.	Sicnn  advert is inc places  of  1msiness or activities i1hich  terminate  operations shall be removocl.,  includinz the G'lpportine;	;tructu.res, by the 011mer within sixty  (60) dcys of  such termination or be su.bject  to Section 972.










4 '.!
 

Article X
NON-CO:NFORMING USES


Section 1000	Application

The provisions of the Article shall apply to buildings, structures, signs, lands and uses which were legal prior to adoption of this Ordinance but which would not be permitted as the result of the application of this Ordinance to their location or use in the Borough, or as a result of the reclassification of the property containing them, or of the adoption of other amendments to this Ordinance after
the initial passage.	This Article is concerned with properties of inadequate area and/or frontage, uses of land and/or structures for activities not permitted in , the zone districts where such land and/or structures are located, and structures placed on a property too close to property boundary lines or too high for c.ompliance with standards of the zone district in which they are located.

Section 1010	Non-Conforming Lots of Record

Any property in separate ownership legally recorded in the Allegheny County Recorder of Deeds Office prior to enactment of this Ordinance and abutting on both sides along a common street properties in a different ownership may be developed for a:ny use permitted in the zone district where such property is located regardless of the property area, width or shape, except that if the proposed development includes a reduction of minimum yard widths or required parking or loading areas, a variance shall be obtained from the Zoning Hearing Board before development may commence.
Properties of inadequate size or frontage shall be developed for no more than one (1)
dwelling unit in zone districts where dwellings are permitted.	If abutting lots of
inadequate area or frontage are in the same ownership the group of lots shall be
considered one property and shall not be developed unless as one property or as
subdivided to create new lots meeting the minimum requirements for lots in the zone
district containing the lots.

Section 1020	Non-Conforming Uses of Lands and Structures

1021.		Where at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance lawful use of land, or land and the structure or structures on it, exists and is made no longer permissible under the requirements of this Ordinance, as adopted or amended, such use may be continued indefinitely, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided the following conditions are applied.

1022.	No such non-conforming use of land shall be extended by acquisition of additional land to occupy a greater land area than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, nor shall such non-conforming use be expanded to occupy an area on the lot more than twenty-five (25)   percent larger than was occupied at the date of adoption of this Ordinance, or adoption of an amendment that made the use non­
conforming.
 
1023.	No structure containing a non-conforming use but capable of being enlarged without violating setback or height requirements in. the zone district
where it is located may be increased in volume more than twenty-five (25) percent over the volume of such structure at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or subsequent amendments that made the use non-conforming.	A non-conforming use which occupies part of a structure may be extended throughout the structure it occupied at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or subsequent amendment that made the use non-conforming, but the expansion under such circumstances may not be extended to occupy
land outside the original structure.

1024.		If any such non-conforming use of land or use of land and structures in combination ceases or is abandoned for any reason including dest 1ction of buildings, for a period of at least one (1) year, any subsequent use of such land, or land and structures in combination, shall conform to the regulations for the zone district where such land is located, except that where a hardship to the operator of the non-conforming use clearly exists as a result of financial, health or other calamity, the Zoning
Hearin Board may  grant an extension of the one (1) year limit consistent
with the hara.ship, t!Ut not more than one (1)  additional year.

1025.	Assuming no structural alterations are made to the building containing
a  non-conforming use, the use may be changed to a second non-conforming
use but only after u.n  e:.pplication has been filed with the Zoning Hearing
Board and the Board concludes that the second use is more compatible with
the uses permitted in the zone district than is the original non-conforming
use.

1026.	Each succeeding owner of a non-conforming commercial or industrial use shall secure an occupancy permit from the Zoning Officer who may ask the Z.oning Hearing Board for a decision if he has reason to doubt that the non-conforming use will be continued in the same manner as formerly
or in a manner more compa ible with the permitted uses in the zone district.

1027.	The non-conforming use of a structure and.1or land, or combination of structure and land may be superceded by a use permitted in the zone district whe.re the property is located and the use of the premises shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zone district.

1028.	Where a non-conforming use of structure and premises exists in combination, the removal of the structure an lor use in the structure shall terminate
the non-conforming use of the premises.

1029.	The maintaining or strengthening to a safe condition of any non-conforming structure shall not be interpreted as being denied by any   portion of this Article.

Section 1030	t;on-Conforming Structures

10.31.		hhere a structure exists on a property at the effective date of this Ordinance or. any amendment to it and does not conform to the requirements regarding height 01·  minimum setbacks from adjacent streets or lot lines, such structure may remain indefinitely subject to the following provisions.






·'
 

1032.	No structure may be enlarged or altered in a w;zy that creates a non-conformity or increases a.r1 existing non-conformity.

1033.	Any replacement of a non-confonning structure shall be made in compliance
with the regulations governing development for the zone district in which the
property is located, except that if a hardship is alleged by the owner, he m;zy request the Zoning Officer to approve replacement on t.he same foundation that supported the structure to,be replaced, but in no case a location that was more non-conforming than the original location.

1034.	If a non-conforming structure is moved, it shall thereafter conform to setback requirements regarding location on  the property.

Sect ion 1040	Record of fon-Conforrr.ing Uses
 

1041.



1042.



1043.

1044.
 

The Zoning Officer shall identify and register all uses of land and structures in Coraopolis Borough made non-confonning as a result of adoption of this Ordinance.

The Zoning Officer shall keep the data current by the addition of non-conforming uses as amendments to this Ordinance are adopted and by the deletion of non-conforming uses as they are eliminated.

The record ma,}' be kept b3' map or written documentation.

Any property owner of a non-conforming use m;zy request a certificate
of non-conformance from the Zoning Officer, guaranteeing the owner the
rights of this Article.	The Officer shall inspect the property and
shall issue the certificate if he verifies a non-conformity exists.
The certificate shall describe the non-conformity specifically.	One
(1)  copy of the certificate or letter of certification shall be retained
in the Zoning Officer's file and one copy sent to the applicant.
 





Article  XI ZONING !-l:EARIKG BOJ....lill

Section 1100	Functions of the Board

1101.	Appeals frorr. Decisions of the Zoning Officer

	The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed procedures or has misinterpreted or misapplied any provision of this Ordinance.
	An appeal ma...,v  be filed witt the Board in writing by any landoYmer affected, a!'lJ' officer or agency of the Borough, or a!'lJ' person aggrieved.

1102.	Challenges to the Va idi ty of an Ordinance or lfap

	The Board shall hear challenges to the validity of any part of this Ordinance or amendment thereof, unless such challenge is accompanied by a curative amendment or challenges the procedure of adoption of the Ordinance or a.'1.Y   amendment.

	In the case of a challenge to the process of adoption, appeal from the action of Borougt Council shall be made directly to the Allegheny
County Courts.	If the challenge is accompanied by a curative amendment, appeal shall be made to Council.

	In challenges of the validity of this Ordinance, the Board shall take evidence and make a record thereon.	At the conclusion of the hearing the Board stall decide all contested questions and shall make findings on all relevant issues of fact which shall become part of the record on appeal to the Courts.

	A challenge ma;y be filed with the Board in writing by   any landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Borough, or any person aggrieved.

	The written re Jest of a lando mer shall include a short statement infoI'1'!1ing the Board of the matters that are at issue and the grounds for the challenge as well as a certification by the landowner that he was not ah'are that the Borough was considering a scheme of rezoning that would detrimentally affect a plan he proposes and that such a scheme would be inconsistent with his proposed plan.	The request shall be accompanied by plans describing the proposed use.

	A person aggrieved by a development on lands of another but in con­ formance with the Ordinance ma,y challenge the Ordinance by filing a written request with the Board that it hold a hearing on the challenge. The request shall contain a short statement reasonably informing the Board of the matters that are in issue and the grounds for the challenge.
 

1102 .,7   The Board may hear challenges to other Borough Ordinances or regulations that apply to the same plan for which a zoning challenge has been brought, but in such a case the Board shall have no power to pass on
the non-zoning issues and shall merely take evidence of such issues and include them in the record.

1103.	Variances

1103 •.1 The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant.	An appeal for variance maJ7 be filed with the Board by any landowner or an;{    tenant with the landowner's permission.

1.103 •.2 Variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted by the Board unless a written application for a variance is submitted to the Secretary of the Board demonstrating:

1103 •21 That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions including but not limited to irregularity, narrovmess or shallovmess of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions geLerally
created by the provisions of this Ordinance in the neighborhood in which the property is located;

1103 22 That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance
and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessar,y to enable the reasonable use of the property;

1103 .2J The such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the arpellant;

1103 • 24 That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood in which the property is located nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent property or be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.

110J.3	The variance if authorized, shall represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and will represent the least modification possible of the reg lation in issue.
1 iO.•.4   If the Board finds in favor of the appellant, it maJ7 prescribe appro­ priate conditions and safeg ards deemed necessary to implement the purposes and intent of this Ordinance.

1103.J		The Board shall prescribe a time limit, consistent with the nature of the variance granted and the conditions surrounding the property, within which the action for which the variance is granted shall be completed.	Failure to comply with the time limit shall render the variance void.
11o:f •.b    Under no circumstances shall the Board grant a variance to allow a use not pennissible either by right or conditionally under the terms of this Ordinance in the zoning district containing the property for which the variance is sought.
 
1104.	Appeals for approval of development not specifically listed in any zone district

1104.l		If a developer proposes a use not listed specifically as permitted or conditional in any zone district and his request for a building permit from the Zoning Officer or for a conditional use approval is denied, such developer ma;y appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for a hearing on his proposal.
1104.2	The Board shall determine which zone district is most appropriate
for the proposed use based on the uses permitted by right or conditionally
in the zone district the Board selects, even though the zone district ma;y not be the one containing the property for which the developer is making
the request.
1104.		In determining the appropriate zone district, the Board shall establish the proposed use as a conditional use in the zone district selected, subject to approval as for any   conditional use.


$ection 1110	Operation of the Board 1111.	Membership
	'rhe membership of the Board shall consist of three (3)  persons, all
residents of Coraopolis Borough, who shall be appointed by the Borough Council and may be reappointed upon completion of a term.

	lV!ernbers of the Board shall hold no other office in the Borough except that one member of the Board may be a member of the Borough Planning Commission.

1112.	Term of Office
	Members of the Board shall be appointed for three (3)  year staggered terms, with one appointment each year to refill a completed term.

	Appointments to fill vacancies shall be made by   Council for the unexpired portion of a term only.

1113.	Removal of Members

	Any  Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or non­ feasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of Borough Council, taken after the Board member has received at least fifteen (15) days notice such vote will be taken.

	The Board member thus accused may request by written communication to the Borough Secretary no later than seven (7) days prior to the meeting of Council at which the vote for removal is to be taken, a hearing before Council after which Council, at its discretion, ma;y take a vote for removal of the Board member.

1114.	Organization of the Board
	· 'rhe Board shall annually elect officers from among its membership, to include a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.

	The Board shall reorganize at its first meeting in each calendar year.	Board members may succeed themselves in their positions.
 
	The Chairman shall call and. chair all meetings of the Board.	The Vice Chairr:ian shall act in the absence of the Chairman and shall assist the Secretars.

1114 .4  The Secretc..IJ' sr.all keep the minutes of the proceedings, recording the vote of eact member; shall tra.. scribe and distribute, or arrange to have transcri·ned and distributed, all testimoilJ' given at hearings under procedures descriced in Section 1120; shall draw up the agenda for each meeting; shall be responsible for placing of notices for public hearings; and shall handle all correspondence.
1114.B	The Board ma,y ma.°l<e, alter or rescind rules and forms for its procedure consistent with this and other Ordinances of the :Borough and the laws of the Commonwealth.	It may establish a regul.:r monthly meeting date fer conducting business.

1114.6	The Board shall keep full p blic records of its business and shall submit an annual report of its activities to Borough Council not later tha.'1 sixty (60) deys after the start of the subsequent year.


Section 1120	Hearings Proced.ure

1121.	Hearings shail be conducted by the :Board or the Board may appoint any member as a hearing officer.	The decision, or fir.dings where no decision is called for, shall be made by   the Board., but the parties ma.>'   wc.ive a decision or findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.

1122.		The parties to a hearing shall te Coraopolis Eoro gh, the party filing the application, a."l..)'  party affected by the application who has made a re	est to appear in writing with the Board Secretars prior to the hearing, and an:;/ other person or civic or community organization which the Eoard pel"r.'!its to ap ear after filing a request to appear at least
five (5)  da;ys before the hearing.

1123.	Before a hearing ma,y   commence all fees and costs relative to the proceed­ ings shall be paid by the applicant.	Fees shall be established by resolution of Borough Council.

1124.	Public Notice
1124.	Public notice of the hearing shall be placed in a newspaper of general local circulation twice, once in each of two (2) consecutive weeks, the first notice not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fourteen (14) deys before the hearing.	The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing.
 

1124.2
 

A mailed notice shall be sent at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing to the applicant, to the Secretaries of Borough Council and Planning Commission, and to other parties who have filed a timely
re uest to receive notice.	In addition, when the hearing involves a particular property or properties, notice shall be sent to the owners of property within one humired (100) feet of the edge of the affected property or properties.	T!:.e applicant shall provide the Secretary of the Board with the names and addresses of the property owners to be sent notices.
 
1124.3 A copy of the notice shall be posted at the Municipal Building and, in a case involving particular properties, in a conspicuous location on the affected. property.

1125.	The chairmar. or acting chairman of the Board or the hearing officer presiding shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by the parties.

1126.		The par ies shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and arguments and to cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.	Formal rules of evidence shall not apply and irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.

1127.	The Board or the hearing officer shall keep or arrange to have kept a stenographic record of the proceedings, and a transcript of the proceedings
·and copies of graphic or	ritten material received in evidence shall be made available to any  party at cost.	In lieu of a stenographic record of the hearing, a tape recording may be kept if agreeable to the Board and the appellant, acknowledged by  a signed statement.

1126.		The Board, or the hearing officer, shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party, and/or representatives of any  party in connection with any  issue relevant to the hearing, except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; shall not take legal notice of any communications, reports or other materials unless all parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed;
and shall not inspect an...v site or its surroundings with any party and/or
representative of any   party after the start of hearings unless all
parties are given an opportunity to be present.

1129.	Hearing Decisions

1129 .1 The Board or hearing officer shall render a written decision, or when no decision is required, written findings on the application, within forty-five (45)   da,ys after the conclusion of the hearing before the Board or hearing officer.	Decisions shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based on them together with the reasons therefor.	Conclusions based on any   previsions of this Ordinance or
any  other Ordinance or regulation of Coraopolis Borough or the Pennsyl­ vania Municipalities Planning Code shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why a conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts.

1129.2 When a hearing is conducted by a hearing officer and there is no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations available to the parties who
shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to the Board's final decision and entry of findings, which shall occur not later than forty-five (45)   da,ys after the hearing officer's decision.
 

•	1129.3 When the :beard. or tearing officer fails to render a decision where it or he has the power to do so within forty-five (45)   days after
hearing the application or fails to hold a hearing within sixty (60) days of tte a;c:;:;2. icar.t 's rec::uest, the decision shall be deemed to h&ve beer. rende ei in favcr of tte applicant, and the Board shall place a public notice of the decision thus granted not later than ten (10) days after the expiration of the forty-five (45)   day period in a newspaper of general local circulation.	In addition the decision shall be posted on the affected property and sent by mail to all
parties having an interest in the decision.	Any extension of the
forty-five (45)  day period for a.YJY   other reasons shall be agreeable
to both the Board and the applicant and shall be for a fixed period.

1129.4 A copy of the final decision, or the findings if no decision is required, shall be mailed to the applicant not later than the day after the date of the decision.	All others requesting notice of the
decision not later than the last da_y of the hearing shall receive by mail a su...l"l'l!:lary of the findings or decision and a statement of the place
at which the full decision or findings may be examined. Any reproduction of the proceedings shall be paid for by the party requesting the transcription.


Section 1130	Zoning Appeals

1131.		No one shall be permitted to file an appeal with the Board later than thirty (30) days after an application for development, whether preliminary or final, has been approved by the Zoning Officer or Borough Council if such appeal is intended to reverse or limit the approval in any manner. Only if the appellant is able to prove he had no notice or knowledge of the approval can the Board extend the time limit.	Successor owners shall be bound by tte kno·dedge of their predecessors in interest.

1132.		Upon the filing of an appeal, and while an appeal is pending before the Board, any    development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoninb Officer or of any agency or body and all official action thereunder shall be st2.;yed unless the Zoning Officer certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay w uld cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by the Court.

1133.	Zoning Appeals to Court

	The Courts may act upon appeals from the decisions of the Board and findings and conclusions of the Board in proceedings to challenge the validity of the Ordinance or other development regulations of the Borough.
	The court having jurisdiction shall be the Allegheny County Court of COT$'!On      Pleas.

	Zoning appeals mc,y be taken to court by any  party before the Board. or any officer or agency of Coraopolis Borough.

	All zoning appeals shall be filed not later than thirty (30) days after issuance of notice of the decision or report of the Board.
 
;

	A developer having received approval from the Borough for his development ar d  faced with a.  appeal brought by others before the Board may petition th-e Court to order those bringing the appeal to post a bor.d ir. an aT.ount established by the Court as a condition of the appeal's continuation before the Board.	The Court shall hear the petitiont  determine whether the appeal is frivolous or is designed to delay, and if so ma,y require the posting of the bond.

1134.		If any application for a variancet or appeal from the zoning officer is denied by the Board, another application for the same request shall not be filed within a period of one (1)year from the date of denial except upon order of the Court or if the application is substantially changed.























,-





























e
 




Article XII Administration



Section 1200	Duties of the Zoning Officer

1201.	The Zoning Officer shall administer and enforce this Ordinance in accordance with its literal terms.	He shall be appointed by Borough Council and may hold no elective office in Coraopolis Borough.

1202.	Applications for building and occupancy permits shall be made to tile Zoning Officer, who shall process the applications in accordance with Section 1210 or Section 1220.

1203.	The Zoning Officer shall investigate alleged violations and take action
to gain compliance in accordance with Section 1230.	He shall also testify
at hearings of the Zoning Hearing Board on contested decisions he has made.
1204.		All questions of interpretation of this Ordinance shall be first presented to the Zoning Officer and such questions shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing Board only on appeal from the decision of the Zoning Officer.

Section 1210	Building Permits

1211.		No building or structure including a mobile home shall be erected, moved, or enlarged unless a permit for such action has been issued by the Zoning Officer.	Permits shall not be required for the erection of paved walks, patios, residential driveways, childrens play equipment, or garqen sheds. Nor shall a permit be required for painting, for replacement of siding, roofing, windows, doors, soffits or gutters, for repainting masonry, or for altering interior partitions or doorways when no structural changes
are needed.	Permits shall be required for permanent roofs over open porches or patios or for closing in such areas with screening or windows.

1212.		An application shall include the following in duplicate on forms provided by the Zoning Officer:

	A description of the proposed work and the proposed use of the structure, if a new building, indicating the number of dwelling units or commercial units the building is designed to accommodate.

	A site plan drawn to scale showing the boundary lines of the property to receive the new construction, if a new building or expansion of an existing building is proposed, indicating bearings and distances of each line, area of the property and name of owner of record.
 
	The site plan shall also show the building setback line from each property boundarJ, public ! ads abutting the property, public utilities serving the property and the location of free-standing signs and of parking areas, with the number of parking spaces indicated, if a multi­ family residential, cormnercial or industrial development.

	The proposed building or addition shall be shown on the site plan,
with dimensions and height noted and distances indica ed between it and adjacent streets and property lines.
1212_.5	Existing buildings already on the property and topographical features such as steep slopes, swamps and streams shall be shown if ()n the property.
	If the building is for commercial, industrial, multi-family or public use, a certificate of approval from the State Department or Labor and Industry shall be provided.

	The applicant shall swear that all the information given on the form and drawings shall be true and correct to the best of his knowledge.

 
1213.














1214.





1215.








1216.




1217.
 
If the application is satisfactor;y, the Zoning Officer shall inspect the premises where the construction is proposed to occur.	If new construction is proposed, the	oning Officer shall verify on the site the location of the construction relative to adjacent property lines and may order the owner to have stakes positioned by a registered surveyor to indicate the property line and outline of the new construction.	Upon completing his inspection and finding the application and premises compatible, the
Zoning Officer shall approve the application and return one (1)   copy of
the construction documents together with a signed building permit auth­
orizing the applicant to proceed.	The applicant shall post the permit
prominently on the building site during construction and shall keep one
(1)  set of the documents available on the site as well.

If the application is not satisfactory, the Zoning Officer shall return one (1)   set of the application documents together with a letter indicating the specific reasons why the application cannot be approved and the changes needed to make it acceptable.

The Zonine Officer shall from time to time visit the property whereon the approved construction is taking place in order to assure himself that the work is proceeding in  accordance with the application documents.	1rhe Zoning Officer shall not be  denied access to the property during working hours in order to inspect the construction in progress and may order the work halted pending appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board or corrected to conform to the permit.

If an applicant wishes to amend the use, arrangement or construction of his building from that shown on the permit after the permit is approved, he   shall file with the Zoning Officer an  application for an   amended zoning permit.
A building permit shall become void, if after six (6)  months from the
date of issue, construction has not conunenced and been vigorously pursued. The life of a building permit shall be one (1)year from the date of issue.	Permits may be extended for not more than one (1)  additional year on large projects or where the applicant can prove to the Zoning Officer
a hardship exists making it impossible to complete the project in one (1)
year.
 

1218.		The Zoning Officer shall keep records of all applications either approved or disapproved, including one (1) copy of each permit issued, shall main­ tain a journal of his activities, and shall submit an annual report to Borough Council detailing building activity in the Boroµgh during the preceding year.


Section 1220	Occupancy Permits

1221.	For new uses or expansion of existing uses

	Upon completion of a co .rnercial, public, semi-public or industrial building, or a str cture containing more than two (2) dwelling units, or the placing of a mobile home on its foundation, the contractor or builder shall apply to the Zoning Officer for an occupancy permit.

	The Zoning Officer shall inspect the premises and if satisfied that all conditions of the building permit have been met, shall issue an occupancy permit certifying that the premises comply with the pro­ visions of this Ordinance and may be useu for the purposes set forth on the buildin& permit.

1221.)		If the Zoninb Officer upon inspection finds the premises to have been developed in violation of any  of the conditions of the building permit, he shall order the violations corrected to conform to the building permit and shall not issue an occupancy pennit until satisfied these corrections have been made.	The contractor shall be responsible for requesting a re-inspection after violations have been corrected and
the Zoning Officer shall not issue an occupancy permit until he
verifies all violation have been corrected.

1221.4		It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for a new structure covered by this section to he occupied without an occupancy permit first having been issued.

1222.	For changing existing uses

	If a propert;y owner wisheE to cr.ange the use of a:riy   building, structure or premises, or if a new ov.-ner seeks to occupy a property that has been used for commercial or industrial purposes, he shall apply_to the Zoninc Officer for a.   occupancy permit.	Changes for which an occupancy permit shall be re uire6. include adciition of a dwelling unit or units in the structure, introduction of a home occupation, conversion of premises to a different commercial or industrial use, or continuation of the use of a commercial or industrial property by a new owner.	The Zoning Officer shall first determine that no building permit is needed to effect the proposed change, but if so the developer shall proceed
as under Section 1210 above.
	2   If the Zoning Officer is satisfied that such change or addition is in conformance with all requirements of this Ordinance, he shall issue
an occupancy pemit.
 
	It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a property to determine that any persons leasing or subleasing the premises will use them only for activities permitted by this Ordinance, and if a use is contemplated or undertaken by a leasee or subleasee which is not permitted, or is permitted only as a conditional use, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to either secure permission from the Borough for the use or
to remove the use from the premises.


Section 1230	Enforcement and Penalties

1231.		If the Zoning Officer shall find that any   provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify the o mer of the property upon which such violation is allegedly occurring by certified mail, return receipt requested, such notice being deemed adequate if persons other than the
o mer are perpetrating the alleged violation.

1232.		Communications regarding violations shall indicate the nature of the violation by specific paragraph of this Ordinance relied on and shall order the action necessary to correct it.

1233.		Such communications shall order the discontinuance of illegal uses of land or structures, or the removal or moving of illegal structures or additions or alterations thereto, as well as any  other action necessary to assure compliance with or prevent violation of this Ordinance and shall indicate the owner's alternative actions under the terms of this Ordinance.

1234.		The Zoning Officer shall allow a period not to exceed thirty {30) days from date of notice	within which a violation shall be corrected.	The Zoning Officer shall inspect the site of the violation at the conclusion
of the period specified and if he finds the violation still not corrected, shall take the ovmer before a magistrate, who if he finus the owner guilty, ma,y assess penalties in accordance with Section 1235.

1235.		Continuation of a violation of this Ordinance beyond the thirty (30) da,y period shall constitute a swnmary offense.	Any  person, partner or officer of a corporation who violates this Ordinance, or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus costs of prosecution.	In default of payment of the fine, such person, the members of such partnership, or the officers of such corporation shall be liable to imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) da,ys.	Bach day each violation continues may be considered a separate offense.	All fines collected for the violation of this Ordinance shall be paid over to the Borough.

1236.	The ovmer or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains a violation ma,y
each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
 
1237.	Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough from taking such other lawful action as ma,y be necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, or to bring an action to enjoin any violation of this Ordinance.

1238.	The granting of a building or occupancy permit shall not constitute a guarantee of any kind by the Borough or any official or employee thereof for the safety of any   structure from any   cause whatever and shall create no liability against any  Borough official or employee for any   structural or other failure that mey res-ult therefrom.


Section 1240	Schedule of Fees

1241.		A schedule of fees for building permits, occupancy permits, sign-permits and applications for petitions to amend this Ordinance, or to initiate action on conditional uses before the Planning Commission or action on variances, challenges to the validity of the Ordinance, or challenges to a decision of the Zoning Officer before the Zoning Hearing :Board shall
be established by resolution of Borough Council, posted conspicuously in
the Borough Building, and subsequently amended only by action of Council.

1242.		No permit, certificate, application, or variance shall be issued unless, or until such established costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full; nor shall any   actions be taken on proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full.


Section 1250	Amendment of the Ordinance

1251.	An  amendment, supplement, change, or repeal of this Ordinance mey be initiated by:

	A resolution or request by Borough Council;
	An official proposal by the Planning Commission; or

	A petition presented to the Planning Commission by a property owner
·or a person who has entered into an agreement to purchase a property
in the Borough.

1252	Procedure

	Upon receipt of a petition from a property owner for an amendment to this Ordinance or its map, the Planning Commission shall review the proposal and submit recommendations, with specific reasons in support of either adopting the proposal, rejecting it or adopting it with conditions, to Borough Council not later than the third meeting after which the Commission officially received the petition.

	The Planning Commission may hold a public hearing, properly noticed, if it feels the proposal is of such a controversial nature or is so widespread in its jurisdiction that additional testimony should be gathered •




•
 
•	1252.3	Council shall review the Planning Commission's recommendations and shall call a public hearing, properly noticed, after which
Council shall vote approval or disapproval of the proposed amend­
ment within ninety (90) da,ys of the conclusion of the hearing.
At least thirty (30) da,ys prior to the hearing the Board shall
submit the amendment proposal to the Allegheny County Planning
Commission for comment.
1252.4	When Council proposes an amendment it shall allow the Planning Commission at least thirty (30) da,ys to review the proposal and submit recommendations before Council holds a public hearing.

	If a proposed amendment is revised before final approval to include property not previously affected or to further alter the text, Council shall hold another public hearing before proceeding to vote on the change.
	'I'he hearing record shall be kept by stenographic or sound recording and copies may be provided any party to the hearing at cost.

	Appeal from a decision of Borough Council on an umendment proposal shal 1 be to the County Courts of Common Pleas.

1253.	Public Hearing requ].rements
1253.1	Public notice shall be published in a newspaper of general local circulation once in each of two (2) consecutive weeks, the first notice appearing not more than thirty (30) da,ys nor less than
fourteen (14)   days before the hearing.
	A notice shall simultaneously be posted at a conspicuous location at the Municipal Building and at least one (1)  location on property or properties to be affected by the proposal, if it involves the
zoning map.

	Owners of property within two hundred (200) feet of any boundary of a property or properties or portion of a property for which a
change in the zoning district boundaries is sought shall be informed by mail at their addresses of record by letter sent at least
fifteen (15)  days prior to the hearing, indicating the date, time
and place of the hearing and describing the proposed change.

	The placing of public notices, posting of affected properties and mailing of letters to property owners in the vicinity of a proposed zone boundary change shall be the responsibility of the Borough Secretary, who may assign all or part of this work to the Zoning Officer.
1254.		If Council receives a clearly adverse report from the Borough or County Planning Commission, or, prior to taking a vote for adoption of a zone distract boundary change, is presented with a petition, signed in opposition
by owners representing at least one half (i) of the property proposed to be
rezoned and by at least one half (}) of the owners within two hundred (200)
feet of such property, Council shall adopt the amendment only by a two-thirds
majority vote.
 
1255	Curative Amendments

	Landowner Curative .Amendment
A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of any   portion of this Ordinance which prohibits or restricts the use
or development of land in which he has \?J:'l   il." ·::er.;st me:y submit a curative amendment to the Borough Council.	The request shall include a written statement informing Council of the matters that are in issue and the grounds for the challenge, the proposed amendment as the landowner
wishes it to be adopted, and proposed plans for development of the land in question that are frustrated by the existing zoning.	Council shall seek comments from the Borough and Allegheny County Planning Commissions at least thirty (30) days prior to a public hearing, which shall be held, with proper public notice, not later than sixty (60) days after the landowner's request is received at a regular meeting of Council.	A stenographic record of the hearing shall be kept unless Council and the appellant agree in writing to a tape recor:iing and Council shall have the power to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, compel the attendance of witnesses and production of relevant documents.	The parties may be represented by counsel which ma;y   present evidence and cross examine
adverse witnesses.	The landowner's proposed amendment shall be considered denied when Council informs the landowner it will not adopt the amendment, when Council adopts another amendment unacceptable to the landowner, or when Council fails to act on the landowner's amendment within thirty (30) days after the public hearing unless the time period is extended by
mutual consent.

	'Municipal Curative Amendment
Borough Council ma;;.'  by official vote declare any part or all of the
Ordinance invalid and propose to prepare a curative amendment to over­
come the inveJ.iciity.	Within thirty (30) days thereafter, Council by
resolution shall specify the portions of the Ordinance to be cured and
shall commence preparation of the amendment.	The consideration of the amendment shall include review by the Borough and County Planning Commissions and public hearing before Council, properly noticed as·
specified in Section 1253.	Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the declaration of i:qvalidity, Council shall adopt the curative amendment or reaffirm its Ordinance as it stood prior to the declaration.	While
a municipal curative amendment is in process, Council shall not be required to receive any  landovmer's curative amendment nor shall any rights accrue to a landoi·mer as a result of Council's action relative to a landowner curative amendment.	r_foe mun:.c:'.pcl curative amendment pro­ cedure may not be used by  Council for at least thirty-six (36)months after Council's decision on a previous amendment unless State law compels Council to act sooner.

1256.	Rehearing
If a petition for amendment, supplement, change or repeal of this Ordinance
is denied by Borough Council, another petition for a similar change shall
not be filed within a period of one (1)year from the date of denial,
except upon the initiation of Council and reconnnendation of the Planning
Commission based upon a change in circumstances which would warrant a
rehearing •

..
 
Section  126o	Enactment of the Ordinanoe

1261.	This Ordinance is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public health,  safety  and general  welfare  and shall be  effective upon  its passage and signing.

1262.	Duly  presented  after public  hearings  and adopted  at  a regular  meeting of the :Borough Council of Coraopolis :Borough, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania  held on	18th	dey- of  September	, 198 5 .






I   I	i
\    l  I, l
: ; t t'
 


 








































 
 

 




OFFICIAL BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
ORDINANCE I 74.8

AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY AND COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING THE CORAOPOLIS BOROUGH CODE OF ORDINANCES, THE CORAOPOLIS BOROUGH ZONING CODE ND THE CORAOPOLIS BOROUGH ZONING MAP SO AS TO CHANGE ZONING OF A PORTION OF LAND SITUATED IN THE NORTHEASTERLY QUADRANT OF THE BOROUGH FROM INDUSTRIAL (I-2) TO PUBLIC RECREATION (P).

WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis has  heretofore enacted into law the Coraoplis Borough Code of Ordinances as well as the Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map, as amended, of the Borough of Coraopolis; and,


WHEREAS, the aforesaid Zoning Map established various areas of the Borough of Coraopolis and districts which are designated for particular uses; and,


WHEREAS, a large portion ofland situated in the northeasterly quadrant of the Borough between the Ohio River to the north and Pa. State Route 51 to the south is currently Zoned Industrial (I-2) but said parcel is not being utilized for industrial purposes; and,

WHEREAS, the Borough has received requests from owners and interested parties to the aforesaid land to change or rezone the zoning designation relevant thereto from Industrial (I-2) to Public Recreation (P) so as to facilitate the development of said area into a	Complex, a Public Park and extension of the Montour Trail;



Council of the Borough of Coraopolis deems

ecreat1ona1 use to be in

 
 


NOW THEREFORE, be it ORDAINED and ENACTED by the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis as follows:


SECTION I:	That the following described property shall be rezoned from the existing classification ofindustrial (I-2) to Public Recreation (P) and the official Zoning Map of the Borough of Coraopolis shall be revised to reflect said change in classification:


"All that parcel of land known and commoniy referred
to as Lot and Block 272-E-199 which parcel is generally situated in the northeasterly quadrant of the Borough, South of the Ohio River and Robinson Township, North of Pa. State Route 51, East of the Neville Island Bridge and West of Robinson  Township."


SECTION II: That attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked as an Exhibit hereto is the revised Official Zoning Map of the Borough of Coraopolis which reflects the change in zoning classification referred to in Section I, above.


SECTION III: That	the	within	Ordinance	shall	take	effect immediately upon passage and approval of same.


 



2011.
 
ORDAINED and ENACTED this	/Vl-f day of ----
 

ATTE&T	BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS

           PreSi11tOfCCii


and approved by the Mayor of the Borough of Coraopolis this_, 	 2011.
----'--'----'-----'

 
 

 


OFFIOAL

BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
ORDINAL CENO.  J?;.?t)



AN ORDINANCE  OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS. ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, Af..ffit.irnING THE CORAOPOLIS BOROUGH Z0 1NG ORDL. ANCE TO AME:Nu ARTICLE V, OTHER ZONING DISTRICTS, TO PRO\!IDE FOR OUTDOOR RECREATIONAL ACTl\tTIIES AS CONDIDONAL USES IN THE 1-1 LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRJCT AND THE I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT AND TO RESTATE ARTICLE  VII,  CONDIDONAL  USES.  IN ITS ENTIRETY.


WHEREAS, the Coraopolis Borough Zoning Ordfaance regulates zoning and land use within the Borough of Coraopolis; and

WHEREAS, outdoor recreational activities are becoming increasingly popular in Allegheny County and the Borough; and

WHEREAS, the unregulated development of outdoor recreational activities is inconsistent with the community development objectives of the Borough and hampers the orderly development, redevelopment, use and reuse of property with.in the Borough; and

WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis desires to amend the Coraopolis Borough Zoning Ordinance by restating the conditional use regulations in their entirety in order to further the communiry developmenr objectives of the Borough, to further provide for the orderly development, redevelopment, use and reuse of property. and to further protect the health, safery and welfare of the residents and businesses of the Borough; and


WH S, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis desires to amend the Coraopolis Borough Zoning Ordinance in order to provide for outdoor recreational activities as a conditional use within the 1-1 Limited Industrial District and the I-2 Heavy Industrial District and to establish stmdards and regulations related thereto.

NOW, THEREFORE. Council of the Borough of Coraopolis hereby ordains chat Article II of the Coraopolis Borough Zoning Ordinance be amended to add the following definition:

Outdoor Recreational Activities - any activities conducted primarily  for entertainment, amusement and recreational purposes and occurring outside an enclosed strUcrure, with ancillary  services  (such  as  restrooms.  offices,  electronic  games  and  refreshments) conducted within an enclosed building located on che same property.  Outdoor recreational shall	but not be limited to:  miniature	go-can tracks,  amusement
 
 
rides or devices. swimming pools,  festivals, fairs, flea markers,  concerts,  athletic fields
or any other similar activities. ·

NOW, THEREFORE, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis hereby ordains r.hat Article V of the Coraopolis Borough Zoning Ordinance _be amended as follows by adding the underscored language.

Article V
Provisions Applicable in Other Zoning Districts Section 550	Development  in the Limited Industrial (l-1) District
* * *"'"'

553.    Conditional Uses
Any light manufacturing plant. business that sells principally to industry. or
non-retail  business  similar  to,  and  compatible  with.  the  uses  that  are permitted.
Qutdoor Recreational Activities

*****

Section 560	Development in the Heavy Industrial (1-2) District

* * * .. *

563.     Conditional Uses
Outdoor Recreational Activities




NOW,  THEREFORE,  the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis hereby  ordains r.hat
A.	rticle \TJI of the Coraopolis Borough Zoning Ordinance be restated  in ir.s entirety as follows.



Article VIl
Conditional Uses -Review and Regulations Section 701	Applicability
Applications for conditional use, when listed as permissible by thls Ordinance, shall be approved or denied by Borough Council in accordance with the standards and criteria of this Article.



2
 
Section 702	Application Procedure
a.	Applications for conditional use shall be filed with t.he Zoning Officer and shall be
accompanied by:
1.	an application fee in an amount equal to that set by resolution of Borough
Council;
2.	a written statement supporting the general standards and criteria outlined in
Section 705 and describing the proposed use in detail;
3.	5 copies of a sealed site plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of th.is Ordinance and showing the arrangement of the proposed use on t.he site, including: property lines, uses on adjacent propenies, abutting streets, location and dimensions of any ex.1sting or proposed buildings and strucrures, points of access into the sire, internal driveways, parking area layout indicating nlli11ber of spaces, free standing signs, ar.eas of earth moving with grade of finished slope noted, stormwater management controls, proposed landscaping and other pertinent information.

b.	The Planning Commission may waive parts of the site pl.an submission that are clearly irrelevant in a particular case.

Section 703	Review Procedure
a.	The Zoning Officer shall forward copies of the completed application to the Planning Commission for review and then to the Borough Council for review and approval.

b.	The Planning Commission shall review the application and forward its wrinen recommendation to the Borough Council within 30 days of review. This written recommendation shall eit.her recommend the approval or denial of the application. or the approval of the application with reasonable conditions.

c.	Borough Council shall hold a public hearing wichin 60 of the filing of a completed application for coruiitional use and proposed site plan. Council shall issue its decision within 45 days after the last hearing on t.he application. Council shall approve or deny the application, taking into consideration any recommendation by the Planning Commission. Inapproving a conditional use, Council may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this Article, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this Article.

d.	Borough Council shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional use application within 45 days after the last hearing on the application. Where the application is contesred or denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any provision of the Municipalities Planning Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation sh.all contain a
 
reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.

e.	The time limitations referenced in this Section may be extended or modified  as
agreed by the applicant in writing or on the record.

f.		W1lere Council fails to render a decision within the time provision set forth above, without 'Jlllinen agreement by the applicant, the application shall be deemed to be approved. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant  because of the failure of Council to meet or render a decision as herein above provided, Council shall give public notice of the decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met t.o render a decision in che same manner as required by the public notice requirements of the Municipalities Planning Code. If Council shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so.

g.		Any development, construction, use or operation pursuant to an approved conditional use application shall be in accordance with Council's approval and che approved site plan, unless a revised plan is submined and approved.

Section 704	Term of Approval.
The approval of a conditional use application shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the dare of approval Ifwith.in th.is period, the building permit has not been applied for and construction or development ha.s not begun, then the conditional use approval shall be revoked,  and the applicant must re-apply  for conditional  use  approval.   One extension of up to 6 months may be granted by the Zoning Officer where the applicant can show good cause for the delay.

Section 705	General Standards and Criteria for Conditional Uses
Before approving a conditional use application. Council shall determine that the proposed use will not alter the established character and use of the neighborhood or zoning district in which it is located, and that it will not substantially impair the use or development of adjacent properties. In addition. che following standards and criteria must be met for che granting of a conditional use.

a.	The conditional use must be found to be beneficial to the public ar the proposed location and compatible wich surrounding land uses.

b.	The conditional use shall be suitable at the proposed location in terms of topography, soil conditions and size, based on the number of projected users and che frequency of use.

c.	The conditional use must be more suitable at the proposed location than on other properties in the same zoning district because of the size, shape, topography, surroundings and physical condition of the proposed location.
 
d.	The conditional use shall not involve any element or cause any condition that may be dangerous, injurious or noxious to any ocher property or persons. Specifically. the conditional use shall not have a negative impact on the existing neighborhood or development in terms of air and water quality, noise, illumination and glare, odor, vibration, dust, restrictions to natural light and air circulation, or other hazardous conditions that could endanger surrounding residents and businesses or impair the use of surrounding property. Ally lighting of signs or outdoor areas shall be directed away from adjacent residences and streecs and light levels shall be the minimum necessary to provide safety and security.

e.	The conditional use shall comply with all applicable standards and requirements for providing sanitary sewage disposal, water supply, storm water drainage, and solid and toxic waste storage and disposal.

f.		The conditional use sha11 be sired. oriented and landscaped to produce a harmonious relationship of buildings and grounds to adjacent buildings and properties. Parking and outdoor srorage areas shall be screened to provide a buffer for adjacent residences and businesses.

g.	The conditional use shall satisfy any special standards and criteria for a particular type or use of development referenced in Section 706 of this Article.

h.	The conditional use shall provide for safe and adequate vehicular access and parking to minimize traffic congestion in the neighborhood. Vehicular access shall be clearly marked and located to provide maximum sight distances for traffic entering and leaving che property and on any intersecting public street. The conditional use shall have access from a street capable of handling the traffic generated by the proposed use, and it shall not result in undue traffic congestion and hazardous conditions on adjacent streets. The use shall provide for safe and efficient internal circulation and sufficient off-street parking and loading.

i.	The conditional use shall conduct all business from a permanent enclosed building.
No sales shall take place from a trailer or withln a parking lot upon spaces set aside
·	to meet minimum parking standards.

j.	All storage vessels shall be surrounded by a dike with sufficient capacity to hold the contents of the vessel or vessels.

k.		The conditional use shall comply with all applicable Federal, state, county and Borough laws, rules. regulations,  and ordinances.
 
Section 706	Special Standards and·Criteria
For the types  of uses  identified  in this Section,  Council  shall also determine that  the proposed use complies with these additional standards.

706.1	Outdoor Recreational Activities
a.	All vehicular and pedestrian access to and from the proposed site shall be located so as to not interfere with through traffic movements on adjacenr streets and roadways.

b.	The conditional use shall not produce or involve any lighting, noise, odor or other environmental characteristics that negatively impacts surrounding propenies  or neighborhood.
1.	A!ly noise which  is derermi.ned  to  be objectionable, because  of volume, frequency or beat shall be muffled or otl:l-""f'Wise controlled.

2.	All outdoor lighting shall be shielded and/or reflected so as not to cast direct illumination onto any residential dwellings or adjoining properties.

c.		All vehicular parking, operating and access areas shall be paved or otherwise covered with an impervious material acceptable to the Borough engineer.

d.		No part of the conditional use shall be located or conducted within the requisite yard or setback area. except for the necessary landscaping or vegetative buffer.

e.	Any repair, servicing or maintenance of recreational equipment or vehicles shall occur entirely within an enclosed structure.

f.		The conditional use shall not include or produce any exterior music. A:IJy exterior public address system shall be operated so that noise is directed away from residential dwellings, and shall be operated at the minimum volume necessary to be audlole by .individuals involved in the recreational activity.

g.		The conditional use shall include a solid fence located so as to provide a buffer for adjacent residential dwellings and to deflect any noise away from residential areas. This solid fence shall be constructed at a height and angle necessary to deflect noise from residential areas and which satisfies Borough Council. The fence shall also be engineered to withstand wind loads to the satisfaction of the Borough engineer.
 
h.		All motorized vehicles used in conjunction with the conditional use shall utilize a muffler to reduce noise.

L		All motorized vehicles used in conjunction with the conditional use shall be maintained and stored on the property. and such vehicles shall not be permitted to be operated or repaired on public roadways. All loading and unloading of such vehicles must occur on the subject property.

J.		The location, construction and operation of the conditional use shall comply with the approved site plan. Any expansion or alteration of the conditional use that deviates  from this approved  site plan  shall require prior  approval of  Borough  Council.

k.		Borough Council shall have the power to impose restrictions on access to the facility, storage of vehicles or materials on the premises. hours of operation. noise and odor control, and such other matters as Council deems necessary to insure that there is no negative or adverse impact on residential areas or adjacent properties.

706.2	Manufacturing or Processing Operations
a.	The conditional use shall not create excessive noise, odor, vibration,  sky
reflected glare or dust.


b.	All parts of such an operation shall occur within an enclosed. building.

 
ORDAINED   and  ENACTED  this	t:J/h day of	/VJ AP
by the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis in lawful session duly assembled.
 


'2001,
 



ATTEST:	BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS



By:"h,/V
PresideD.t:BUgh Council

EXAMINED  and APPROVED  this	qt!}_ day of_/v1 .A_Y	, 2001.





Mayr
 

 


 

BOROUGH OF CORJ\OPOLIS ORDINANCE NO.



AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORA.OPOLIS, ALLEGHEJ\T)' COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE CORAOPOLIS BOROUGH ZONING ORDINANCE TO REGULATE THE PLACEMENT AND CONSTRUCTION OF COM]\i1UNICATIONS TOWER.S AND ANTENNAE IN THE BOROUGH.

'WHEREAS, the Coraopolis Borough Zoning Ordinance regulates zoning and land use within the Borough of Coraopolis;,and

\VHEREAS, technical developments in the telecommunications field have provided new options for the expansion and delivery of communications services to the Borough of Coraopolis and its residents; and

WHEREAS, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis desires to encourage efficient and
.adequate wireless communication services within the Borough while at the same time, protecting the public health, safety and welfare; and

\VHEREAS, in an effort to facilitate efficient and adequate wireless communicatio.p.s services and protect the interests of its residents, the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis desires to regulate the construction and the placement of communications towers and antennae; and

WHEREAS, federal and state statutes and regulations impose certain limitations on the Borough of Coraopolis' ability to regulate the placement and construction of communications towers and antennae; and

\VHEREAS, it is necessary to amend the Coraopolis Borough Zoning Ordinance to make it consistent with the interests of the Borough of Coraopolis and its residents and the limitations imposed by federal and state statutes and regulations.

 
NOW, THEREFORE, the	of	of Coraopolis Coraopolis Borough	Ordinance be amended as follows:
 
ordains that
 

II is	new
 
 

reception service or on1nidirectional
by
 


, including  without
or  whip  antenna  and  directional  or  panel  antenna,  owned  or person  or	Federal
to operate such
 
antenna                     on                         ("Tower-mounted Communication Antenna") and antenna mounted on Buildings ("Building-mounted Communication Antenna"). This definition does not include private residence mounted   satellite  dishes  or  television  antenna  or  amateur  radio  equipment,
lirriJtation ham or	band	antenna.

COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING: Any unmanned Building, Court or other enclosure containing equipment or control devices for the operation of a Communication Antenna.

COMMUNICATIONS TO\VER: A Structure other than a Building, such as a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower, designed and used to hold and facilitate the operation of a Communications Antenna.

COMMUNICATIONS TOWER HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the ground level to the highest point on a Communications Tower, including any Communications Antenna mounted on the tower.

PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER: A Structure, owned or operat. d by a public utility regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead electricity, telephone or other transmission lines.


 
Section 2.
 
Definition of Structure. Article II is further amended by adding the following underscored language and deleting the following  bracketed language from the definition  of  "Structure."

STRUCTURE: Any [permanent man-made construction in, on or over the ground surface and attached to the ground bur not including surfaces treated for vehicular
 


 
 
Section 3.
 
Height Exceptions.
Exceptions, is the following
 
Article VI (Supplementary Regulations),  Section 620 - Height
by	the following	  language.
 

622	Height  Exceptions


Chimneys, exhaust           , church                                , water tanks[,]
roof-mounted air handling equipment [and communications equipment meeting Federal Communications Commission requirements] shall be exempt from height regulations.

 
Section 4.











Section S.










Section 6.
 
Communications Antenna as Permitted Use. In the I-1 Limired Industrial District (§551) and I-2 Heavy Industrial District (§561), the following new Permitted Use is hereby inserted:

Communications Antenna mounted on an ex1stmg Public Utility Transmission Tower, Building or other Structure, subject to the provisions of Section  670. l.



Communications Tower as Permitted Use. In the I-2 Heavy Industrial District (§561), the following new Permitted Use is hereby inserted:

Comnmnications Tower·, including Tower-mounted Communications Antenna and any related Communications Equipment Building, subjeCU(), the provisions of Section 670.1 and Section 670.2.                              ·



Regulations for Permitted Communications  Antenna.  Article  VI (Supplementary Regulations) is amended by the insertion of a new Section 670 and Section 670.1 as follows:

670      Permitted Communications Antenna and Tower Regulations

670. l  Regulations	Governing   Communications   Antenna   and  Accessory Communications Equipment Buildings.

a.	A Building-mounted Communications
on any	or	 
b.                                                                                                            to
no
 
c.	An  omnidirectional  or whip  Communications  Antenna  shall not
(20)	m	seven	m


d.	A directional or panel Communications Antenna shall not exceed five (5)        in height        three (3) feet in width.

e.	Any applicant proposing a	Antenna to
on a Building or  other  structure  shall  submit  from  a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer certifying thar the proposed installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the Building  or  other  Srructure,  consideri..11g     and     loads associated with the anten.r1a location.

f.		Any applicant proposing a Communications Antenna to be mounted on a Building or other Structure shall submit detailed construction and elevation drawings indicating how the antenna will be mounted on the Building or Structure for review by the Township Engineer for compliance with the Borough Building Regulations and other applicable law.

g.	Any applicant proposing a Communications Antenna to be mounted on a Building or other Structure shall submit evidence of agreements and/or easements. f!_ecessary to provide access to the Building or Structure on which the antenna is to be mounted so that installation and maintenance of the antenna and any Communications Equipment, Building can be accomplished.

h.	A Communications Antenna shall comply with all applicable standards established by the Federal Communications Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.

1.	A ·communications Antenna  shall  not  cause  radio  frequency interference with  other  communications  facilities  located  in  the Borough.

J.	A Communications Equipment Building shall not exceed twelve (12)
in	Any Communications Equipment Building accessory to a Communications Antenna mounted on an existing Public Utility H·....,..,,v...     Tower,	Structure, shall not exceea
be
 
k.	The owner or operator of any Communications Antenna shall be licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to operate such antenna.


 
Section  7.
 
Requirements for Permitted Communications Towers. Article  VI (Supplementary Regulations) is amended by the insertion of a new Section 670.2 as follows:

670.2	Regulations	Governing	Communications	Tm:ver	and	Accessory Equipment Building

a.	The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to operate a Communications Tower and  Gommunications  Antenna,  as  applicable.

b.	The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed Communications Tower and Communications Antenna proposed to be mounted thereon comply with all applicable standards established by  the Federal Communications Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.

c.	A Communication.s Tower shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration, Commonwealth Bureau of Aviation and applicable Airport Zoning Regulations.

d.	The shared use of Communications  Towers and sites is encouraged.
Any applicant proposing construction of a new Communications Tower shall demonstrate in writing that a good faith effort has been made to obtain permission to mount the Communications Antenna on an existing Building, Structure or Communications Tower. A good faith effort shall require that all owners of potentially suitable Building,  Structure or Communications  Tower within a one-half
(112) mile radius of the proposed Communications Tower site be contacted and that one (1) or more of the following reasons for not selecting such Building, Structure or Communication Tower apply:

(i)	The proposed antenna and related equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the existing Building, Structure or Communications Tower and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
 
The proposed antenna and related equipment would cause radio                                        with other existing equipment for that existing Building, Structure or Communications Tower   and   the   interference   cannot   be   prevented   at   a
cost.


Such          Building, Structure or Communications Tower does not have adequate location, space, access or height to accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform  its  intended  function.

(iv)	Addition of the proposed antenna and related equipment would	result in electromagnetic radiation from such Buiiding, Structure or Communications Tower exceeding applicable	standards established by the Federal Communications Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.

(v)	A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with	the owners of such  Building, Structure or Communications Tower.

e.	Access shall be provided to the Communications Tower and Communications Equipment Building by means of a public street or easement to a public street. Any such easement shall be a minimu.Ill, of twenty (20) feet in width and shall be paved to a width of at least ten (10) feet with concrete, bituminous asphalt or bituminous  seal coat for its entire length and in accordance with applicable Borough Ordinances  governing  the  construction  of public  streets.

f.	The applicam shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the Coinmunications Tower is the minimum height necessary to perform its function. For any proposed  Communications  Tower  with  a height in excess of seventy (70) feet, the applicant shall deposit with the Borough an engineering review deposit as may be deemed appropriate by the Borough Engineer,  which  deposit  shall  in addition to           other required  application and/or engineering  fees.
This deposit shall be used by the Borough  to
of Communications
 
shall	payment of
for	are
amount of	deposit, the		be refunded and/or credited to the applicant.  At irs sole discretion, the Borough may, in lieu of designating the qualified engineer,		a report from a qualified selected'"		applicant.	The  applicant  shaII  be
responsible	the costs of	report.

g.	foundation and base of any Communications Tower shall be set back a minimum of sLxty (60) feet from any property boundary line and any overhead utility transmission line.

h.	The maximum height of any Communications Tower shall be seventy (70) feet; provided, however, that such height may be increased by no more than an additional one hundred (100) feet as long as the engineer retained under paragraph f. above expresses an opinion that the additional height is necessary for the proposed Communications Tower to perform its function. Regardless of height, all Communications Towers shall remain subject to the setback requirements of paragraph  g. above.

I.	A permitted Communications Tower shall only be constructed in a monopole fashion, with a maximum diameter of five (5) feet at the base of the tower ·and a maximum diameter of three (3) feet at the top of the tower.   Guy wires are prohibited.

J.		A permitted Communications Tower shall be located no closer than six hundred (600) feet from any residentially zoned property and no closer than one hundred  fifty  (150)  feet  from  any residential structure. No Communications Tower shall be located closer than one	thousand    five   hundred    (1500)    feet    from    any    other Communications   Tower,   such   distance   being   measured   as  a horizontal line from tower to tower.

k.	There shall be a maximum of one (1) Communications Tower per lot, regardless of lease lines.

l.	applicant shall submit a plan to -the Borough to minimize visual	of  the   Communications   Tower   on
plan shall consider		as of
 
Communications uses.
 
to help it better  conform to surrounding
 

m.	The site of a Communications Tower shall be secured with a minimum	of	and a ... ...  ..
ten  (1	feet  anu  containing  only  self-latching  gates  to  limit by the	public.	shall	to
compatible with surrounding land uses.

n.	Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided within the required  fenced area.

o.	The base of a Communications Tower shall be landscaped so as to screen the foundation, base and Communications Equipment Building from abutting properties. The Applicant shall submit a landscaping plan to the Borough which conforms to the following requirements:

(i)	Landscaping, consisting of trees and  shrubs,  shall  be required	at the perimeter of the fence and the Communications Equipment Building, as well as along all property lines abutting an existing school, park or church. Evergreen_ trees six (6) feet in height at planting shall be planted at a maximum interval  of twelve (12) feet on center around the perimeter of the fence. Areas in between thc:_se trees shall contain shrubbery and plantings at least four (4) feet  in height.

(ii) The Borough may waive any or all of these landscaping requirements if it is determined that acceptable vegetation exists aiong the required areas.

p.	A Communications Equipment Building shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height, nor exceed a footprint of four hundred (400) square feet. The minimum setback for Communications Equipment Building shall be twenty (20) feet.



 
 
applicable	requirements	of Regulations.
 
state   or	Borough	Buildincr
 

r.

 
tele.¢1one		number	for	the	operator	of	the Communications	, and a Certificate of Insurance evidencing liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and	damage coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the Communications Tower
and any Communications Anteu.'la located thereon.

s.	No signs or lights shall be mounted on a Communications Tower, except as may be required by the Federal Communications Commission,	Federal Aviation Administration or other governmental agency which has jurisdiction.

t.	A Communications Tower shall be protected and maintained in accordance with the requirements of any state or Borough Building and Property Maintenance Regulations.

u.	Any Communications Tower that remains unused for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months shall be considered abandoned, and the	owner    or   operator    shall    dismantle    and    remove    the
Communications Tower within ninety (90) days of the expiration .9f
such twelve (12) month period. Failure to remove an abandoned Communications Tower within said ninety (90) day period shall be grounds for the Borough to remove said Tower at the owner's expense.

In order to ensure the removal of an abandoned Communications Tower pursuant to the above requirements, the applicant for a proposed Communications Tower must provide the Borough with financial security, in a form acceptable to the Borough Solicitor, in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or in such greater amount as deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer given the characteristics of a proposed Communications
 

v.	All tower  structures shall be
tower UAOLHULO.'-·"-H
 
 
          Repealer.
Ordinance are hereby
 

of this
 



ORDAINED and ENACTED  this





ATTEST:	BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS



By:    

77
EXAMIN D and APPROVED  this	day of _,_/f-'--'"l{_.,.{r....,L(_.S...,..J------' 2001.







































1
 
BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA ORDINANCE NO. 1795

AN ORDINANCE FOR THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, TO PROVIDE FOR THE REGULATION OF HANDICAPPED PARKING.



WHEREAS, the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code permits local authorities to erect on the h'ighway as close as possible to a place of residence a sign or signs indicating that a parking
space is reserved for a vehicle bearing a "handicapped" or "severely disabled veteran" license plate; and,

WHEREAS, the Borough has been providing such signs to individuals who provide evidence of having been issued a handicapped or severely disabled veteran license plate from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania pursuant to Sections 1338 or 1342, respectively, the Motor Vehicle Code, 75 Pa. C.S.A. Sections 1338 and 1342; and,

WHEREAS, such plates are renewed on an annual basis by the payment of the appropriate fee; and,

WHEREAS, the Borough desires to enact the within Ordinance so as to ensure the uniform administration of regulations regarding parking for handicapped persons and impose a fee to offset the cost of the sign and associated labor.

NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by authority of the same, as follows:

Section 1.	Restricted Handicapped Residential Parking.

Any Borough resident who has been issued a handicapped or severely disabled veteran license plate by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or on whose behalf said license plate has been issued, pursuant to Section 1338 or Section 1342 of the	'
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, shall be eligible for the installation, in front of, or as close as
possible to, said person's residence of a sign indicating that parking in such space is restricted to any person's vehicle bearing a handicapped or severely disabled veteran license plate, which initial eligibility shall expire twelve (12) months from the date such sign is installed. Application for such restricted parking sign shall be made to the Chief of Police. The applicant shall be required to pay an initial fee of Fifty ($50.00) Dollars for the first year at the time the application is approved by the Chief of Police of the Borough of Coraopolis.  Disabled Veterans are exempt from the initial application fee and the annual fee, but are required to renew the application annually.
 
Section 2.	Application Fm·m and Content.

Application for a restricted handicapped or severely disabled parking space shall be made on a form provided by the Chief of Police, a copy of which is appended to this
Ordinance. The application information shall include the identity of the handicapped person or
severely disabled veteran and said person's place ofresidence and shall be accompanied by documentation evidencing issuance of a handicapped or severely disabled veteran plate by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and such other information as is deemed fitting and proper.

Section 3.	Factors in Determining Auproval of Applications.

In reviewing the application, the Chief of Police shall take into consideration the following factors:

A.	Impact on general safety.

B.	Impact on traffic flow.

C.	Impact on neighboring properties.

D.	Nature of disability.

E.	Availability of off-street parking, garage and/or driveway.

F.	Verification of application in general.

The application shall not be approved if off-street parking is available to the applicant unless the same cannot be utilized or if an undue hardship is created for the other residents parking in the area.

Section 4.	Annual Certification.

A.	Each renewal period shall be twelve (12) months.

B.	Application for renewal must be filed with the Chief of Police no later than thirty (30) days before the date the prior eligibility is due to expire.

C.	Each Application for Renewal shall be accompanied with a fee of Ten ($10.00) Dollars.

D.	The Chief of Police will not accept the application for renewal unless it is also accompanied by a sworn document containing the following averments:

I.	The applicant continues to be disabled as evidenced by documentation submitted and signed by applicant's treating physician.

2.	The applicant continues to drive an automobile or is being driven by another identified individual because of applicant's disability.
 
3.	The applicant resides at the same address.

E.	All handicapped plates and placards must be readily visible.

Section 5.	Exemption for the Annual Fee Payment.

A single applicant who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older, a Coraopolis Borough resident for at least ninety (90) days prior to the date of application, with a total income
of less than twenty-three thousand five hundred dollars ($23,500) shall be eligible for application without the initial and the annual fee.

A married applicant who is sixty-five (65) years of age or older, a Coraopolis Borough resident for at least ninety (90) days prior to the date of application, with a total combined income of less than thirty-one thousand five hundred dollars ($31,500) shall be eligible for application without the initial and the annual fee, Applicants should be prepared to provide verification of any of these criteria to the Chief of Police when submitting the completed application.

Section 6.	Failure to File Completed Auplication.

Failure to file a completed initial application or a timely application for renewal shall result in such application being denied or not renewed. In the event an individual
fails to file a completed application for recertification within the time allowed, that is, on an
annual basis prior to expiration of the individual's eligibility, the right to such sign
shall be forfeited and the sign shall be removed by the Department of Public Works and shall not be re-erected unless an application for recertification is filed along with a Fifty ($50.00) Dollar fee.

Section 7.	C111Tent Signs.

All residences currently having restricted handicapped or severely disabled veteran parking signs in front of the premises shall apply to the Chief of Police within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this ordinance for renewal of their handicapped or disabled status. Failure to do so will result in the removal of the sign.

Section 8.	Removal of Sign.

In addition to removal of the sign for failure to properly apply for renewal, a handicapped or severely disabled veteran parking restriction sign may be removed after notice to the applicant if, upon investigation, the Borough determines either that the applicant is not, in fact, handicapped or a severely disabled veteran; that the applicant has moved; or, that the privilege is being abused in a manner inconsistent with its intent. The notice to the individual shall state the reason or reasons for the anticipated removal of the
sign and shall give the handicapped individual or severely disabled veteran twenty (20) days in which to request a hearing before the Chief of Police or his designee. The Chief of Police and his designee shall also have the right to remove a sign for just cause.
 
Section 9.	Installation.

Upon approval of the application, the Chief of Police or his designee shall review and approve all applications for handicapped or severely disabled veteran restricted parking which meet the requirements of this ordinance and refer the approved Application to the Department of Public Works for installation ofa restricted handicapped or severely disabled veteran parking sign. All signs shall remain the prope1iy of the Borough and shall indicate the penalty for violation, including fine and that a violator's car may be towed away.

Section 10.	Penalties.

An individual who submits a false application to the Chief of Police shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of Six Hundred ($600.00) Dollars and costs and in default of payment of said fine and costs, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both. Each false application submitted to the Chief of Police shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty for unlawfully parking in a handicapped parking space shall be in accordance with the Pa. Motor Vehicle Code.

Section 11.	Repealer.

All ordinances of parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.

Section 12.	Effective Date.

This ordinance shall take effect upon adoption.


ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 9th day of March, 2016.


 
ATTEST:
 
BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
 
'-	-)	/
 
?
{;
Ra' mond Mccutcheon
Borough Manager
 

' ,	// /
By:	,..,
--		John Z. Pes y, President Borough Council
 


Examined and approved by the Mayo ·of the Borough of Coraopolis, this 9th day of March, 2016.
 
BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS APPLICATION FOR HANOICAPPPED PARKING SPACE
Return co1np!eted application to Borough Adn1inistration  Office for processing.

Name   of  Applicant:----------------------­
Address Where Applicant Lives: -----------------­
Mailing Address (if different):------------------ Home or Cell Telephone Number of Applicant:	_ Applicant's Physician's Name:		_
Physician's Phone Number:-------------------­ Information of vehicle owned by Applicant which will occupy the parking space:
 
License Plate Number:	_

Color of Vehicle:---------
 
Make of Vehicle:	_

Year of Vehicle:----------
 
Does the property for which this space is being requested have a garage or other off-
street parking available? YES	NO	(If YES -describe:	_


 

Is this request for temporary space or permanent space?  	 long	_
 
If yes, for how
 

By signing this form, you agree that all the information you have given is true and correct to the best of your knowledge. You also permit the Borough 's Authorized Official to investigate all the above information. Any false or missing information given will render this application void. Further, you understand that parking in such space is not exclusive to applicant, but is available to any person's vehicle bearing a handicapped or severely disabled veteran license plate.



Signature of Applicant                                                                                             DATE
*********************************************************************************************************************

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY - DO NOT WRITE BELOW THIS LINE
Does the applicant have a H/C License Plate?		_ Is the vehicle in applicant's name?		_ Is there off-street parking?	_
Is there a garage/driveway available to applicant?	_
 
Reviewed by:	_ Approved by:	_
 
Date: --------
Rejected by:	_
 
 
 
BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS ORDINANCE NO. 1255


AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA, RELATING TO GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION,
REQUIRING THE REMOVAL, TRIMMING OR CUTTING THEREOF BY THE OWNER OR OCCUPANT OF THE PREMISES WHERE THE SAME IS GROWING UNDER CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES, OR BY THE BOROUGH AT THE EXPENSE OF SUCH OWNER OR OCCUPANT IN DEFAULT, AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES
FOR VIOLATION.


Whereas, the Borough of Coraopolis is desirous of enacting the following items in order to protect the health, safety, general welfare, beauty, convenience, comfort and safety of the Borough, and they are desirous further of prohibiting and removing nuisance on public or private grounds and to require the removal of such nuisance by the owner or occupier of such grounds, in default of which the Borough may cause the same to be done, and collect the cost thereof, together with any fine or penalty in a manner provided by law for the collection of the municipal claims (or by an action in assumpsit or by relief through a bill in equity).


The Borough of Coraopolis hereby ordains as follows:
Section 1. No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within the Borough of Coraopolis, shall permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height of six (6) inches or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any filthy deposit or to create or produce pollen. Any grass, weeds or thither vegetation  growing upon any premises in the Borough in violation of any of the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comport of the inhabitants of the Borough.


Section 2. The owner of any premises, as to vacant premises or premises occupied by the owner, and the occupant thereof, in case of premises occupied by other than the owner thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or other vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of the provisions of the first section of this ordinance.


Section 3. The Borough Council, or any officer or employee of the Borough designated thereby for the purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal service or by Registered United States Mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case may be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation is growing or remaining in violation of the provisions
 
of the first section of this ordinance, directing and requiring such occupant to remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation, so as to conform to the requirements of this ordinance, within then (10) days after issuance of such notice. In case any person, firm or corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to com poly with such notice, within the period of time stated therein, the Borough authorities may remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation, and the cost thereof, together with any additional penalty authorized by the law, may be collected by the Borough from such person, firm or corporation, in the manner provided by law.


Section 4. Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this ordinance, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and costs or prosecution. PROVIDED: each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense and notice to the offender shall not be necessary in order to constitute an offense.
ENACTED AND ORDAINED into an ordinance, this 8th day of February, 1960
 
BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS ALLEGHENY COUNTY, PENNSYLVANIA ORDINANCE NO. 1796

AN ORDINANCE FOR THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS, COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY, COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, AMENDING THE CODIFIED ORDINANCES OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS,   SPECIFICALLY PROHIBIT BASKETBALL HOOPS FROM ENCROACHING ON PUBLIC STREETS AND HIGHWAYS, PROHIBITING THE PLACEMENT OF SOCCER, HOCKEY AND OTHER GOALS ON PUBLIC STREETS AND HIGHWAYS AND PROVIDING FOR PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF.



WHEREAS, the Borough of Coraopolis has heretofore enacted into law the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Coraopolis, which Code of Ordinanc·es, inter alia, provides that no person shall place or cause to be placed an obstruction above, upon or under any public highway; and,



WHEREAS, there has been a proliferation of basketball hoops, soccer nets, hockey nets and other goals being placed on or above public highways which placement endangers the health, safety and welfare of both pedestrians and motorists alike; and,



WHEREAS, the within Ordinance is intended to prohibit the placement of basketball hoops, both portable and permanent, and all other soccer, hockey or other goals over and on public right-of­ ways regardless of when they were erected. This ordinance is not intended to regulate or prohibit the placement of basketball hoops or other soccer, hockey or other goals on or over private property.



NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Council of the Borough of Coraopolis, and it is hereby ordained and enacted by authority of the same, as follows:




Section 1.

That the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Coraopolis, Part Four, entitled "Traffic Code", Title Four, entitled "Public Ways and Traffic Control Devices", Chapter 420, entitled "Street Obstructions and Special Uses", Section 420.0l(a), entitled "Obstructing Streets" and Section 420.99, entitled "Penalty" are hereby repealed in their entirety and in lieu thereof, the following is substituted:

"420.01 OBSTRUCTING  STREETS.
(a) The public highways of the Borough are hereby declared to be for the common use of the motoring public except insofar as the same may be restricted by these codified ordinances or other official municipal action. No person shall place or cause to be placed an obstruction, including, but not limited to, basketball hoops, soccer or hockey or other goals, above, projecting above, upon
 
or under any public highway, street or way, except with the express written consent of the Borough and subject to such conditions as the Borough may impose. The provisions of this Ordinance, in so far as they are the same as those of the previous ordinance in force immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended to be a continuation of such previous ordinance and are therefore applicable to any obstructions placed over, projecting over, on or  under any public highway, street or way."

"420.99 PENALTY

Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to a fine in the amount of Three Hundred ($300.00) Dollars plus costs for each violation. Each day in which a violation exists after said person fails or refuses to remove the obstruction after receiving written notice to remove same from the Borough shall constitute a separate violation of this ordinance."





Section 2.



This ordinance shall take full force and effect immediately upon passage and approval of same.




ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 9th day of March, 2016.



ATTEST:	BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS

\.._


Ra mond McCutcheon Borough Manager









 


2016.
 
Examined and approved by the Mayor of the Borough of Coraopolis, this 9th day of March,



''I 1;
 






OFF.I-CIAL BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS
ORDINANCENO.  111'2,



AN ORDINANCE OF THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS COUNTY OF, ALLEGHENY, COMMONvVEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA AMENDING THE CORAOPOLIS BOROUGH CODE OF ORDINANCES .SO . AS TO ESTABLISH RULES, REGULATid°NS .AND SPECIFICATIONS REGARDING THE CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF SIDEvVALKS SITUATED IN THE BOROUGH OF CORAOPOLIS.     .

WHEREAS, the ·Borough of Coraopolis has· from time to time established standards and regulations regarding the construc on, maintenance and repair of sidew lks situated in the Borough; and,


WHEREAS, it is the desire of the Borough Council to amend the afores id standards and regulations as is hereinafter set forth.


NOvV, THEREFORE, be it ORDAINED and ENACTED as follows:


SECTION 1.	Sidewalks to be at. Grade.. Every owner of property in the Borough of Coraopolis "s'hall, before constructing, reconstructing, paving, repaving, or
curbing or recurbing any sidewalk or handicapped ramp in said Borough shall secure from the Borough Engineer the proper established grade of the street, unless otherwise specified by ordinance or resolution.


SECTION 9,.	Notice to Construct, Every owner of property in the Borough  of  Coraopolis  shall,  on  thirty  (.'30)  days  notice  from  the  Borough  Manager,


-1-
 






constr11ct or reconstruct a side\valk, which shall confo1m to all applicable requirements of this Ordinance in front of or alongside of any property along any street.


SECTION S.	Owner to Repair Upon NotiGe. Every owner of property in the Borough of Coraopolis .shall, on thirty (30) days' notice from the Borou. g. h Manag.er, repair the sidewalk, in the manner stipulated in such notice, in front of or alongside such property.


SECTION4.	·Notices to be in Writing, The notices referred to in Section 2 and Section 3 of this Ordinance may be written or printed or partly written and partly printed.


·	·SECTION 6.	'Sidewalks to ·Meet .Specifications.	All sidewalks and curbs, if any, shall be.constructed, reconstructed and repaired of concrete only, according to specifications determi ed from time to time by the Borough Engineer. However, the Borough Engineer may authorize a substitute material if site conditions determine that the tise of concrete is inappropriate.


SECTION 6.	Owner  Responsible  tq  Constrnct  or  Repair.	All sidewalks and/or curbs and handicapped ramps shall be constrqcted, reconstructed and repaired and the grading therefor done upon the line and grade'obtained by the property owner from the Borough Enginee1·, and not otherwise. Upon Notice, as provided in Section 2 and Section  S of this  Ordinance  as the case may be, such work  of construction,
reconstruction oi· repair shall be done by the owner or owners of such property.
-l••"'w	.






-2- .
 






SECTION 7. Boroug·h Engineer to Inspect. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Borough Engineer to determine, in the case of any individual property, whether or not the sidewalk and/or curb shall be reconstructed or repaired, and, if so, the specific part or parts thereof reconstructed or repaired. The Engineer may at any time during the course of work of constructing, reconstructing or repairing any sidewalk and/or curb, and/or handicapped ramp, visit the site of such work to ascertain whether such wm·k is being done according to requirements; and he or one of his assistan\s shall visit any such site for such p11rpose whenever requested by the property owner. Within ten (10) days after the completion of the work of constructing, reconstructing or repairing any sidewalk and/or curb, it shall be the duty of the owner of the property where such work was done to notify t e Borough Engineer of that fact, so that he may inspect such sidewalk to determine whether the grade thereof has been observed and followed.


SECTION s.	Owner May Con:slTuct or Repair without Notice. Pilly property owner, upon his own initiative, and without notice from any Borough  Official, may
construct reconstruct or repair a sidewalk in front of or along his property provided that such owner shall first mal\e application to the Borough Engineer and shall conform to the requirements of this Part as to l.ine and grade and·as to material used, and that he shall also notify the Borough Engineer, as required by Section 7 of this Ordinance within ten. (10) days after completion of the work.

-3-
 






SECTION 9.	Owners Along· Paved Streets Shall Pave Siclewa1ks. Owners of property abutting on any paved street, including state highways and county roads, shall be required to pave, curb, repave or recurb sidewalks along their property according to the minimum.requirement of this Ordinanqe unless otherwise $pecified in a particular ordinance or resolution within thirty (80) clays of the elate of service. of such notice.	Upon failure of the abutting p,roperty owner to comply with said notice and ordinance, the Borough of Coraopolis may cause the same to be done, and to levy and collect the cost of such grading, paving, curbing, repaving and recurbing thereof from the abutting property owners in accordance with the Municipal Claim Law or suit in assumpsit.



SECTION 10.	Lien May be F.iled.	The cost of any such gTading, paving, curbing, repaving and recurbing shall be a lien upon the premises from the time of the commencement of the ·work, which date shall be fixed by the Borough Engineer and be filed with the Borough Manager. Any such lien may be collected by action iri assump it or by lien filed in the manner provided by law for the filing and collection of municipal claims.



SECTION 11.	Owner to Keep Sidewalk Safe and Clear. The owner or owners of the abutting property shall keep the sidewalk, together with any portion of his property paved and use'd as a sidewalk or public walk, immediately in front of his property, in good order and repair, and; at all· times, free and clear of all obstruction to safe and

-4-
 





c.onvenient passage, and free fany merchandise placed there for·display, if the removal thereof is ordered by the Borough Manag·er.	If the owner or owners of any property neglects to perform the duty so required of him, the Borough Manager may serve wdtten noti.ce upon him requiring. hi to do that which is necespry. If such property owner or owners fail to comply with the requirements of such notice within thirty.(sO) d ys from the date of its service, the Borough may make the necessary repairs or remove obstruction. The cost of the same, together with a penalty often percentum (10%) shall be paid by the delinquent property owner or owners, and may be collected by action of assumpsit, or the Borough may file a mlUlicipal lien against .the property. The notice provided for in this
section may be served on the property owner or owners by leaving the same at his place of residence, or if he has no residence in the Borough, then by posting the same on the premises  and mailing a copy thereo to the owner or owners at his last known address.


SECTION 12.	Responsibilities  for Removal  of Snow  and  Ice, . The owner, occupant  or  tenant  of ev.ery property  fronting upon  or  alongside. of any of the streets in the Borough is hereby required to remove or .cause to be removed from all of the sidewalks in front of or alongside such property, all snow and ice thereon fallen or formed, within  twenty-four  (24) hours after the same shall have ceased to fall or to be formed. Provided:  The owne1:'of-a property shall be responsible for conforming to the requirements of this Section where such property is occupied by su,ch owner; is uriocctipied or vacant, or

-5-
 





is a multiple-business or multiple-dwelling property, occupied by more than one (1) tenant or occupant; the tenant or occupant of every single-unit property, occupied by  such occupant or tenant only, shall be responsible for conforming to the requirements of this Section.



SECTION 13.	Authodty to Borough to Remove.Snow and Collect Costs. In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant, as aforesaid, shall fail, n glect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of Section 12 of this Ordinance within the time limit prescribed therein, the Borough authorities may proceed iminediately to clear all snow and/or ice·from the side\valk of such delinquent, and to collect the expenses thereof, with an additional am01.mt often percent-(10%) from such owne1 occupant or tenant, as the case may be, which may be in addition to any fine or penalty imposed under Section 14 hereo£



SECTION 14.	Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) and costs, or in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (SO) days. Provided, such fine and costs of prosecution may be in addition to any expenses and additional amount imposed as provided in other Sections of this Ordinance.




-6-
 





 

SECTION  16.
 
Repealer.  Any ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
 

with the within ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency.




SECTION 16.	Effective  Date.	The  within  ordinance  shall  take  effect immediately upon passage and approval of same.


.ORDAINED and ENACTED this 8-\1	day of   fyYi	'2000.


