8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 1/301
Borough of Coopersburg, PA
Wednesday, August 12, 2020
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1. General Provisions
Article I. Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 585]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the codification of a complete
body of legislation for the Borough of Coopersburg, County of Lehigh, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General
Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 230, together with an Appendix, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Borough of
Coopersburg, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the “Code of the Borough of
Coopersburg,” hereinafter referred to as the “Code.”
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as those of ordinances and
resolutions in force immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a
continuation of such ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of
such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinance or resolution. All such
provisions are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption
by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg, and it is the intention of said Borough Council
that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in
said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed
repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only changed provisions, as described in
§ 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15
below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Borough of
Coopersburg and in force on the date of the adoption of this Code and not contained in the Code,
along with the 1996 Code, are hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15 below, except
as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by
repeal.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 2/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
Q.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal;
provided, however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from repeal of
ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to revive any ordinance previously
repealed, superseded or no longer of any effect:
Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 25, 2005.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative provision of the Borough
prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in violation of any
legislative provision of the Borough or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any judgment rendered
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the
Borough.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the
Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or agreement.
Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments
or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax rate.
Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special taxes, assessments or
charges.
Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or acquiring property
by acceptance of deed, condemnation or exercise of eminent domain.
Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or reconstruction or opening of
sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public place
or property or designating various streets as public highways.
Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose districts and designating the
boundaries thereof; providing for a system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a system of sewers
or water supply lines.
Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the
Borough or setting the bond of any officer or employee.
Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning Map.
Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for municipal employees.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 3/301
R.
A.
B.
Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit
or service obtained from the Borough.
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to the date given in § 1-4A
and/or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and
shall, upon being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances and resolutions of
the Borough for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and
style changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Borough Council
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
Where the provisions of the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall control. Where the
provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation impose greater restrictions or
requirements, the provisions of such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other divisions in the Code or in
supplements made to the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to
the Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information or referring to the statutes or
to other parts of the Code are inserted in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the
Code for the convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the legislation.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the Ordinance Book in the
office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain there for use and examination by the public. Upon
adoption, such copy shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring
to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and adopted
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to
be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 4/301
include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code
shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and directed by him or her to keep
up-to-date the certified copies of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances and
resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective date of this codification which
the Borough Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be
included therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions are printed as
supplements to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the manner required a notice of
the introduction and of the adoption of the Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
The enactment and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notices of
introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of
the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions, or to alter or
tamper with the Code or any part or portion thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the
law of the Borough to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are severable, and if any clause,
sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation and application
to the clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this ordinance and
the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence,
subsection, section, article, chapter or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect on and after September 26,
2006.
Chapter 5. Auditor
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 5/301
[1]
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 2-26-1991 by Ord. No.
458 (Ch. 1, Part 10 of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 5-1. Appointment of independent auditor.
Borough Council is authorized to appoint an independent auditor who shall be a certified public
accountant, registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, a firm of certified public accountants so
registered or competent public accountant or firm of public accountants.
§ 5-2. Annual appointment by resolution.
Borough Council shall appoint such an independent auditor annually by resolution before the close of
the fiscal year.
§ 5-3. Office of elected auditor abolished.
The office of elected Borough Auditor is hereby abolished, subject to the expressed terms and
conditions of § 1005(7) of the Borough Code, Act of February 1, 1966 (1965 P.L. 1656, No. 581), as
amended.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46005(7).
Chapter 12. Billing Procedures, Uniform
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 9-25-1990 by Ord. No.
452 (Ch. 1, Part 2 of the 1996 Code); amended in its entirety 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 599. Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 12-1. Payment of invoice.
Payment of all invoices rendered by the Borough of Coopersburg are due and payable in the amount
set forth within 30 days from the date of the invoice.
§ 12-2. Penalty for nonpayment.
Invoices not paid in full after 30 days from the date of invoice will be subject to a penalty equal to 5% of
the amount of the invoice.
§ 12-3. Additional penalty for continued nonpayment.
Invoices not paid in full after 60 days from the date of invoice will be subject to an additional penalty of
1 1/2% of the amount per month beginning 60 days after the date of the invoice.
§ 12-4. Payment by check.
Payment by check is accepted contingent upon collection of funds due the Borough from the bank. If
payment of check is denied by the bank for any reason, the Borough will assess an additional charge
which shall be established by resolution of the Borough Council.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 6/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
H.
§ 12-5. Discontinuance and termination of water and other
services.
In the event that an invoice remains unpaid 30 days from the date of the invoice, the Borough shall
have the option to discontinue municipal services to the property, provided that:
The property owner, landlord and/or tenant of the property is afforded 15 days' written notice of the
termination with the notice served by certified and first-class mail, in person or by posting the
notice conspicuously on the property;
The property owner may contest the termination of municipal services at the next regularly
scheduled Council meeting or, if a Council meeting is not scheduled before the termination, by
providing a written and/or oral statement to the Borough Manager for submission to the Council for
consideration;
The property owner is to pay all costs as may be established by resolution of the Borough Council
incidental to notice and posting and collection of invoices for municipal services;
Services will not be terminated on a Friday, Saturday, holiday or the day before a holiday;
Three days before the termination, the Borough will attempt contact with the property owner,
landlord and/or tenant about the proposed termination;
At the time of termination, the Borough shall contact an adult on the property. If no adult is
present, the termination will be delayed 48 hours;
When the property owner is a landlord, the Borough proceeds in conformance with the Utility
Service Tenants Rights Act of November 26, 1978, P.L. 1255, No. 299, 68 P.S. § 399.1 et seq., or
any similar legislation hereafter enacted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly;
Subject to provisions for termination for nonpayment, the Borough also reserves the right to
terminate municipal services for the following reasons:
Misrepresentation in the application as to the property or fixtures to be supplied or the use to
be made of the water supply.
Use of the water for illegal, improper purposes or for reasons other than described in the
application.
Waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures or otherwise.
Failure to maintain in good order connections, service lines or fixtures beyond the curb and
owned by the property owner.
Tampering with any service, pipe, meter, curb stop or seal or any appurtenance of the water
system of the Borough.
Vacancy of premises.
Repeated violations of this chapter or the rules and regulations of the Municipal Authority of
Coopersburg.
Failure to make payments of any charges against the property.
Unreasonable refusal of access to the property for the purpose of inspecting, reading,
maintaining or removing meters.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 7/301
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
The Borough Council or its duly authorized representatives shall have the right to turn off the
water without notice in case of emergencies, breakdowns or for other causes, including necessary
repairs, connections, etc. Reasonable notice will be given when practicable. In no case shall the
Borough be liable for any damage or inconvenience suffered therefrom.
§ 12-6. Restoration of services.
In the event that the Borough elects to terminate the rendering of municipal services due to
nonpayment of invoices, a charge which shall be established by resolution of the Borough Council will
be imposed for such termination. Following payment in full of all past due amounts owed by the
Borough, a charge which shall be established by resolution of the Borough Council will be made for the
restoration of service.
§ 12-7. Assessment by agent visiting premises.
If payment of an invoice is forthcoming only at such time as an agent of the Borough visits the property
with the intent of terminating the service due to nonpayment, the Borough will assess the same charge
as if the service were terminated, but it will not assess a restoration charge.
§ 12-8. Payment of sewer charges.
Sewer rentals or charges imposed by this chapter shall be payable quarterly or, in the case of
large users, monthly, at the discretion of the Borough.
All bills shall be rendered each calendar quarter or each year for service during the preceding
quarter annum or, at the discretion of the Borough, the same may be rendered each month for
service during the preceding month.
Whenever service to any improved property shall begin after the first day or shall terminate before
the last day of any billing period, sewer rentals or charges for such period shall be prorated
equitably, if appropriate, for that period of the billing period during which such improved property
was serviced by the sewerage system.
Every owner of an improved property which is connected to the sewer system initially shall provide
this Borough with and thereafter shall keep this Borough advised of his correct address. Failure of
any person to receive bills for sewer rentals or charges shall not be considered an excuse for
nonpayment nor shall such failure result in an extension of the period of time during which the net
bill shall be payable.
Fees for sewer charges shall be set from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 12-9. Payment of solid waste charges.
Trash charges imposed by this chapter shall be payable quarterly.
All bills shall be rendered each calendar quarter or each year for service during the preceding
quarter annum.
Whenever service to any improved property shall begin after the first day or shall terminate before
the last day of any billing period, trash charges for such period shall be prorated equitably, if
appropriate, for that period of the billing period during which such improved property was serviced
by the Borough trash contractor.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 8/301
D.
E.
A.
B.
Every owner of an improved property which is utilizing the Borough trash contractor shall provide
this Borough with and thereafter shall keep this Borough advised of his correct address. Failure of
any person to receive bills for trash shall not be considered an excuse for nonpayment, nor shall
such failure result in an extension of the period of time during which the net bill shall be payable.
Fees for trash charges shall be set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 12-10. Municipal liens.
After the termination of services as outlined above, if invoices are still not paid, procedures for filing a
municipal lien against the property will begin. Rentals or charges imposed by this chapter shall be a
claim on the improved property, and any such charges which are not paid within 15 days after each
billing date applicable to the particular improved property, at the discretion of the Borough, shall be
filed as a lien against the improved property so connected to and served by the Borough services or
invoiced for work done, which lien shall be filed in the office of the Prothonotary of Lehigh County,
Pennsylvania, and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the filing and collecting of
municipal claims.
§ 12-11. Effective date.
The effective date of this chapter is January 1, 2008.
Chapter 21. Emergency Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Emergency Management Plan
[Adopted 2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 430 (Ch. 1, Part 5A of the 1996 Code)]
§ 21-1. Purpose.
The purpose of an emergency management policy is to anticipate the happening of an unexpected
event within the Borough giving rise to conditions which could seriously affect the health, safety or
welfare of a substantial number of residents and interrupt the operation of essential public services.
This is a result of the mandate of Section 7503 of the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Services
Code, 35 Pa. C.S.A. § 7101 et seq. which requires the Borough of Coopersburg to prepare, maintain
and keep current an Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) for the prevention and minimization of injury
and damage caused by a major emergency or disaster.
§ 21-2. Scope.
Emergency management is not a separate function set apart from the normal responsibilities of
local government. It is employed whenever a local government responds to an extraordinary
emergency such as a flood, tornado, earthquake, fire, major accident or explosion, the release of
toxic or radioactive materials, civil disorder or other disasters whether natural or man-made.
In any major emergency or disaster there must be direction and coordination of services
immediately available within the community and with those which must be brought in from
elsewhere. These services are both governmental and private. Key personnel from the local
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 9/301
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
A.
B.
A.
police, fire and medical services will be on immediate call. Direction must come from Borough
officials and designated citizens who have been identified as being available to respond to an
emergency.
§ 21-3. Cost of operations.
Expenses must inevitably be picked up, somehow, after the emergency has passed. Funds may
be drawn from either the local government or the private sector. That determination should never
be allowed to impede the performance of urgent activities necessitated by disaster.
When the Governor has proclaimed a state of extreme emergency, each political subdivision
within the disaster area may enter into contracts and incur obligations necessary to combat such
threatened or actual disaster, protect the health and safety of such persons and property and
provide emergency assistance to the victims of such disaster. In exercising this authority the
Borough may proceed without regard to time consuming procedures and formalities proscribed by
law (except for mandatory constitutional and charter requirements) pertaining to the performance
of public works, entering into contracts, incurring obligations, employment of temporary workers,
rental of equipment, purchase of supplies and materials, levying of taxes and appropriation and
expenditure of public funds.
§ 21-4. Table of organization.
If and when a emergency occurs there will not be time to ask the question: Who shall take the lead
in putting an emergency plan into operation? The expected leadership shall come from the
following list of individuals:
Borough Secretary.
Emergency Management Coordinator.
Mayor.
President of Council.
Chief of Police.
Fire Chief.
Ambulance Corp Representative.
Chairman of Public Safety Committee and committee members available.
Borough Secretary.
The Borough Secretary is placed first and last on the list in recognition of the fact that this office
will most likely become first involved in notifying and securing the active participation of persons to
be in leadership command. It will be the function of the Borough Secretary to work with the
leadership in its function.
§ 21-5. Emergency Management Committee.
The purpose of the Emergency Management Committee is to provide broad, authoritative, skilled
and experienced leadership essential to effective action in major emergencies.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 10/301
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The Coopersburg Borough Emergency Management Committee shall consist of the Mayor, who
shall be the ad hoc chairperson guiding the Coopersburg Borough Emergency Management
Committee until it shall have undertaken its initial organization meeting and selected (or approved
an appointee of Borough Council) an Emergency Management Coordinator for the Borough. After
that event, the Mayor shall remain a member, and second in command, of the Agency.
The Coopersburg Borough Emergency Management Committee shall be an advisory body prior to
and during major emergency situations whose purpose will be to prepare and evaluate alternative
courses of action capable of being made available during an emergency and bring support and
guidance to the person in charge during such emergency situation. Decisions of the Committee,
during emergency, are to be advisory only and shall not bind the person in charge to a particular
course of action.
§ 21-6. Potential disaster scenarios.
Inasmuch as different natural and man-made events which may develop the potential for disaster will
call for differing approaches and varied and distinctive problems, at times, an Emergency Operations
Plan will have sets of different procedures designed to meet the problems anticipated from the
developing event. The Emergency Operations Plan of the Borough of Coopersburg has been set up in
contemplation of the following possibilities of events:
Flood, hurricanes, rain and wind.
Water disruptions.
Electric power failure.
Bomb or device scares.
Search/rescue of missing persons, drowning, downed aircraft, or similar emergency situations.
Train derailments, motor vehicle calamities, fire or explosion related calamities.
Evacuations from distant municipalities (nuclear accident).
§ 21-7. Emergency response actions.
At the moment the Emergency Operations Plan goes into effect and the Emergency Management
Director or other "leader" in the chain of command begins both an objective and a subjective
performance, the ultimate test of judgment in an emergency. Beyond the Plan (which should be at
fingertips at this time) the following sequence of activities will take place by the individual in charge:
A quick analysis of the nature and scope of the event; people involved; and persons and
institutions needed immediately.
A setting in motion of activity to reach out to county, state and federal civil defense or emergency
officials.
A search for private sector responsible persons if the calamity has been set off by actors or
agencies of commerce or industry.
A designation of individual or individuals to make records of sequence and happening of events,
with objective data development an important priority.
A submission of initial and follow-up reports to county, area or state emergency management
offices.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 11/301
F.
G.
[1]
A submission of damage assessment reports when requested.
Review events and plan improvements in existing Emergency Operations Plan.
§ 21-8. Emergency Operations Plan (EOP).
In response to the mandate of § 7503 of the Pennsylvania Management Services Code, 35 Pa. C.S.A.
§ 7102 et seq. the Borough of Coopersburg hereby adopts the Generic Emergency Operation Plan
submitted by the Department of Property Services of the Office of Civil Defense of the County of
Lehigh, submitted January 4, 1989, in form, contents and style as adapted to the Borough institutions
and personnel therein named to carry out stated functions. The Emergency Operations Plan of the
Borough of Coopersburg shall be revised and readopted as revised, annually, at the first meeting of the
Borough Council in January of each calendar year; such action to be taken by resolution, and the first
resolution number of each calendar year is so designated to be utilized for this administrative purpose.
Each such resolution, from year to year, is hereby designated to be a part and parcel of this article and
incorporated by reference therein.
Article II. Adoption of Emergency Management Plan
[Adopted 3-22-1994 by Res. No. 2-94 (Ch. 1, Part 5B of the 1996 Code)]
§ 21-9. Adoption of Emergency Management Plan.
The Borough of Coopersburg Council does hereby approve, adopt and place into immediate effect the
Emergency Operations Plan of the Borough of Coopersburg. This plan shall be revised on an annual
basis to make certain that it conforms with the requirements of the Lehigh County Emergency
Operations Plan.
Editor's Note: The Borough of Coopersburg Emergency Operation Plan is on file in the Borough offices.
Chapter 28. Fire Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 33.
Article I. Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 2-5-1906 by Ord. No. 50 (Ch. 1, Part 9A of the 1996 Code)]
§ 28-1. Organization and authority.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
The Coopersburg Fire Company No. 1, and such other hose and fire companies as may hereafter be
recognized by Borough Council, shall constitute the Coopersburg Fire Department, and the said
company shall annually, at their stated meetings held in October, elect one man as Chief to serve for
one year, and one man as Assistant Chief to serve for one year, and six fire police to serve for one
year. The fire policemen shall be sworn in by the Mayor.
§ 28-2. Service of elected officers to be at pleasure of Council.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 12/301
The election of Chief and Assistant Chief by the companies shall be subject to the approval of the
Borough Council. The Chief and Assistant Chief may be removed at any time at the pleasure of the
Council by a 2/3 vote. Or, should a vacancy occur at any time, the Council shall immediately appoint a
Chief or Assistant Chief by the recommendation of the fire company or companies to fill such vacancy
for the unexpired term.
§ 28-3. Duties of Chief.
It shall be the duty of the Chief to attend all fires and alarms, superintend and direct the operation of
the several companies of the Department. He shall have full control of all the men and apparatus,
issue and enforce all such orders as in his judgment may be calculated for the protection of property,
the extinguishment of fires and the welfare of the Department. He shall enforce all the rules and
regulations of the Department and the Borough ordinances pertaining thereto. He shall annually in the
month of September report to Council a full statement of the condition of the Department during the
year, together with a statement of all the fires occurring during the year, the origin of the same, of
property destroyed and insurance thereon, if any. It shall be the duty of the Chief to direct special
attention to the fire plugs of the Borough, to guard against freezing of the same, and to report to
Council any necessary repairs. Should any repairs be very urgent between meetings of Council, the
Chief, with the committee on fire and water, jointly, shall hereby be empowered to have such repairs
made and report the same to Council.
§ 28-4. Absence of Chief.
In case of fire in the absence of the Chief, his duties shall devolve upon and be performed by the
Assistant Chief arriving upon the grounds, and he shall be vested with all the power and authority now
vested in the Chief during the continuance of the fire, unless the Chief should, during the continuance
of the fire, make his appearance, when he shall immediately enter upon and perform his duties.
§ 28-5. Failure to perform duties.
Any officer, member or members, who shall willfully neglect or refuse to perform his duties or shall be
guilty of disobedience to his or their superior officers. The Chief shall be vested with the power to
discharge or dismiss any member for such offense from the service and until the Fire Department
meets, action shall then be taken.
§ 28-6. Liability.
No liability shall be incurred by the passage of this article for the payment of any of the officers or
members of any fire company or for any services connected therewith.
§ 28-7. Alcoholic beverages.
The drinking or keeping for drink of any intoxicating liquors, at any engine house or other place in the
Borough where any of the fire apparatus is kept, is hereby expressly forbidden and a violation of this
section, and shall be sufficient cause for the Borough Council to revoke the privileges hereby granted
to such company.
Article II. Fire Police
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 13/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
[Adopted 2-9-1982 by Ord. No. 366; amended in its entirety 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509 (Ch. 1, Part 9B
of the 1996 Code)]
§ 28-8. Creation of office.
The office of Fire Police is hereby created within the Borough to be staffed by appointment by Borough
Council yearly, for a one-year term of office beginning the first day of January of each and every year.
§ 28-9. Fire company to provide list of nominees.
On or before October 15 of each and every year, the officers representing the Coopersburg Volunteer
Fire Company No. 1 shall present to the Mayor of the Borough a list of nominees to be considered for
appointment as Fire Police for the next succeeding year. Within 20 days from the date of the receipt of
such list of nominees, the Mayor shall review the same and transmit to Borough Council the said list
with his own confirmation or denial of qualification noted thereon.
§ 28-10. Action by Council.
On or before the completion of the final session of Borough Council for the then current fiscal year, the
Borough Council shall act upon the Mayor's confirmation or denial of qualification of proposed
nominees for Fire Police for the succeeding fiscal year. Failure of the Council to act upon the Mayor's
recommendation shall be considered the equivalent of approval.
§ 28-11. Swearing in.
Fire Police shall be sworn into office by the Mayor at the first meeting of Borough Council in each fiscal
year.
§ 28-12. Duties and powers of Fire Police.
Fire Police, upon confirmation by Council and acceptance of the oath of office, shall (1) be provided
with a badge of office; and (2) be instructed immediately in the duties and limitation of duties of office,
which are:
Fire Police shall be under the direction and supervision of the Chief of Police. They shall have full
power and authority to regulate traffic and keep crowds under control at or in the vicinity of any fire
on which their companies are in attendance.
Fire Police shall have full power and authority to act as police officers in order to facilitate and
prevent interference with the work of firemen in extinguishing fires.
In the absence of the Chief of Police or a police officer, Fire Police shall be under the direction of
the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief if present on duty.
Fire Police shall have authority to act only when called upon by officials of the Borough of
Coopersburg.
Fire Police, under the direction of the Chief of Police, shall have the same power and authority to
act in all other emergencies, parades, functions or events sponsored or officially sanctioned by the
Borough to which they have been specially mustered for control purposes.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 14/301
A.
B.
§ 28-13. Legislative authority.
Fire Police shall have such further duties, responsibilities, rights and obligations as may be further set
forth by the Act of July 11, 1980, Act No. 122, or its amendments, from time to time, and the
resolutions and ordinances of the Borough from time to time appertaining.
Chapter 33. Firemen's Relief Association
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 4-23-1996 by Ord. No.
509 (Ch. 1, Part 5C of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 28.
§ 33-1. Recognition of Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association.
The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged in providing fire protection
and/or emergency services in the Borough of Coopersburg.
Coopersburg Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association
The above named association has been formed for the benefit of its members and their families
in case of death, sickness, temporary or permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of
duty.
The above named association of the Borough of Coopersburg is designated the proper
association to receive such funds as are due and payable to the Borough Treasurer by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania from the tax on premiums from foreign fire insurance
companies.
§ 33-2. Certification to Auditor General.
The Borough Council shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the commonwealth the name(s) of
the active associations and the percentage of service they contribute to the protection of the Borough
of Coopersburg. Such certification shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 33-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the Borough Treasury all such sums of money that may hereafter
be paid into the Borough Treasury by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes
paid on premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of the Act of December 18, 1984,
No. 205, 701 et seq. as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania. Such monies received by the Borough Treasurer from the State Treasurer
shall be distributed to the duly recognized association(s) within 60 days of receipt. The funds shall be
distributed on the basis of the percentage of service established in the certification to the Auditor
General and with other provisions of the Act.
Chapter 42. Manager
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 5-11-2004 by Ord. No.
568. Amendments noted where applicable.]
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 15/301
A.
B.
A.
§ 42-1. Creation of office.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of Coopersburg, subject to the right
of the Borough, by ordinance, at any time to abolish such office.
§ 42-2. Appointment and removal.
The Borough Council shall elect by a majority vote of all members one person to fill the office of
Borough Manager. That person shall serve at the pleasure of Borough Council. The Borough Manager
shall be subject to removal at any time by a majority vote of all the members of Borough Council. The
Borough Manager need not be a resident of the Borough of Coopersburg or of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment, but shall within a period of time agreed upon between
Borough Council and the Borough Manager, become and during his tenure as Borough Manager, shall
live within a 15 air-mile radius of the Borough.
§ 42-3. Qualifications.
The Borough Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative
qualifications without regard to race, color, creed, sex or political affiliation.
§ 42-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Borough Manager shall give bond to the Borough with a bonding
company as surety in such sum as is set by resolution of Borough Council, conditioned for the faithful
performance of his duties, premium for said bond to be paid by the Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 42-5. Compensation.
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.
§ 42-6. General duties.
The Borough Manager shall have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to him by statute,
all powers and duties assigned to the Borough Secretary by statute, and such other authority as
may be granted by the Borough Council. He shall be charged with the enforcement of all laws and
ordinances within the municipality insofar as their enforcement is within the powers of the
Borough, excepting however, that he shall in no way restrict, infringe, or supplant the authority of
the police who are directly responsible by statute to the Mayor.
The Borough Manager shall attend all meetings of the Borough Council, shall prepare the agenda
for Council meetings and supply Borough Council with materials necessary to participate therein,
shall keep the Council informed as to the affairs of the Borough, and shall recommend to the
Borough Council such actions as may be necessary or expedient for the welfare of the Borough.
§ 42-7. Employees.
The Borough Manager shall administer, supervise and be responsible for the activities of all office
and clerical employees of the Borough, other than such employees who may be assigned to
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 16/301
B.
C.
D.
A.
Police or Fire Departments. The Borough Manager shall administer, supervise and be responsible
for the activities of all Code Enforcement Officials, including, but not limited to: Assistant Borough
Manager/Code Enforcement Officer, Zoning Officer, Building Official, Public Works Inspector,
Plumbing Inspector, Fire Official, Safety Inspector, Surveyor, Health Officer, or their assistants. He
shall have charge of all personnel of Highway, Water, Sewer, Parks and Recreation, and General
Administration Departments. The Borough Manager shall represent Borough Council in matters
relative to union and union members and shall issue all work rules and disciplinary notices to
Union employees on behalf of the Borough Council.
In addition, the Borough Manager shall administer, supervise and be responsible for activities of
any other Borough employees who shall be assigned to his jurisdiction by ordinance or resolution
of Borough Council or assigned to his jurisdiction by the Mayor in writing, as provided under § 42-
21.
The Borough Manager shall make recommendations concerning hiring and/or firing of all nonunion
employees under his jurisdiction to the proper Committee of Borough Council.
Any of the above duties may be assigned by the Borough Manager to any subordinate officials,
but the overall responsibility for proper execution of said duties remains with the Borough
Manager.
§ 42-8. Planning.
The Borough Manager shall be responsible for planning, initiating, supervising, completing, costing and
documenting all projects and activities of all departments. He shall maintain priorities in consonance
with the requirements of committee chairmen and shall be responsible to the appropriate committee of
Council for all works and projects of these departments. He shall insure that all activities under his
jurisdiction are accomplished in a timely and orderly manner.
§ 42-9. Contracts.
The Borough Manager shall examine all proposed contracts to which the Borough may be a party, and
may sign on behalf of the Borough any contract authorized by the Borough Council, excepting where
the Borough Council directs that some officer or officers shall do so. It shall be the duty of the Borough
Manager to see to it that all terms of any contract to which the Borough is a party are fully performed
by all parties thereof.
§ 42-10. Purchases.
The Borough Manager shall be general purchasing agent of the Borough, and except where specific
provision to the contrary is made by law or by Borough Council, he shall make all purchases of
supplies, materials and equipment authorized by Borough Council in the manner prescribed by and
subject to the limitations imposed by law. No purchase shall be made or obligation incurred excepting
upon authorization by Borough Council and no expense shall be incurred, except for the purpose for
which no prior appropriation is required by law if the amount thereof is not covered by an unexpended
appropriation for the purpose.
§ 42-11. Appropriation and levies.
The Borough Manager shall see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid, and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all the Borough's claims.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 17/301
B.
A.
B.
The Borough manager shall serve as Earned Income Tax Officer and shall be responsible for
collecting such other taxes levied under Act 511 as the Borough Council may designate by
ordinance.
§ 42-12. Accounts.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to keep current accounts showing at all times the fiscal
condition of the Borough, including the current and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand
and anticipated revenue of all municipal funds and accounts, and he shall see to the collection of all
money due the municipality.
§ 42-13. Budgeting.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to prepare the preliminary budget for review and final
approval by the Borough Council.
§ 42-14. Inventories/property.
The Borough Manager shall keep a current inventory showing all real and personal property of the
Borough and its location, and shall be responsible for the care and custody of all such property,
including equipment, buildings, parks and all other Borough property, which is not by law assigned to
some other officer or body for care and control.
§ 42-15. Reports and publications.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to see to the publication of all notices, ordinances, or other
documents required by law to be published, and to prepare or cause to be prepared all reports which
the Borough or any of the officials thereof are required by law to prepare.
§ 42-16. Records/certificates.
The Borough Manager shall prepare and have custody of all municipal records required by law to
be kept by the Borough and not by a specific officer. Where the law makes it the duty of a specific
officer to keep or maintain records, the Borough Manager shall make available to such officer all
necessary clerical assistance for the preparation of such records and shall make available a place
for the custody of such records. And in compliance herewith, the Borough Manager shall make
available to the clerk, stenographic or clerical assistance necessary for the preparation of the
journal of Council proceedings, and the record of ordinances and all other documents which by
law the clerk is required to keep; and he shall perform similar service for the treasurer in the
maintenance of bond registers, and all other records or documents which by law the treasurer is
required to keep or prepare.
Where the law requires or provides for certification of any records or documents by any officer of
the Borough, the Borough Manager shall cause such records or documents to be properly
prepared and presented to such officer for his signature.
§ 42-17. Collector and comptroller.
The Borough Manager shall be ex officio Borough collector and Borough comptroller unless such
officers, or either of them, are duly filled by appointment; and he shall perform the duties of each such
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 18/301
[1]
office in the absence of such appointment to either of them.
§ 42-18. Maps/plats.
The Borough Manager shall cause to be kept a complete set of maps and plats showing the location of
all Borough utilities and other Borough properties, all street and other public places, and all lots or
parcels of land subdivided according to law.
§ 42-19. Offices.
The Borough Manager shall maintain an office in Borough Hall and shall spend such time in the
performance of his duties as may be required by Borough Council.
§ 42-20. Absence from Borough.
In the event the Borough Manager shall be absent from the Borough or incapacitated from performing
the duties of his position, the Assistant Borough Manager shall act as Borough Manager during such
absence or incapacity.
§ 42-21. Delegation of Mayor's powers and duties.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to delegate in writing to the Borough Manager, subject to recall by
written notification at any time, any of his nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and duties.
Chapter 47. Municipal Authority
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 5-20-1947 by Ord. No.
146 (Ch. 1, Part 4 of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 47-1. Intention of Borough.
The Borough Council hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an Authority under the
provisions of the Municipalities Authority Act of 1945.[1]
Editor's Note: The Municipalities Authority Act of 1945 was repealed June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22.
See now 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 47-2. Articles of Incorporation.
[Amended 3-3-1970 by Ord. No. 274; 5-14-1985 by Ord. No. 396]
The Burgess, the President of the Borough Council and the Secretary are hereby authorized and
directed to execute on behalf of the Borough of Coopersburg, Articles of Incorporation for said
Authority, in substantially the following form:
Articles of Incorporation
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, known as "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945," the Borough of Coopersburg, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, desiring to
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 19/301
incorporate an Authority thereunder, does hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority is "The Municipal Authority of the Borough of Coopersburg."
2. Said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382.
3. No other Authority organized under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, or under the Act of June
28, 1935, P.L. 463, as amended, or under the Act of December 27, 1933 (Special Session,
1933, P.L. 114) is in existence in or for the incorporating municipality, the Borough of
Coopersburg.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is the Borough of Coopersburg, Lehigh County,
Pennsylvania.
5. The names and addresses of its municipal authorities are as follows: [Here followed the
names and addresses of Borough officials]
6. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board of the Municipal
Authority to be formed hereby are as follows: [Here followed the names, addresses and
terms of office of the original Board members].
7. The ordinance authorizing the creation of said Authority, certified from the records of the
Borough of Coopersburg, together with advertisement of notice of filing these Articles of
Incorporation, are each submitted herewith.
8. The term of existence of the Municipal Authority of the Borough of Coopersburg shall be for a
period ending April 1, 2035.
Chapter 54. Pension Plans
[Former Ch. 54, Pension Plans, which consisted of Art. I, Nonuniformed Employees, adopted 5-22-
1990 by Ord. No. 450 (Ch. 1, Part 8 of the 1996 Code), and Art. II, Police, adopted 11-8-1988 by Ord.
No. 417 (Ch. 1, Part 7 of the 1996 Code, as amended, was repealed 9-22-2009 by Ord. No. 615. The
current pension plans, as revised and amended, are on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.]
Chapter 59. Police Department
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 6-2-1959 by Ord. No.
202-A (Ch. 1, Part 6 of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Plan — See Ch. 54, Art. II.
§ 59-1. Police Department established.
A Police Department is hereby established in the Borough of Coopersburg. The Chief of Police shall be
the chief executive of the Police Department. He shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be in charge of
the police force, and have supervision over its members, in the exercise of their powers, duties and
authority.
§ 59-2. Subordinates to the Chief of Police.
Subordinate to the Chief of Police, in the Police Department, the following classifications are hereby
established: lieutenant, sergeant, patrolman, special deputy officers, and such other classifications to
which Council and Mayor may from time to time deem necessary or expedient for the operation of the
Department. The priority of authority among such subordinate classifications shall be in the order
above listed. The number of persons to serve in each of such subordinate classifications, on a full-time
and/or part-time basis, and the compensation of each shall be as determined by the Borough Council
from time to time.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 20/301
§ 59-3. Powers of Mayor.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Nothing herein contained shall deny the Mayor his continued authority to appoint auxiliary police
officers during emergencies.
Chapter 67. Recreation Board
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 5-9-1972 by Ord. No. 288
(Ch. 1, Part 3A of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 67-1. Authority to create board.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Borough Code (53 P.S. § 47708) the power to equip, operate and
maintain recreation places is hereby vested in a Recreation Board.
§ 67-2. Membership; terms of office.
The Recreation Board shall consist of five persons who shall be residents of the Borough of
Coopersburg. Three members of the Recreation Board shall be appointed by the Council of the
Borough of Coopersburg. The two other members of the Recreation Board shall be members of the
School Board of the Southern Lehigh School District or its nominees; provided, however, that such
members or nominees shall all be residents of the Borough of Coopersburg. The members of the
Recreation Board shall serve for a term of five years or until their successors are appointed; except
that the members first appointed shall be appointed for staggered terms so that not more than one
member's term shall expire annually thereafter. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term in the
same manner as the original appointment.
§ 67-3. Compensation; powers.
Members of the Recreation Board shall serve without pay. The Recreation Board shall exercise its
powers and duties in establishing standards, qualifications and salary schedules for employees, which
shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Council for all classifications of recreation employees.
§ 67-4. Election of officers.
The Recreation Board shall elect, from its membership, annually, its own chairman and secretary and
such other officers as may be deemed necessary.
§ 67-5. Annual report to Council.
The Recreation Board shall submit to the Borough Council an annual report which shall include an
analysis of community recreation areas, facilities and leadership with particular reference to the extent
or adequacy of the program and its effectiveness in view of the public expenditures involved and public
needs.
Chapter 70. Records
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 21/301
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
G.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Open Records Policy
[Adopted 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 606]
§ 70-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to assure compliance with Act 3 of 2008, the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know
Law,[1] as amended, to provide access to public records of the Borough of Coopersburg, to preserve
the integrity of the Borough of Coopersburg's records, and to minimize the financial impact to the
residents of the Borough regarding the resources utilized in the receipt of and processing of public
record requests and the retrieval and copying of public records.
Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ 70-2. Designated Open Records Officer.
It is the policy of the Borough to require the presence of a designated employee when public records
are examined and inspected and to charge reasonable fees for duplication of public records of the
Borough. The Borough of Coopersburg designates its Borough Manager as its Open Records Officer,
responsible for assuring compliance with the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law, in accordance with the
following guidelines:
The Borough Manager may designate certain employee(s) to process public record requests.
The Borough Manager is responsible for minimizing, where possible, the financial impact to the
Borough regarding the resources utilized in the receipt and processing of public record requests
and the retrieval and copying of public records.
All requests for public records of the Borough under this policy shall be specific in identifying and
describing each public record requested. In no case shall the Borough be required to create a
public record which does not exist or to compile, maintain, format or organize a public record in a
manner in which the Borough does not currently compile, maintain, format or organize the public
record. All requests for public records shall be submitted in writing and include the date of the
request, requestor's name, address, and telephone number; certification of United States
residency; signature of requestor; and, if duplication is requested, appropriate payment.
The Open Records Officer or designated employee shall make a good faith effort to determine
whether each record requested is a public record.
The Borough shall facilitate a reasonable response to a request for the Borough's public records.
In no case is the Borough expected or required to provide extraordinary staff to respond to the
request, but will respond in a manner consistent with the Borough's administrative responsibilities
and consistent with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law.
The Open Records Officer or designated employee shall respond to the requester within five
business days from the date of receipt of the written request. If the Borough does not respond
within five business days of receipt thereof, the request is deemed denied.
The response provided by the Borough shall consist of:
Approval for access to the public record;
Review of the request by the designated employee; or
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 22/301
(3)
H.
I.
J.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(1)
(2)
K.
[1]
L.
Denial of access to the record requested.
If access to the public record requested is approved, the public record shall be available for
access during the regular business hours of the Borough. The Open Records Officer or
designated employee shall cooperate fully with the requester, while also taking reasonable
measures to protect the Borough's public records from the possibility of theft and/or modification.
The presence of the Open Records Officer or a designated employee is required when public
records are examined and inspected.
Fees for duplication of public records shall be as established by the Commonwealth's Office of
Open Records. The Borough may at its discretion waive fees and by resolution set forth fees as
not otherwise established by the Commonwealth's Office of Open Records.
In the event the estimated cost of fulfilling a request submitted under this policy is expected to
exceed $100, the Open Records Officer or designated employee shall obtain the expected cost in
advance of fulfilling the request to avoid unwanted expense of Borough resources.
If the request is being reviewed, the notice provided by the Borough shall be in writing and include
the reason for the review and the expected response date, which shall be within 30 days of the
notice of review. If the Borough does not respond within 30 days thereof, the request is deemed
denied.
Review of the request is limited to situations where:
The record requested contains information which is subject to access, as well as
information which is not subject to access that must be redacted prior to a grant of
access. The redacted information is considered a denial as to that information.
The record requires retrieval from a remote location.
A timely response cannot be accomplished due to staffing limitations.
A legal review is necessary to determine whether the record requested is a public record.
The requester has failed to comply with the Borough's policy and procedure
requirements.
The requester refuses to pay the applicable fees.
The extent or nature of the request precludes a response within the required time period.
Upon a determination that one of the factors listed above applies, the Borough shall send
written notice to the requester within five business days of receipt of the request for access.
The notice shall include a statement notifying the requester that the request for access is
being reviewed, the reason for the review, a reasonable date that a response is expected to
be provided, and an estimate of applicable fees owed when the record becomes available. If
the date that a response is expected to be provided is in excess of 30 days, following the five
business days allowed for, the request for access shall be deemed denied unless the
requester has agreed in writing to an extension to the date specified in the notice. If the
requester agrees to the extension, the request shall be deemed denied on the day following
the date specified in the notice if the agency has not provided a response by that date.
If access to the record requested is denied, the notice provided by the Borough shall be in writing
as indicated on the form attached hereto entitled "Denial of Request to Review and/or Duplicate
Borough Of Coopersburg Records."[1]
Editor's Note: Said form is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 23/301
M.
N.
O.
If the request is denied or deemed denied, the requester may file an appeal with the
Commonwealth's Office of Open Records within 15 business days of the mailing date of the
Borough's notice of denial, or within 15 days of a deemed denial. The appeal shall state the
grounds upon which the requester asserts that the record is a public record and shall address any
grounds stated by the Borough for delaying or denying the request.
Within 30 days of the mailing date of the final determination of the appeals officer, the requester or
the Borough may file a petition for review or other document as required by rule of court with the
Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County. The decision of the Court shall contain findings of fact
and conclusions of law based upon the evidence as a whole. The decision shall clearly and
concisely explain the rationale for the decision. A petition for review under this section shall stay
the release of documents until a decision is issued.
This policy shall be available for review at the Borough office.
Chapter 74. Salaries and Compensation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 2-8-1977 by Ord. No. 330
(Ch. 1, Part 1 of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 74-1. Compensation schedule.
[Amended last 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. 661]
That the following offices and appointments be, and the same are hereby acknowledged or created, for
the faithful performance by the holders of these offices and appointments, or the duties and functions
thereof subject to the requirements and conditions fixed by law, and that the following compensation is
hereby fixed for the fiscal year January 1 through December 31, 2018, as passed December 19, 2017:
Office Employee Compensation
Borough Manager Paashaus $73,500 annually
Administrative Assistant FaRannte $19
Chief of Police Struss $70,000 annually
Patrolman Hetton $30.17
Patrolman Leindecker $30.17
Patrolman Wyckoff $30.17
Patrolman Nahrgang $30.17
Patrolman Wisser $30.17
Patrolman Strauch $30.17
Patrolman, part-time Pochek $18.50
Patrolman, part-time Mikels $18.50
Patrolman, part-time Hoats $18.50
Patrolman, part-time Tramonte $18.50
Patrolman, part-time Buskaritz $18.50
Patrolman, part-time Gnas $18.50
Street Commissioner Nace $28.90
Water and Sewer Commissioner Snyder $25.35
Assistant Municipal Services
Director
Reiss $23.25
Machine Operator Szabo $24.40
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 24/301
Office Employee Compensation
Machine Operator Ritter $24.15
Compost Site Monitor Ritter $12.50
Custodian Baer $12.60
Temporary employee TBD $10.50 - $16
Solicitor Gross McGinley $8,400 annual retainer
$100 hourly for Borough
business
$175 hourly for third parties
$100 for lien preparation
$80 for lien satisfaction
Engineer KCE $5,000 annual retainer
Zoning Officer KCE hourly costs
Health Inspector Department of Agriculture $0
Mayor $400 annually
Councilpersons $300 annually
Tax Collector Bealer $13,905 annually plus previous
certification fees
Zoning Hearing Board All members in attendance $25 per meeting
§ 74-2. Bond requirements.
[Amended last 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. 661]
The amounts of bonds are hereby fixed as follows:
Office Amount of Bond
Borough Manager $300,000
Administrative Assistant $100,000
Tax Collector $250,000
§ 74-2.1. Withholdings; stipend; contributions.
[Added 12-16-2014 by Ord. No. 647; amended last 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. 661]
Healthcare and pension:
Type Amount
Public Works Department $0 towards healthcare costs and $550
reimbursement for health expenses
Nonhealthcare stipend $4,000 annually, paid biweekly
Uniformed Pension contribution 1% in accordance with the Auditor General's
recommendation
Nonuniformed Pension contribution 3.5% in accordance with the Auditor General's
recommendation
§ 74-3. Power of Council to change compensation.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 25/301
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
[Amended 11-28-1989 by Ord. No. 445; 12-11-1990 by Ord. No. 454; 12-10-1991 by Ord. No. 469; 12-
8-1992 by Ord. No. 484; 12-14-1993 by Ord. No. 492; 12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 500; 12-12-1995 by
Ord. No. 506; 12-10-1996 by Ord. No. 515]
The compensations, salaries and bonds fixed under this chapter may be changed by Council, by
motion, regularly passed, and any appointments hereunder (in the case where Council has the power
to dismiss) may be dismissed at any time by Council. The intent of this chapter being that the offices
subject to regular appointment, together with salaries and bonds as may be herein also designated,
shall be in force until Council, by motion or ordinance otherwise decide.
§ 74-4. Compensation of Tax Collector.
Fees for the collection of the Borough tax shall be calculated and payable to the elected Tax
Collector on the basis of the following schedule:
For the first 500 taxpayer accounts billed and collected: $1.50 per account.
For each account billed and collected in excess of 500: $1 per account.
For the purpose of Subsection A, a "taxpayer account" shall be deemed to consist of each single
and separate billing regardless of whether one or more names are contained in the billing, and,
shall include only realty tax billings.
Per capita list tax billings shall collect fee charges calculated as follows:
For all taxes collected up to the beginning of the discount period: 3% of collections.
For all taxes collected after the beginning of the discount period: 4% of collections.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 95. Alarm Systems
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 7-28-1987 by Ord. No.
418 (Ch. 13, Part 1 of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 95-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms and phrases used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
ALARM REGISTRATION
All documentation pertaining to an alarm system which identifies the owner or lessee of the
system, the address of the property which is protected by the system, the identity of individuals
authorized to respond to the alarm and to gain access to the property and deactivate the system,
the identity of the firm or individual who installed the system and can provide emergency repair
service and any other data required by the Borough of Coopersburg Police Department.
ALARM SYSTEM
Any siren, bell, horn or other device which is attached to a structure and when activated emits a
warning signal audible outside of the structure and/or transmits an alarm or message to an
emergency communication center or police station requiring police or firemen to respond.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 26/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
Any electronically operated instrument composed of a sensory apparatus and related hardware
which automatically transmits an alarm or other similar message upon receipt of a stimulus from
sensory apparatus that has detected a physical force or other stimulus inherently characteristic of
a fire or intrusion over a telephone line to an emergency communication center.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Coopersburg, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION CENTER
A protection system or group of systems operated privately for customers or publicly by a person,
firm, corporation or government entity which maintains, supervises or accepts recorded messages
from automatic protection devices at a central station having operators who are required to take
appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message.
FALSE ALARMS
Any alarm or signal activated by an automatic protection device, or any warning signal audible
outside of the structure to which it is attached, or any signal given from a residential sensory
device to which police or firemen respond which is not the result of weather extremes, burglary,
fire, robbery or similar emergency.
INSTALLER
Any company, corporation or individual which has engaged in installing fire, intrusion, or water
alarms, where the alarm system is designed to require a response from an emergency service
such as police or fire service.
KEY
To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a message from an automatic protection
device.
RESIDENTIAL SENSORY DEVICE
A device attached to the interior of a residential structure which is not tied to an emergency
communication center nor intended to be audible on the exterior of the structure to which it is
attached.
§ 95-2. Installation requirements.
Within 60 days from the effective date of this chapter, every owner/lessee of an alarm system,
other than a residential sensory device, shall register said alarm with the Police Department of the
Borough of Coopersburg. Such registration shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
The name, residence and telephone number of the owner or lessee of the alarm system.
The address in the Borough where the alarm device is installed and the telephone number of
that address.
The name, address and telephone number of at least two persons other than the owner or
lessee of the alarm system who are authorized to respond to an alarm and gain access to the
address where the device is installed.
The name, address and telephone number of the installer.
Within 90 days after enactment of this chapter, all owners or lessees must equip their alarm
systems, other than residential sensory devices, with timing mechanisms that will disengage the
alarm after a maximum period of 30 minutes. Alarms, other than residential sensory device
systems, without such timing mechanisms shall be unlawful in the Borough of Coopersburg.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 27/301
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
Within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter, all persons owning or operating existing or new
automatic protection devices that transmit messages directly to an emergency communication
center shall contact the Lehigh County Emergency Communication Center for the proper
transmission procedure.
All information furnished pursuant to these sections shall be kept confidential and shall be only for
the use of the Borough of Coopersburg, Borough of Coopersburg Police Department, and the
Lehigh County Emergency Communication Center.
§ 95-3. Alarm operation requirements.
All alarm systems installed in the Borough of Coopersburg that are keyed to an assigned trunk line in
the Lehigh County Emergency Communication Center shall meet the following requirements:
No more than two calls (for an event) shall be made to the Lehigh County Emergency
Communication Center as a result of a signal activation of the automatic protection device.
The sensory mechanism used in conjunction with an automatic protection device must be adjusted
to suppress false indications of fire or intrusion so that the device will not be activated by impulses
due to fleeting pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, the rattling or vibrating of
doors and windows, vibrations to the premises caused by the passing of vehicles, weather or any
other similar force not related to emergencies requiring protection.
All components comprising an automatic protection device must be maintained by the owner or
lessee in good repair to assure maximum reliability of operation.
Each owner or lessee shall be required to provide external visible and legible identification of the
installer on the protected structure on or near the main entrance. (This identification shall include a
twenty-four-hour emergency telephone number and where someone can be reached to deactivate
the system.)
§ 95-4. Technical information concerning automatic protection
devices.
Each installer who sells or leases an automatic protection device in the Borough of Coopersburg after
the effective date of this chapter shall furnish to the owner or lessee of the system the following:
operating instructions, a circuit diagram, a maintenance manual, and written information as to how
service may be obtained, including the telephone number of the installer or agent responsible for
service.
§ 95-5. Repair service for automatic protection devices.
Every installer of an automatic protection device in the Borough of Coopersburg shall make
service available to the owner or lessee of the system, either directly or through an agent, within
24 hours of a request by such owner or lessee for repair or service. Such service shall be made
available to such owner or lessee at his or her election and expense.
The owner or lessee of an automatic protection device shall be responsible for having any device
rendering a false alarm disconnected or repaired within eight hours of the commencement of the
first such false alarm.
§ 95-6. Disconnecting automatic protection devices.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 28/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
When messages evidencing failure to comply with the operational requirements set forth in any section
of this chapter are received by the Lehigh County Emergency Communication Center, the automatic
protection device sending such messages shall be disconnected in order to relieve the particular
emergency service from responding to false alarms. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to
demand that the owner or lessee of the device, or his or her representative, disconnect the device until
it is made to comply with the operational requirements hereof.
§ 95-7. Violations and penalties.
Responses to alarms given off by audible alarms and automatic protection devices involve the
time of and danger to members of the Coopersburg Police Department, and false alarms are
therefore to be discouraged. If more than three false alarms are given from any property in any
given calendar year, a service fee, as established from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council, shall be paid to the Borough of Coopersburg by the user, whether owner or lessee, of the
audible alarm or automatic protection device from which the false alarm emanated for the fourth
and each subsequent false alarm in that calendar year. The Chief of Police of the Coopersburg
Police Department shall have the right to waive payment of the service fee for any false alarm
which is caused by weather conditions, malfunctions in the operation of the electric system of
Pennsylvania Power and Light Company, or which is the result of other unusual circumstances.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any person who fails to pay within 30 days or violates any other provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs and, in default
of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
It is the intent of this chapter that at the end of every calendar year the record of offenses for any
owner, lessee or user of an automatic protection device, alarm or residential sensory device shall
go back to zero and the next offense in the new calendar year shall be considered a first offense
regardless of the number of violations in the previous year.
The provisions of this section shall be waived for a period of 30 days from the date the Borough
receives written notice of the initial installation of an alarm system or automatic protection device
to permit the owner and installer to remedy any initial problems with the system.
§ 95-8. Registration fees.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
The Council of the Borough of Coopersburg may establish by resolution, from time to time, reasonable
registration fees for installations permitted hereunder.
Chapter 100. Animals
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Control and Health Care
[Adopted 6-11-1985 by Ord. No. 397 (Ch. 2, Part 1 of the 1996 Code)]
§ 100-1. Definitions.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 29/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
A.
The following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section except where the context
indicates otherwise.
ANIMAL
Any living creature the subject of ownership (other than livestock held for agricultural purposes)
which is kept, harbored or permitted to remain on or about the residence of the owner or occupant
of the premises.
PERSON
Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or institution commonly recognized by law as
a legal entity.
§ 100-2. Licensing and vaccination requirements.
Subject to the limitations or exceptions hereinafter set forth, no person shall own, keep or harbor any
animal over six months of age within the Borough of Coopersburg unless such animal is vaccinated
and licensed.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to animals owned by a licensed research facility or
held in a licensed veterinary facility or licensed veterinary facility of a licensed animal shelter.
Animals which shall be vaccinated are those for which an approved rabies vaccine is available as
set forth in the latest "Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for
Immunization" published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians.
Animals which shall be licensed are those for which the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania acting
through the County of Lehigh, as agent, require the issuance of a license.
Animals shall be vaccinated against rabies only by a licensed veterinarian who shall issue a
certificate of vaccination to the owner together with a durable vaccination tag indicating the year of
issuance.
Animals subject to either license or vaccination, or both, must wear the tags at all times. Such tags
shall be attached to the collar of the animal. Any animal found not bearing the appropriate current
identification tags as herein specified shall be subject to impoundment and the owner subject to
fine as hereinafter set forth.
§ 100-3. Owner responsibility for animal control.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
All animals subject to license and vaccination, or both, shall be confined by the owner within a
building or secure enclosure or shall be securely muzzled, leashed, or caged whenever off the
premises of the owner.
Any animal subject to licensing and vaccination as herein provided and found running at large
without a muzzle, or unleashed or not caged as the nature of the animal may require, is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance subject to impoundment.
§ 100-4. Impoundment.
Any animal found running at large shall be impounded by the Animal Control Authority in an
animal shelter and confined in a humane manner. Immediately upon impounding an animal, the
Animal Control Authority shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner and inform such
owner of the conditions whereby custody of the animal may be regained. Such conditions may
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 30/301
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
include the reasonable costs incurred during impoundment, including, but not limited to, the cost of
food, shelter, transportation, and administrative expense. Animals not claimed within a period of
10 days shall become the property of the Borough or its assigns.
When the animal is found running at large and its ownership is verified by the Animal Control
Authority, the Animal Control Authority may exercise the option of serving the owner with a notice
of violation of this article in lieu of, or in addition to, impounding the animal.
In the event the Animal Control Authority finds animals to be suffering, he shall have the right
forthwith to remove, or cause to have removed, any such animal to a safe place for care at the
owner's expense, or to euthanize, or cause to be euthanized, the animal when necessary to
prevent further suffering. Return of the animal to the owner may be withheld until the owner shall
have made full payment for all expenses incurred, including, but not limited to, the cost of food,
shelter, transportation, veterinary services, medical supplies, and administrative tasks.
Disposal of an animal by any method specified herein does not relieve the owner of liability for
violations and any incurred charges.
§ 100-5. Redemption.
No animal impounded or quarantined under the provisions of this article may be redeemed until
(1) the animal complies with the vaccination and licensing requirements of this chapter, and (2) all
applicable costs have been paid, and (3) all fines levied under this article have been paid, and (4)
if the animal was impounded for rabies quarantine, then redemption shall also require the approval
of the Animal Control Authority.
Payment of impoundment fees is not considered to be in lieu of any fine, penalty, vaccination, or
license fee.
§ 100-6. Suspicion of infection.
The Animal Control Authority is hereby authorized to investigate a reported animal biting incident
or any suspicion of exposure to rabies, and to notify the animal's owner using an appropriate
quarantine notice that said animal must be quarantined in accordance with this article for a period
of not less than 10 full days following, but not including, the day of the bite. (All costs for
professional services, quarantine, vaccination, observation, etc., shall be the responsibility of the
owner, and may be deemed due and payable as incurred.)
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal which bites any person, regardless of the
circumstances or whether the animal is vaccinated for rabies protection or not, not to confine said
animal either within an enclosure at home, a veterinary hospital, or restricted by leash composed
of chain or other indestructible material, for the period set forth in Subsection A above.
It shall be unlawful to destroy any quarantined animal which should, for any reason, die during the
quarantined period as set forth in Subsection A above, regardless of the animal's whereabouts at
the time of death. Within three hours of the animal's death, the Animal Control Authority shall be
advised and given custody of the entire carcass. No part of the carcass may be destroyed,
removed, or altered by the owner or any individual.
§ 100-7. Animal Control Authority.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
The Police Department of the Borough of Coopersburg, or such other person or persons as Borough
Council may from time to time designate, shall act in the capacity of Animal Control Authority under the
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 31/301
A.
B.
C.
provisions of this article. No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest any agent of the Animal
Control Authority in the performance of his or her duty.
§ 100-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty of interference with the performance of the duty of an Animal Control
Authority agent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.
Failure of the owner to comply with the provisions of § 100-3 regarding animal control shall subject
the owner to a fine of not less than $15 and not exceeding $50 for the first two offenses. The
owner shall also be responsible for reasonable fees for keeping the animal in a kennel as fixed
pursuant to a resolution of the Borough Council.
Any person allowing an animal to run at large a third time in violation of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs; and in default of
payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Article II. Animal Excrement; Owner's Responsibility
[Adopted 6-10-1986 by Ord. No. 406 (Ch. 2, Part 2 of the 1996 Code)]
§ 100-9. Owner's responsibility to remove.
No owner of a pet, domestic animal, or wild animal maintained as a pet, shall permit the same to
discharge or deposit any fecal matter upon the streets and sidewalks of the Borough or the property of
another without immediately removing such matter and disposing of it in a sanitary manner.
§ 100-10. Maintenance of property.
Neither the owner nor any person or persons having the care, custody and control of any pet or pets,
domestic animals or wild animals maintained as pets shall permit fecal matter from such animals to
accumulate upon their property for more than 24 hours; and, it shall be the responsibility of the owner
or person or persons having the care, custody and control of pet or pets, domestic animals or wild
animals maintained as pets to remove, daily, such fecal matter in order to prevent any accumulation
from becoming a danger to public health.
§ 100-11. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine not less than $25, and not exceeding $600 plus costs and, in default of payment thereof,
shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Article III. Barking Dogs and Crying Cats; Limit of Number
of Animals to be Kept
[Adopted 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 489 (Ch. 2, Part 3 of the 1996 Code)]
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 32/301
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
§ 100-12. Keeping barking dogs and crying cats.
Harboring. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to keep or harbor any dog which
habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which habitually cries or howls to the great discomfort
of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, or in such manner as to materially disturb or annoy
persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
Petitions complaining of vicious or barking dogs or crying cats.
Whenever any person shall complain to the Police Department that a dog which habitually
barks, howls or yelps or a cat which habitually cries or howls is being kept by any person in
the Borough, the Police Department shall notify the owner of said dog or cat that a complaint
has been received and that the person shall take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the
howling, yelping or crying.
If the warning given to the person alleged to be keeping a dog or cat as set forth in
Subsection B(1), above, is ineffective, then verified compliant of at least two citizens not from
the same family may be presented to the Police Department, alleging that a vicious dog or a
dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps or a cat which habitually cries or howls is being
kept by any person within the Borough. The Police Department shall inform the owner of such
dog or cat that said petition has been received and shall cite the owner of the dog or cat for
the violation alleged in said petition.
§ 100-13. Keeping of numerous dogs and cats in the Borough.
Nuisance. The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats in the Borough for a considerable
period of time detracts from and, in many instances, is detrimental to the healthful and comfortable
life for which such areas were created. The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats, is
thereof, declared to be a public nuisance.
"Dog" shall mean any canine, regardless of age or sex.
"Cat" shall mean any feline, regardless of age or sex.
Number of dogs and cats limited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep more than five dogs or five cats within
the Borough, with the exception that a litter of pups or litter of kittens, or a portion of a litter
may be kept for a period of time not exceeding five months from birth.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any establishment wherein dogs or cats are
kept for breeding, sale, sporting purposes or boarding.
§ 100-14. Kennels.
In the areas where kennels are permitted, no kennel shall be located closer than 100 feet to the
boundary of the nearest adjacent residential lot.
§ 100-15. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 33/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 108. Construction Codes, Uniform
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 95.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 187.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
Article I. BOCA Building Code
[Adopted 5-4-1971 by Ord. No. 280; amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509 (Ch. 5, Part 1 of the 1996
Code)]
§ 108-1. Adoption of standards.
The Borough of Coopersburg hereby adopts, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for
the construction, alteration, equipment, fire protection and safety of buildings and structures, including
administration, building permits and penalties, the building code known as the "BOCA National
Building Code, Twelfth Edition, 1993" as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc., save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of
which three copies have been and are now filed in the office of the Borough Secretary, and the same
are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. From the date on which this
article shall take effect the provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and
structures, and in all other subjects therein contained, within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Coopersburg.
§ 108-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The building code hereby adopted is amended as follows:
"Borough of Coopersburg" shall be inserted wherever the words "Name of Jurisdiction" appear in
brackets therein.
Whenever the term "legal officer" or "legal representative" is used in this code, it shall be held to
mean the Borough Solicitor.
Section 104.2 is hereby amended to read as follows:
104.2 Appointment: The Building Official shall be appointed by the Borough Council to serve
during the pleasure of the appointing authority.
Section 104.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:
104.4 Deputy: During temporary absence or disability of the Building Official, the appointing
authority shall designate an acting Building Official.
Section 104.5 shall be amended to read as follows:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 34/301
F.
G.
H.
I.
§ 104.5 Qualifications of building official: To be eligible for appointment, the candidate for the
position shall have had experience as an architect, structural engineer, building inspector or
superintendent of building construction. He shall be of good health, physically capable of making
the necessary examinations and inspections. He shall not have any interest whatever, directly or
indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material, process or device entering into or used in
connection with building construction, alterations, removal and demolition.
Section 112.3.1 shall be amended to read as follows:
§ 112.3.1. Fee Schedule: The fees charged by the Borough of Coopersburg for building permits,
demolition permits, inspections and plan examinations shall be fixed by resolution of the Borough
Council.
Section 116.4 shall be amended to read as follows:
§ 116.4. Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate any provision of this code or who shall
fail to comply with any requirement thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building
or structure in violation of an approved plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs, and in default of payment, to imprisonment for
not more than 30 days. Each day that a violation of this code continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Section 117.2 shall be deleted.
Section 202.0 is hereby amended to read as follows:
Alley: any public way primarily intended to provide vehicular access to the rear of lots fronting
upon public streets or avenues.
Building line: a line, established by ordinance or designated upon an officially adopted lot plan,
beyond which a building shall not extend.
§ 108-3. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by regulations of
departments or agencies of the commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or
regulations, or other ordinances of the Borough of Coopersburg, as the case may be, shall control
where the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this article. The code
shall control in all cases where the state requirements or the requirements of other ordinances of this
Borough are not as strict as those contained in this article.
§ 108-4. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this article so far as they are the same as those of ordinances and/or codes in force
immediately prior to the enactment of this article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and codes and not as new enactments. The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or
liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any
right or penalty or to punish any offense under the authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
Article II. BOCA Plumbing Code
[Adopted 7-14-1992 by Ord. No. 479; amended in its entirety 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509 (Ch. 5, Part 2
of the 1996 Code)]
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 35/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
§ 108-5. Adoption of standards.
The Borough of Coopersburg hereby adopts, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for
the design and installation of plumbing systems, including administration, plumbing permits and
penalties, the plumbing code known as the "BOCA National Plumbing Code, 1993, Ninth Edition," as
published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., save and except such
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which three copies have been and are
now filed in the office of the Borough Secretary, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this article shall take effect the provisions
thereof shall be controlling in the design and installation of plumbing systems within the corporate limits
of the Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 108-6. Additions, insertions and changes.
The code hereby adopted is amended as follows:
Section P-101.1 insert "Borough of Coopersburg."
Section P-113.2 is amended to read "The fees for all plumbing work shall be as indicated in the
schedule of fees as adopted, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough Council."
Section P-116.4 is amended to read "Any person who shall violate any provision of this code or
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements hereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair
plumbing work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official,
or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code shall be, upon conviction
thereof, sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense."
Section P-117.2 shall be amended to read "Any person who shall continue any work in or about
the structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be, upon conviction thereof,
sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fines and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days."
Section P-304.3 insert "150 feet."
Section P-309.4 insert "36 inches."
Section P-309.5 delete the language in BOCA and insert "Building sewers shall be installed below
recorded frost penetration but not less than 36 inches below grade except where the depth of the
building sewer or the sewer lateral is governed by the requirements of Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Part I, Department of Environmental Resources, Chapter 73, Standards for Sewage
Disposal Facilities."
§ 108-7. State law and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by regulations of
departments or agencies of the commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or
regulations, or other ordinances of the Borough of Coopersburg, as the case may be, shall control
where the requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this article. The code
shall control in all cases where the state requirements, or the requirements of other ordinances of this
Borough, are not as strict as those contained in this article.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 36/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 108-8. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this article so far as they are the same as those of ordinances and/or codes in force
immediately prior to the enactment of this article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and codes and not as new enactments. The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or
liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any
right or penalty to punish any offense under the authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
Article III. BOCA Fire Prevention Code
[Adopted 5-4-1971 by Ord. No. 281; amended in its entirety 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509 (Ch. 5, Part 3
of the 1996 Code)]
§ 108-9. Adoption of standards.
The Borough of Coopersburg hereby adopts, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, the fire prevention code known as the
"BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, 1993, Ninth Edition," as published by the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc., save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted,
modified or amended, of which three copies have been and now are filed in the office of the Borough
Secretary and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.
From the date on which this article shall take effect the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the
corporate limits of the Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 108-10. Additions, insertions and changes.
The fire prevention code hereby adopted is amended as follows:
"Borough of Coopersburg" shall be inserted wherever the words "Name of Jurisdiction" appear in
brackets therein.
Wherever the term "legal officer" or "legal representative" is used in this code, it shall be held to
mean the Borough Solicitor,
F-112.3 is hereby amended to read as follows:
"Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this code or fail to comply with any order
issued pursuant to any section hereof, shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to a fine of
not less than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each say that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense."
"The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions."
Section P-403.0, "Open Burning," is deleted.
§ 108-11. State laws and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by regulations of
departments or agencies of the commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or
regulations, or other ordinances of this Borough, as the case may be, shall control where the
requirements thereof are the same as or in excess of the provisions of this article. The code shall
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 37/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
control in all cases where the state requirements, or the requirements of other ordinances of the
Borough, are not as strict as those contained in this article.
§ 108-12. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this article, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances and/or codes in force
immediately prior to the enactment of this article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and codes and not as new enactments. The provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or
liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any
right or penalty or to punish any offense under authority of any of the repealed ordinances.
Article IV. Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 5-11-2004 by Ord. No. 567]
§ 108-13. Election of Borough to enforce state code.
This municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to
time, and its regulations.
§ 108-14. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401-405, as amended from time
to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of this
municipality.
§ 108-15. Manner of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within this municipality shall be undertaken in any of the
following ways as determined by the governing body of this municipality from time to time by
resolution:
By the designation of an employee of the municipality to serve as the municipal code official to act
on behalf of the municipality;
By the retention of one or more construction code officials or third-party agencies to act on behalf
of the municipality;
By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint administration and enforcement of
this Act through an intermunicipal agreement;
By entering into a contract with another municipality for the administration and enforcement of this
Act on behalf of this municipality;
By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry for plan
review, inspections and enforcement of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling
units and utility and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 108-16. Board of Appeals.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 38/301
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing body of this municipality in
conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions of the Code, as amended from time to time,
and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken
jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action
of the participating municipalities.
§ 108-17. Construal of provisions.
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were adopted by this municipality on
or before July 1, 1999, and which equal or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue in
full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum
requirements of the Code, as amended from time to time.
All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in effect as of the effective date of
this article and whose requirements are less than the minimum requirements of the Code are
hereby amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the Code.
All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this municipality not governed by the Code
shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 108-18. Fees.
Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement undertaken pursuant to
this article and the Code shall be established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
Article V. International Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 1-3-2005 by Ord. No. 575]
§ 108-19. Adoption of standards.
A certain document which is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary of the Borough of
Coopersburg, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2003
Edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Coopersburg in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of
such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the Secretary of the Borough of Coopersburg are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 108-20 of this article.
§ 108-20. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1, Insert "Borough of Coopersburg."
Insert Current existing Fee Schedule.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 39/301
C.
D.
E.
F.
Insert "10 inches."
Insert "May 15 to October 15."
Insert "October 15 to May 15."
Insert "October 15 to May 15."
§ 108-21. Repealer.
That any ordinance or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 108-22. Severability.
That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is, of any reason, held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The
Borough Council hereby declares that it would have passed this article, and each section, subsection,
clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
§ 108-23. Construal of provisions.
That nothing in this article or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be construed to
affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any
cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
§ 108-21 of this article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this article.
Chapter 115. Disorderly Conduct
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 10-12-1993 by Ord. No.
489 (Ch. 6, Part 1 of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms — See Ch. 122.
Public property protection — See Ch. 161.
§ 115-1. Disturbance of the peace.
Any person who shall, by any act, work or conduct cause or tend to cause a disturbance of the peace
and good order of the Borough, or cause, or tend to cause any danger, discomfort or annoyance to any
of the inhabitants of the Borough or users of the Borough thoroughfares; or who shall willfully make
any loud, boisterous or unseemly noise or disturbance; or who shall fight or quarrel or incite others to
fight or quarrel; or who shall publicly make use of obscene or indecent language; or who shall loaf or
loiter or congregate upon any of the public streets or alleys or public grounds in the Borough of
Coopersburg, to the annoyance of peaceable residents nearby or traveling upon any street or alley or
being lawfully upon any of the public grounds of the Borough, whereby the public peace is broken or
disturbed or the traveling public annoyed shall be guilty of disorderly conduct.
§ 115-2. Defacement of personal property.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 40/301
A.
Any person who shall willfully cut, mark or deface any tree, building or any other personal property in
the Borough shall be guilty of disorderly conduct.
§ 115-3. Firearms.
Any person who shall discharge wantonly and without any justifiable purpose any gun, pistol or other
firearms, at any place, or within any house of the Borough, or in any of the highways thereof shall be
guilty of disorderly conduct.
§ 115-4. Drunkenness, lewdness or exposure.
Any person who shall be publicly drunk and disorderly, or lewdly or immodestly exposed in the
Borough shall be guilty of disorderly conduct.
§ 115-5. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs and, upon default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 122. Firearms
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 8-2-1880 by Ord. No. 5;
amended in its entirety 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509 (Ch. 6, Part 3 of the 1996 Code). Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 122-1. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
Except in necessary defense of person and property and except as provided in § 122-3 of this chapter,
it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, or discharge any gun or other firearm within the Borough
of Coopersburg.
§ 122-2. Use of air rifles, bow and arrows or similar devices
restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B-B
gun, bow and arrow, or similar device, or any implement that is not a firearm but which impels a pellet
of any kind with a force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm, at any place within the
Borough, except as provided in § 122-3 of this chapter, and except on a target range which is properly
constructed to trap or stop the projectile as ascertained by the Chief of Police.
§ 122-3. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
Persons licensed to hunt in this commonwealth while actually engaged in hunting where permitted
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 41/301
B.
C.
Members of any organization incorporated under laws of this commonwealth engaged in target
shooting upon the grounds or property belonging to or under the control of such organization; and
Any law enforcement officers when used in the discharge of their official duties.
§ 122-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs, and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 125. Fire Prevention
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 2-23-2010 by Ord. No.
619. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 28.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Outdoor fires and burning — See Ch. 127.
§ 125-1. Adoption of code by reference.
A certain document, one copy of which is on file for public inspection at the Administrative Offices of
the Borough of Coopersburg at 5 North Main Street, Coopersburg, Pennsylvania, being marked and
designated as the 2009 International Fire Code, as published by the International Code Council, be
and hereby is adopted as the Fire Code of the Borough of Coopersburg, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said 2009 International Fire Code on file in
the administrative office of the Borough of Coopersburg are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter.
Chapter 127. Fires and Burning, Outdoor
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 10-12-1999 by Ord. No.
532. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 127-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated, unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
DOMESTIC REFUSE
Tree branches, tree and shrubbery trimmings, leaves and similar yard waste, not including grass
clippings.
FURNACE
Any enclosed device specifically designed for burning any materials for the production of heat.
GARBAGE
All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and
consumption of food.
INCINERATOR
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 42/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Any device specifically designed for the destruction by burning of refuse, sewage sludge, or any
other combustible material. Incinerators must be screened or covered.
OPEN FIRE
A fire in which any material is burned in the open without containment, or in a receptacle other
than a furnace; e.g., incinerator.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, department, bureau, agency or other legal
entity.
REFUSE
Garbage, rubbish and trade waste.
RUBBISH
Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive, including but not limited to rags, old
clothes, leather, carpets, ashes, furniture, tin cans, rubber, glass, crockery, masonry, and other
similar items.
SALVAGE OPERATION
Any business, trade or industry engaged in whole or in part in salvaging or in reclaiming any
product or material, including but not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums.
TRADE WASTE
All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from construction, building operations or the
prosecution of any business, trade or industry, including but not limited to wood or wood products,
plastic or plastic products, cartons, paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals,
cinders, and other forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
§ 127-2. Outdoor fires prohibited.
Within the Borough limits, no person shall:
Ignite or feed an open fire for the destruction of refuse or in the conduct of a salvage operation in
any public or private place outside any building; or
Cause, suffer, allow, or permit the maintenance of any open fire for the destruction of refuse or in
the conduct of a salvage operation on any property under his control outside of any building.
§ 127-3. Exceptions.
The following are exceptions to the aforementioned regulations:
When approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP), open
fires may be set in the performance of an official duty by an official of the PADEP for the protection
of the public health, for the prevention or control of disease or pest, or the prevention of a fire or
other hazard which cannot be abated by any other means.
Open fires may be set for the purpose of instructing or training of fire fighters upon permit issued
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and provided that fire prevention
supervision is provided by the fire department conducting the training exercise.
Open fires may be set for the purpose of cooking or heating or for decorative purposes, provided
such fire is contained in a furnace, fireplace or other container designed for such use.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 43/301
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Exceptions may be made by the Borough Council upon approval of the Fire Official or other
person charged with enforcement of this chapter, and a permit issued when, as and if, for some
unusual circumstance, Council considers the situation falls within the intent of this chapter and will
not create a nuisance or fire hazard. Permits shall be issued at a fee to be established by
resolution of Council. The Fire Department must stand by during any special burning under this
section and persons requesting a permit shall also be responsible for any expenses incurred by
the Fire Department in excess of fee set forth hereinabove.
Any of the above exceptions permitting open fires may be temporarily suspended by resolution of
Borough Council duly enacted or ratified at any regular or special meeting upon a finding that due
to weather or atmospheric conditions the open burning of domestic refuse poses a risk of fire
hazard. Notice of said resolutions shall be posted in Borough Hall and published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 127-4. Enforcement.
The Borough Council or their duly authorized representatives, or the members of the Police
Department of Coopersburg Borough are hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 127-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or resolution of this chapter of the Borough
Council of Coopersburg adopted under the provisions set forth above, shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $150 or more than $300 for the first offense, or a fine of not
less than $300 or more than $500 for a second or subsequent offense, and/or undergo imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 132. Floodplain Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 6-14-1988 by Ord. No.
428 (Ch. 8, Part 1 of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 187.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 132-1. General provisions.
[Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 435]
The intent of this chapter is to:
Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices to minimize flood damage in the
future.
Minimize danger to public health by protecting the water supply and natural drainage.
Identify and accept the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) of the Borough of Coopersburg,
Community No. 420587, as prepared and revised from time to time by the Federal Insurance
Administration, attached hereto and made a part hereof.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 44/301
E.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
A.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be in effect in identified
floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance provisions shall remain in full force and effect to
the extent that those provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
§ 132-2. Identification of floodplain areas.
[Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 435; 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Identification. The identified floodplain area shall be those areas of the Borough of Coopersburg
which are subject to the one-hundred-year flood, as identified in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
dated November 7, 2001, and the accompanying maps prepared for the Borough of Coopersburg
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision thereof.
Description of floodplain areas. The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific
areas:
FW (Floodway Area). The areas identified as "Floodway" in the AE Zone in the Flood
Insurance Study prepared by the FEMA. The term shall also include floodway areas which
have been identified in other available studies or sources of information for those floodplain
areas where no floodway has been identified in the Flood Insurance Study.
FF (Flood-Fringe Area). The remaining portions of the one-hundred-year floodplain in those
areas identified as an AE Zone in the Flood Insurance Study, where a floodway has been
delineated. The basis for the outermost boundary of this area shall be the one-hundred-yearflood
elevations as shown in the flood profiles contained in the Flood Insurance Study.
FE (Special Floodplain Area). The areas identified as Zone AE in the Flood Insurance Study,
where one-hundred-year-flood elevations have been provided, but no floodway has been
delineated.
FA (General Floodplain Area). The areas identified as Zone A in the FIS for which no onehundred-
year-flood elevations have been provided. When available, information from other
federal, state and other acceptable sources shall be used to determine the one-hundred-yearflood
elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no other information is
available, the one-hundred-year elevation shall be determined by using a point on the
boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site in question.
Changes in identification of area. The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the
Borough Council where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change, approval must be
obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an initial
determination shall be made by the Borough Planning Commission and any party aggrieved by
this decision or determination may appeal to the Borough Council. The burden of proof shall be on
the appellant.
§ 132-3. Floodplain area standards.
The Zoning Officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any flood elevation and floodway
data available from a federal, state, or other source as criteria for requiring within Zone A the
following:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 45/301
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(c)
(3)
New construction and substantial improvements of any residential structure shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
New construction and substantial improvements of any nonresidential structure shall either
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation or be
floodproofed up to that height. Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, having a lowest
floor which is not elevated to at least 1 1/2 feet above the one-hundred-year-flood elevation,
shall be floodproofed in a completely or essentially dry manner in accordance with the W1 or
W2 space classification standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972), as amended
March 1992, or with some other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and methods of construction are
in conformance with the above referenced standards.
[Amended11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Space below the lowest floor.
[Amended11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is prohibited.
Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) which will be used
solely for the parking of a vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other
than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The
term "partially enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of enclosed space.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be screens, louvers, etc., or other coverings or devices provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 132-4. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE
A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to,
the principal use or structure.
BASEMENT
Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BUILDING
A combination of materials to form a permanent structure having walls and a roof. Included shall
be all manufactured homes and trailers to be used for human habitation.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE
A space which will remain totally dry during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to
prevent the passage of water and water vapor.
[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 46/301
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
CONSTRUCTION
The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation
of a building or structure, including the placement of manufactured homes.
DEVELOPMENT
Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion or alteration of buildings or other
structures, the placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving; utilities, filling,
grading and excavation, mining, dredging, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials,
and the subdivision of land.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE
A space which will remain dry during flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or
minor seepage; the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
FLOOD
A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOODPLAIN AREA
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or complete inundation from an
adjoining or nearby stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
FLOODPROOFING
Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.
FLOODWAY
The designated area of a floodplain required to carry and discharge floodwaters of a given
magnitude. For the purposes of this chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a
flood of the one-hundred-year magnitude.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
HISTORIC STRUCTURE
Any structure that is:
[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the Secretary to be qualified as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA
The floodplain area specifically identified in this chapter as being inundated by the one-hundredyear
flood.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 47/301
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
LAND DEVELOPMENT
Any of the following activities:
[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or parcels of land for any
purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially
or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
A subdivision of land.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished floodresistant
partially enclosed area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of a
building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
MANUFACTURED HOME
A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational, and other similar vehicles placed on a
site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK
A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land which has been planned and improved for the placement
of two or more manufactured homes.
MINOR REPAIR
The replacement of existing work with equivalent materials for the purpose of its routine
maintenance and upkeep, but not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion
thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the removal or change
of any required means of egress, or rearrangement or parts of a structure affecting the exitway
requirements; nor shall minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of
any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent or similar piping,
electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
NEW CONSTRUCTION
Structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after 11-13-2001, and includes any
subsequent improvements thereto.
[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
OBSTRUCTION
Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile abutment, projection, excavation, channel,
rectification, culvert, building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along, across, or
projecting into any channel, watercourse, or floodplain area, which may impede, retard, or change
the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water or is placed where the flow of the water might carry the same downstream to the damage of
life and property.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 48/301
A.
B.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD
A flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent
chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
PERSON
An adult, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality,
governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
A vehicle which is: built on a single chassis; not more than 400 square feet, measured at the
largest horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION
The one-hundred-year-flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
SPECIAL PERMIT
A special approval which is required for hospitals, nursing homes, jails and new manufactured
home parks and subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground, including, but not limited
to, buildings, sheds, manufactured homes, and other similar items.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels, or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building, or lot development; provided,
however, that the division of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not
involving any new street or easement of access, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE
Damage from any cause sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
[Added 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 49/301
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
E.
§ 132-5. Alterations procedures.
[Amended 2-14-1989 Ord. No. 435; 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Existing structures. The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements to
be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement is made to any existing
structures, the provisions of Subsection B shall apply.
Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to an
existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any floodway
area that would cause any increase in the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed within any FE area that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the onehundred-
year-flood elevation more than one foot any point.
Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to an existing structure
shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 132-6. Variance procedures.
[Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 435]
Variance procedures for construction within the floodplain area shall be subject to the following
rules in addition to those provided in the Coopersburg Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 230).
If granted, a variance shall involve only the minimum modification necessary to provide relief from
the hazards identifiable within a floodplain area.
Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Coopersburg shall notify the applicant in writing
that:
The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Coopersburg shall consider, but not be
limited to, the following:
That there is good and sufficient cause.
That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
That the granting of the variance will not result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimization of the public, or conflict with any other applicable
local or state ordinances and regulations.
No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or activity within any
floodway area that would cause any increase in the one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the Borough
of Coopersburg. In addition, a report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in
the annual or biennial report to the Federal Insurance Administration.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 50/301
F.
G.
(1)
(2)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
(c)
(3)
A.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be designed and constructed so as
to have the capability of resisting the one-hundred-year flood.
In granting any variance, the Borough shall attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards
it considers necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this chapter.
§ 132-7. Administration of building permits in identified floodplain
areas.
[Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 435]
Special permits.
New construction. Special zoning/building permits shall be required before any new
construction or development shall take place within any identified floodplain area of the
Borough of Coopersburg.
Alterations and improvements. Special zoning/building permits shall be required before any
alteration, repair or reconstruction or substantial improvement of any existing building located
partially or entirely within any identified floodplain, is undertaken.
Nothing withstanding the provisions of this section, no zoning/building permit or variance shall
be granted for:
The commencement of any of the following activities; or the construction, enlargement, or
expansion of any structure used, or intended to be used, for any of the following
activities:
Hospitals.
Nursing homes.
Jails or prisons.
The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an existing manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision.
Any new or substantially improved structure which will be used for the production or
storage of any of the following dangerous materials or substances or which will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than 550 gallons or other
comparable volume or any amount of radioactive substances) or any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises:
Acetone.
Ammonia.
Benzene.
Calcium carbide.
Carbon disulfide.
Celluloid.
Chlorine.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 51/301
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
(d)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(4)
B.
Hydrochloric acid.
Hydrocyanic acid.
Magnesium.
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
Phosphorus.
Potassium.
Sodium.
Sulphur and sulphur products.
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides).
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise regulated.
Any alteration, construction, repair or improvement to an existing structure located
partially or entirely within an identified floodplain, wherein the alteration, construction,
repair or improvement exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure, shall be
prohibited.
Application procedures. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or partially
within any identified floodplain area, applicants for building permits shall provide all the necessary
information in sufficient detail and clarity to enable the building permit officer to determine that:
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and to conform with
the requirements of this and all other applicable codes and ordinances;
All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other pertinent information
(e.g., any or all of the technical information contained in Section 5.01) as may be required by
the building permit officer to make the above determination:
A completed building permit application form.
Name and address of applicant.
Name and address of owner of land on which proposed construction is to occur.
Name and address of contractor.
Site location.
Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost.
A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to
100 feet or less, showing the following:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 52/301
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
(h)
[1]
(i)
(1)
(2)
(3)
C.
North arrow, scale and date;
All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of the site expressed in
acres or square feet;
The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses, identified floodplain
areas and, if available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water,
including direction and velocities;
The exact size and location of the proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, any existing or proposed subdivision and land developments as well
as existing building and structures;
Proposed lowest floor and basement elevations of any proposed building based
upon the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929;
Plan including existing and proposed contours, information concerning one-hundredyear-
flood elevation velocities, and other applicable information such as pressures,
impact and uplift forces, associated with the one-hundred-year flood; size of
structures; location and elevations of existing streets, drives and other accessways;
water supply and sanitary sewage facilities; soil types; and detailed information
concerning any proposed floodproofing measures, including the level of
floodproofing for nonresidential structures.
A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, which states that
the proposed construction or development has been adequately designed to withstand
the pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the one-hundred-year
flood. Such statement shall include a description of the type and extent of flood proofing
measures which have been incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental Protection's "Planning
Module for Land Development."[1]
Editor's Note: Former Section 107.3, which immediately followed this subsection, was
deleted 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548.
Other permit issuance requirements.
Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any stream or any watercourse, etc. within the
municipality, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection,
Bureau of Dam Safety, Obstructions, and Stormwater Management, as specified in the Water
Obstruction Act of 1913, as amended. Further, notification of the proposal shall be given to all
affected adjacent municipalities. Copies of such notifications shall be forwarded to both the
Federal Insurance Administration, the PA. Department of Community and Economic
Development and FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency).
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Under no circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development adversely affect the
capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other
drainage facility or system.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the building permit officer shall review the
application for the permit to determine if all other necessary government permits required by
state and federal laws have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act[2] (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act[3] (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act[4]
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 53/301
[2]
[3]
[4]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
G.
H.
(Act 1937-394, as amended); and the U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344.
No permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 132-8. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and development proposed to be
undertaken within any identified floodplain area:
Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters
without damage to persons or property. The system shall insure drainage at all points along
streets, and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
Sanitary sewer facilities. All new or replacement sanitary sewer facilities, and private package
sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems) shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into the floodwaters. In addition, they should be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage and impairment.
Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system, and be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages.
Utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems shall be located,
elevated (where possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures shall be designed, located and
constructed so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwaters.
Anchoring.
All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted engineering
practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks and other similar objects or components located at
or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be firmly anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
Electrical systems and components.
Electric water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating systems, and other electrical
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation and other
electrical equipment or apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above the regulatory
flood elevation.
Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the level of the one-hundredyear-
flood elevation.
Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be dropped from above.
Plumbing.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 54/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
I.
J.
K.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
L.
M.
Water heaters, furnaces and other mechanical equipment or apparatus shall not be located
below the regulatory flood elevation.
No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any identified floodplain area
except in strict compliance with all state and local regulations for such systems. If any such
system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from
it, during a flood.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to prevent the
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into
the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be
made for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all points;
Consist of soil or small rock materials only -- sanitary landfills shall not be permitted;
Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance to erosion, scouring or
settling;
Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless substantiated data justifying
steeper slopes are submitted to and approved by the building permit officer; and
Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than one foot below the
regulatory flood elevation.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in times of flooding, could be
injurious to human, animal or plant life, and not listed in § 132-7A(3)(c), shall be stored at or
above the regulatory flood elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Floors, walls and ceilings.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be installed to
accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without
causing structural damage to the building.
Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant
variety.
Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed of materials that are water-resistant and will withstand inundation.
Windows, doors and other components at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
made of metal or other water-resistant material.
Paints and adhesives.
[Amended 11-13-2001 by Ord. No. 548]
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 55/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of marine or
water-resistant quality.
Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of a marine or waterresistant
variety.
All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be finished with a marine or waterresistant
paint or other finishing material.
§ 132-9. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured homes and additions
thereto shall be:
Placed on a permanent foundation.
Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is 1 1/2 feet or more above the
elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
An evacuation plan which includes alternate vehicular access and escape routes shall be filed with
the appropriate Borough officials for manufactured home parks and manufactured home
subdivisions.
§ 132-10. Map adopted by reference.
The Flood Hazard Boundary Map contained as part of the Flood Insurance Rate Map, dated July 30,
1982, and attached hereto, is incorporated as a part of this chapter.
Chapter 143. Massage, Reflexology and Spa
Establishments
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 5-10-2005 by Ord. No.
576. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 143-1. Intent and compliance.
It is intended that the regulations applicable to massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork and
spa services address any potential effects which may be detrimental to the public welfare, and to
protect and preserve the quality of the Borough's neighborhoods and commercial districts and the
quality of life in the Borough, the Borough's retail trade, to maintain property values, to reduce the
incidence of unlawful activity and to promote and protect generally the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of and those who come to work and visit in the Borough. The provisions of this chapter have
neither the purpose of nor shall they effect a restriction on the access to legitimate therapeutic
massage and spa services.
§ 143-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words or
phrases shall have the meanings indicated as follows:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 56/301
APPLICANT
A person who is required to file an application for permit or license under this chapter, including an
individual owner, manager, partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager,
employee or agent of a massage or spa business.
EMPLOYEE
Every owner, partner, manager, supervisor, or other worker, whether paid or not, who renders
services of any nature in the conduct of a massage business establishment or similar use as
herein. For purposes of this chapter, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that every person who
renders services of any nature in the conduct of a massage or spa business is an employee of
such business.
HEALTH INSPECTOR
The Borough of Coopersburg's Health Inspector who shall be responsible for enforcement of this
chapter.
MASSAGE BUSINESS or MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT or MASSAGE THERAPY
ESTABLISHMENT
Any location where any person, firm, association or corporation is engaged in or carries on or
permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities or services mentioned in this chapter
for the public, including any activity which involves any combination of massage services,
reflexology, spa services and bathhouse, and which is not a medical or related health facility
subject to the jurisdiction, licensure and inspection of any state board or commission.
MASSAGE or MASSAGE THERAPY or MASSAGE SERVICES
Any method of pressure on or friction against or effurage, kneading, rubbing, tapping, range of
motion, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the head, body or parts of the head or body by
another, with or without the aid of any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances and with or
without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams,
lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice, including but not
limited to the practice or reflexology.
MASSAGE PRACTITIONER(S)
Any person who is licensed by the Borough of Coopersburg to engage in and offer to the public
the practice of massage, massage therapy or massage services as herein defined (including but
not limited to subcontractors, subtenants or temporary employees), and who shall have received a
diploma or certificate from a massage school, as defined herein, certifying completion of a
massage therapy program which consists of not less than 200 hours of supervised course work or
clinic program with the massage school, or, in the alternative, who shall be certified by the
American Massage Therapy Association Commission on Massage Therapy Accreditation and
Bodywork or by the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage, and who shall comply
with the continuing education requirements of such Board or Commission and who shall have
agreed to practice under the Code of Ethics of such Board or Commission.
MASSAGE SCHOOL
An educational facility which is licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Education or similar
government sanctioned licensure board or which is certified by the National Certification Board of
Therapeutic Massage or other recognized accrediting agency, to provide massage therapy and
bodywork training.
OPERATE A MASSAGE BUSINESS OR MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS OR SPA BUSINESS OR
FACILITY
The supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being
responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of a massage, reflexology or spa business
or other activities within a massage or spa business.
PATRON
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 57/301
Any person who receives massage, reflexology or spa services under such circumstances that it is
reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other consideration therefore.
PERMITTEE
The person to whom a massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork or spa health permit or
license is issued.
PERSON
Any individual, firm, association, partnership, co-party, corporation, limited liability corporation,
joint-stock company, joint venture or combination of the above in whatever form or character.
REFLEXOLOGIST or REFLEXOLOGY PRACTITIONER
Any person who is licensed by the Borough to engage in and offer to the public the practice of
reflexology as herein defined (including but not limited to subcontractors, subtenants or temporary
employees), and who shall have received a diploma or certificate from a nationally recognized
reflexology school, certifying completion of not less than 200 hours of a reflexology training
program, and who is certified by the American Reflexology Board or other national recognized
certification board for reflexology and who shall comply with the continuing education
requirements of such and who shall have agreed to practice under the Code of Ethics of such.
REFLEXOLOGY
The practice of applying pressure using thumb, finger and hand techniques to the feet and hands
or other parts of the head or body; the practice of reflexology is restricted to the feet and hands
and shall not include the use of oils, lotions or creams.
SPA or SPA SERVICES
Any location where any person, firm, association, company or corporation is engaged in or carries
on or permits to be engaged in any activity mentioned in this chapter, including without limitation
any of the following: massage, reflexology bathing, treatment of any type of the head, body, skin or
other parts of the body and which is not a medical or related health facility or hair or cosmetology
business subject to the jurisdiction, licensure and inspection of any state board or commission.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS
Includes any of the following: Less than completely and opaquely covered male or female genitals,
pubic region, buttocks and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely opaquely covered; any
device, costume or covering that simulates any of the body parts described above.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
Includes any of the following whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other
coverings: Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; sexual acts, actual or
simulated, including sexual intercourse, masturbation, bestiality, necrophilia, sadomasochistic
abuse, fellatio, cunnilingus, sodomy, or other specified sexual activity prohibited by law; fondling or
other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; excretory
functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in this subsection.
STUDENT INTERN or TRAINEE
A person who is and remains enrolled in on at least a part-time basis a massage or reflexology
school (as defined herein) and who has completed no less than 50 hours of a massage or
reflexology curriculum and who, as part of the curriculum at the massage or reflexology school, is
providing massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork or spa services to the public and who
is and shall at all times be supervised by a massage practitioner.
§ 143-3. Massage and spa health permit required; application.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 58/301
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry a permit or license to be
engaged in, conducted or carried on, or provided to the public in or upon any premises within the
Borough the operation of a business which offers massage, massage therapy, reflexology,
bodywork or spa services unless the person or entity first obtains and continues to maintain in full
force and effect a permit issued by the Health Inspector as required by this chapter, and such
persons are and is licensed by the Borough of Coopersburg as a massage practitioner or
reflexologist and maintains and operates such business and provides such services in compliance
with this chapter. The following shall be excepted from the foregoing: health care professionals
and their associates, including massage therapists, who are subject to the jurisdiction and
licensure of a state board or commission such as a physician, chiropractor, physical therapist,
occupational therapist, nurse practitioner and nurses operating in a medical facility.
Any person who proposes to provide to the public massage, massage therapy, reflexology,
bodywork or spa services or to operate, maintain or conduct a massage, massage therapy,
reflexology, bodywork or spa services in the Borough shall first submit to the Health Inspector a
completed application for a health permit on a form provided by the Borough, as may be amended
from time to time, containing all information required by this chapter and as may reasonably be
required by the Health Inspector, and shall submit payment of the required nonrefundable
application fee as established by resolution and as may be amended by the Borough Council from
time to time. An application which is not complete or which is not properly executed or which is not
accompanied by the required application fee shall not be deemed a complete application and shall
be denied without further review.
Permit application.
A massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork or spa facility existing and operating on
the effective date of this chapter shall apply for a health permit within 30 days therefrom and
shall be allowed to continue operating during the pendency of the application, as set forth
herein, provided such business is otherwise in compliance with applicable provisions of this
chapter.
Upon application to operate a massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork or spa
facility which is existing on the effective date of this chapter, a temporary permit not to exceed
30 days may be issued immediately upon receipt of a completed application, and pending
action on the application. A temporary permit shall expire automatically upon action on the
application or upon the expiration of 30 days, whichever is sooner, unless the period of
temporary permit shall be extended by the Health Inspector. In no event shall the total period
of a temporary application exceed 90 days.
Permit expiration, invalidity and renewal.
Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by
complying with the renewal application procedure set forth herein.
Any permit issued shall become invalid and considered expired if the approved business is
suspended, abandoned or closed to the public for a period of six months after the date of
permit issuance, except that for reasonable cause, the Health Inspector may grant extensions
of time of additional periods of operation pursuant to the previously issued permit, the total of
which extensions shall not exceed 90 days.
An expired permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be renewed only by filing
with the Health Inspector a written application for renewal, accompanied by the annual permit
renewal fee, a copy of the permit to be renewed, and a notarized statement by the applicant
certifying that no change has occurred in the ownership, use, possession and/or physical
structure of the premises since the date of the issuance of the last permit. The application for
renewal shall be filed with the Health Inspector not less than 30 days before the expiration
date of the permit, nor more than 60 days before the expiration date. When an application is
filed less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 59/301
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
stayed. Each application for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for action upon
applications for permits.
Each application for a new permit and subsequent annual permit renewal shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable fee in an amount as shall be established from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council. The application fee shall be used to defray, in part, administrative costs incurred
in the processing of the application and inspection costs, and is not made in lieu of any other fees
or taxes required.
The application for a health permit to operate a massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork
or spa facility shall contain the following information:
Name of applicant.
If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state the applicant's complete name,
including any aliases, address and submit satisfactory written proof that the applicant is
at least 18 years of age.
If the applicant is other than an individual, the applicant shall state the type of entity (e.g.,
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or otherwise).
If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall state all of the partners' complete
names, including any aliases, addresses, ages, whether the partnership is general or
limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.
If the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the applicant shall provide its
name, the date of its incorporation or registration, evidence that the applicant is in good
standing under the laws of Pennsylvania, the names, capacities and ages of all
principals, members, officers and directors, name of the registered corporate agent and
the address of the registered office for service of process.
If the applicant intends to operate the business under a name other than that of the
applicant, the applicant shall provide proof of registration of the fictitious name with the
Department of State.
As to each applicant, in addition to the full name of each individual, partner, member,
officer and director, the application shall contain all aliases, current residential addresses,
telephone numbers, dates of birth, social security numbers, driver's license numbers and
the previous address for a period of three years immediately prior to the date of
application (and the dates of residence on each), written proof that each is at least 18
years of age; business, occupation or employment history for three years immediately
preceding the date of the application; two recent passport-style color photographs and
such other information as may be deemed necessary by the Health Inspector to secure
the foregoing information.
Signature of the applicant. If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall execute the
application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an
individual with at least 10% or greater interest in the business entity shall execute the
application.
Description. The application shall contain a narrative description of the proposed or existing
massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork or spa business for which the permit is
requested, which shall include hours of operation, number of employees and description of
titles and/or positions; a sketch or diagram showing the interior floor plan and configuration of
the premises, depicting all interior rooms, including rest rooms, office space, storage areas
and public areas, and dimensions. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but shall be drawn to a designated scale with marked dimensions of the interior of
the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches, a site plan showing the lot or
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 60/301
G.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
H.
property on which the business is or will be located, the location of the building or portion
thereof in which the business is or will be located, the number of available parking spaces, the
location and type of available and proposed lighting, landscaping, trash enclosures, and all
means of ingress and egress to and from the property. The site plan need not be
professionally prepared, but shall be drawn to scale with marked dimensions to an accuracy
of plus or minus one foot; the full name, address and telephone number of the property owner
and/or property management company if different from the applicant; a copy of the lease
agreement in effect at the time of the application; and a copy of any other agreements,
easements, conditions, covenants, restrictions or other such documents that contain evidence
affecting the use or operation of the lot, property premises or structures which will be subject
to the permit for which the application has been submitted.
Within 10 days of filing an application for a new massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork
or spa business, the applicant shall post the property in which the proposed massage or spa
business will be located with written notice of the application and the applicant shall provide by
certified mail, return receipt, written notice of the application, including a copy to all property
owners who own a property within 100 yards of the property in which the proposed massage or
spa business is to be located.
Massage or reflexology practitioner's license.
No employee of a massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork or spa business may
engage in providing massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork or spa services unless
the practitioner has obtained from the Health Inspector a massage or reflexology practitioner's
license.
A massage or reflexology practitioner's license shall only be issued to persons who are 18
years of age or older and who have received a diploma or a certificate from a massage or
reflexology school as herein defined, certifying the following:
For a massage practitioner's license: completion of a massage therapy program which
consists of not less than 200 hours of supervised course work in clinical program with the
massage school, or, in the alternative, who shall be certified by the American Massage
Therapy Association Commission or Massage Therapy Association and Bodywork or by
the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage, and other accredited
association and schooling facilities, and who shall comply with the continuing education
requirements of such board or commission and who shall agree to practice under the
Code of Ethics of such a Board or Commission;
For a reflexology practitioner's license: completion of a reflexology program which
consists of not less than 200 hours of reflexology training with the reflexology program.
A practitioner who has been issued a license limited to reflexology shall not be permitted to
offer any additional services and the license restricts the practice of reflexology.
Applications for massage or reflexology practitioner's license shall be on a form approved by
the Health Inspector and shall include full name of the individual to be licensed, all aliases,
current residential addresses, telephone numbers, date of birth; social security number,
driver's license number and the previous address(es) for a period of three years immediately
prior to the date of application (and the dates of residence on each), written proof that each is
at least 18 years of age; business, occupation or employment history for three years
immediately preceding the date of the application; two recent passport-style color
photographs and such other information as may be deemed necessary by the Health
Inspector to secure the foregoing information.
§ 143-4. Building requirements.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 61/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
(1)
B.
No massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork and spa facility shall be issued a permit to be
operated, established or maintained in the Borough unless an inspection by the Building Inspector and
Fire Inspector reveals that the facility complies with each of the following minimum requirements, in
addition to all applicable building, fire and health codes.
Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers shall be made waterproof
with approved waterproof materials and shall be installed in accordance with all applicable
building, fire and health codes.
All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls or bath areas and floors shall have surfaces which
may be readily disinfected.
Adequate bathing, dressing and locker facilities shall be provided for the patrons to be served at
any given time. In the event that male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously,
separate bathing, dressing, locker and massage room facilities shall be provided.
The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing nondisposable
instruments and materials used in administering massage, reflexology and spa services. Such
nondisposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron.
Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels and other
materials used in connection with administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other
materials shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets
shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas.
Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When employees and patrons of different
genders are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each
gender. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more employees or patrons
of that gender on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for half of the water
closets for the male patrons after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated
as to the gender accommodated therein.
Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either
the toilet room or a vestibule immediately adjacent thereto. Lavatories or washbasins shall be
provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels.
The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial services.
The premises shall meet all applicable building, health and fire codes and all other applicable laws
and regulations.
§ 143-5. Application review procedure.
Within 30 days of receipt of the completed application for a new permit or a renewed permit or
license, the Health Inspector shall conduct and complete an investigation of the application to
determine whether the applicant shall be issued a health permit or practitioner's license in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Health Inspector shall notify the applicant of
the action in writing by United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant
to the address stated in the application.
The Health Inspector may grant the application and issue or renew a health permit or practitioner's
license only upon sufficient evidence that the applicant and the proposed use comply with all
requirements of this chapter and written certification of:
The determination of the Zoning Officer, or his agent, that the proposed business meets all
zoning requirements; and
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 62/301
(2)
(1)
[1]
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
C.
D.
The determination of the Code Enforcement Officer that the proposed use and building meet
all applicable building and fire codes.
The Health Inspector shall deny the application for a permit or license under this chapter if any
one of the following is applicable:
The correct fee has not been tendered to the Borough, and in the case of a check or bank
draft, honored with payment upon presentation.
The lot or property on which the massage or spa business is or is proposed to be located
does not comply with the zoning requirements of the Borough of Coopersburg Zoning
Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning.
The facility, including the building or portion thereof where the massage or spa facility is or is
proposed to be situated, and the physical facilities or maintenance related thereto, fail to
comply with all applicable building, fire, electrical, plumbing and health requirements of this
code, all applicable state and federal requirements of a similar nature, and all applicable
provisions of this chapter.
The applicant, or the applicant's employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder,
member or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of
material fact in the application for the permit.
The applicant or any of the applicant's employees, agents, partners, directors, officers,
shareholders, members or managers has had a massage, massage therapy, reflexology,
bodywork or spa business, massage practitioners or other similar permit or license denied,
revoked or suspended for any reason under Subsection C(4) above by the Borough or any
other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of the application.
The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors or members if the applicant
is a corporation or limited liability corporation, or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the manager or other person principally in charge
of the operation of the business, or any employee of the applicant is not over the age of 18
years.
The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders, partners or members holding more
than 10% of the stock of the corporation or limited liability company, or any of the officers or
directors or managing directors, or the manager or other person principally in charge of the
operation of the business or any of the employees of the applicant has been convicted of a
felony, an offense involving sexual misconduct with children, prostitution, soliciting for purpose
of prostitution, pandering, keeping a place of prostitution, any crime involving dishonesty,
fraud or deceit or other offenses opposed to decency and morality.
Upon notification that the permit or license application has been granted, or if the Health Inspector
fails to either grant or deny the application within 45 days of receipt of a completed application, a
permit shall be deemed to have been issued and the applicant may offer the permitted and
licensed services and/or operate the massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork or spa
facility pursuant to the terms and conditions of the permit or license, if any, and pursuant to the
terms of the permit or license application. The permittee shall post the permit, or if no permit is
issued, then the permit application, conspicuously in the premises of the massage or spa
business.
§ 143-6. Appeal.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 63/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
A.
Appeal to the Board of Health. A decision concerning the denial or issuance of a permit under this
chapter of the Health Inspector may be appealed to the Board of Health by filing with the Board of
Health within 10 days from the date of mailing of any decision of the Health Inspector under this
chapter a notice of appeal, setting forth particular ground or grounds for the appeal, and upon
payment of the filing fee as may be determined from time to time by resolution.
Hearing on appeal. The Board of Health shall hear the appeal and shall set a time and place for a
hearing on the appeal not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days from the date the notice of
appeal was received by the Board of Health.
No less than five days prior to the hearing written notice to the applicant and all property owners
who own property within 100 yards of the property where the proposed massage or spa business
is to be located shall be provided by regular mail.
Disposition of appeal. After the hearing on the appeal, the Board of Health may refer the matter
back to the Health Inspector for a new investigation and decision, or may affirm the denial of the
application, or may approve the application. The decision of the Health Inspector shall be final
subject only to the rights of appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County under
Pennsylvania Local Agency Law. Notice of the Board's decision shall be mailed to the applicant
and any others who appeared at the hearing within 10 days of the hearing date. Notice shall be
deemed completed when mailed by First Class mail to the address supplied by the applicant on
the application.
§ 143-7. Reapplication.
An applicant whose application for a license has been denied or revoked may reapply for such license
only after a period of not less than one year has elapsed from the date of such denial or revocation
was received by the applicant, provided, however, that an earlier reapplication may be made if
accompanied by evidence that the ground or grounds for denial of the application no longer exist.
§ 143-8. Permit or license suspension or revocation.
A permittee or massage or reflexology practitioner may be subject to suspension or revocation of
a permit or license issued pursuant to this chapter, or be subject to other appropriate action, for
any of the following grounds arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, employee, agent,
partner, director, stockholder or manager of massage or spa business:
Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the
application for a permit or license, or in any report or reports required to be filed with the
Borough;
Violated or is not in compliance with any section of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of
Coopersburg and/or the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the United States of
America;
Knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the
occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the massage or spa facility:
Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation or any
specified sexual activity;
The use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitation of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation or specified sexual activity openly occur;
The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation or prostitution or any act which involves
any specified sexual activity or the showing or touching of any specified anatomical area;
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 64/301
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
D.
Any act constituting a violation of 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 5903, relating to the distribution of
obscene and other sexual materials and performances;
Any act constituting a violation of provisions relating to obscene matter or distribution of
harmful matter to minors;
Any conduct constituting a criminal offense of which an essential element consists of the
use of force or violence;
Any act constituting a felony involving the sale, use, possession or possession for sale of
any controlled substance;
Refusal to allow an inspection of the massage or spa facility as authorized by this
chapter;
Failure to abide by any action previously imposed by the appropriate Borough officer;
Failure to maintain a valid certificate of use and occupancy.
Upon determining that grounds for permit or license suspension or revocation exist, the Health
Inspector shall furnish written notice of the action to the applicant and, in the case of a facility
permit, all property owners who own property within 100 yards of the property where the massage
or spa business is located. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing which shall
be before the Borough Council, and the ground or grounds upon which the proposed action is
based, the pertinent code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof.
The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address and/or shall be
delivered personally, not less than 10 days prior to the hearing date.
In the event that a permit or license is canceled, suspended, revoked or invalidated, the permit or
license shall be forwarded to the Health Inspector not later than the end of the third business day
after notification of such cancellation, suspension, revocation or invalidation.
§ 143-9. Records required.
Every massage or reflexology practitioner(s) and massage and spa health permittee shall keep a
record book legibly written in the English language in which shall be recorded, where applicable:
The name and address of each patron;
The time and date of the patron's appointment;
A full and accurate description of services provided to the patron.
Such records shall be open to inspection by the Health Inspector from time to time during regular
business hours when enforcing health code regulations and provisions of this chapter.
Records shall be kept on the premises of the massage, massage therapy, reflexology, bodywork
or spa business at all times for a period of not less than two years from the original date of the
record.
Failure to have all records required on the premises at any time shall be a violation of this chapter
and subject the permittee to fines, permit revocation and any other applicable sanctions.
§ 143-10. Inspection by public officials.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 65/301
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
The applicant shall authorize and allow entry by public officials of the Borough, including but not
limited to officers of Police and Fire Departments, Code Enforcement Department, Zoning and
Health Departments, into the premises wherein the applicant operates or proposes to operate a
massage or spa business for the purpose of conducting one or more inspections to determine
compliance with the law.
Any and all investigating officials of the Borough shall have the right to enter any massage or spa
business from time to time during regular business hours to make reasonable inspection to
observe and enforce compliance with building codes, zoning codes or health codes and
regulations and provisions of this chapter.
Any person who operates a massage or spa facility or an employee, agent, partner, director,
officer, shareholder, member or manager of such business is in violation of the provisions of this
chapter if any person refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is
occupied or open for business.
§ 143-11. Transfer of permit or license prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to offer to the public or to operate a massage, massage therapy, reflexology,
bodywork or spa business under any name or conduct business under any designation not
specified in the permit or license. No permittee shall transfer a permit or license to any other
person or entity or operate a massage or spa business under the authority of a permit at any place
other than the address designated in the application. No permit or license issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be assigned or transferred in any manner, nor shall any person
other than those mentioned in such permit engage in the enterprise for which the permit is issued.
As used herein, "transfer" shall include, but not be limited to, any modification of the business
entity operating an enterprise, or otherwise required to be disclosed pursuant to this chapter,
including transfer of more than 10% of the stock of any corporation.
§ 143-12. Regulations nonexclusive.
The provisions of this chapter regulating massage and spa businesses are not intended to be
exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations
pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the Borough.
§ 143-13. Other action.
This chapter shall not be construed to limit the authority of the Borough of Coopersburg to pursue any
and all other remedies and relief that may be available to it in law or in equity under the laws applicable
in any case.
§ 143-14. Violations and penalties.
In addition to any other applicable criminal or civil penalty, sanction or remedial procedure, any person
or entity who violates any provision of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a
summary offense and shall be subject to a fine of not less than $300 nor more than $1,000 or a period
of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be
considered a separate offense.
Chapter 147. Nuisances
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 66/301
A.
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 12-12-2006 by Ord. No.
593. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental property — See Ch. 169.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Solid waste — See Ch. 182.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Vector control — See Ch. 205.
Weed control — See Ch. 225.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
§ 147-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
NUISANCE
Any activity or condition not legally authorized or privileged which by its continued existence is the
cause of annoyance, offense or inconvenience to the general public so much so as to be
detrimental either to the public health or general welfare of the inhabitants of the community.
PERSON
Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation. The singular shall include the
plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 147-2. Enforcement.
Under the direction of the Board of Health, the Health Inspector, in his official capacity, shall be in
charge of the enforcement of this chapter and shall act as prosecutor in any and all cases of violation
of the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the Borough of Coopersburg and/or state
statutes relating to the abatement of nuisances found to be detrimental to the public health and safety.
§ 147-3. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Health Inspector, or such person designated by the Borough Council, to
make periodic sanitary inspections of the streets and alleys as well as any premises in the
Borough of Coopersburg at any such time as directed by the Board of Health and to report to the
Board of Health any and all evidence or reports of conditions alleged to be detrimental to the
public health and safety. Such person shall also, at the direction of the Board of Health, upon the
complaint by Borough residents, make special investigation of alleged nuisances and report
concerning the same to the Board of Health. Such person shall serve all notices of abatement
issued by the Board of Health, perform duties regarding the abatement of nuisances as the Board
of Health may direct and execute the orders of the Board of Health. While acting in the
performances of duties, such person shall have the powers and authority of a police officer.
All duties and responsibilities of a Health Officer as set forth under any relevant state statute,
including the Pennsylvania Health Code, are hereby incorporated into this chapter.
§ 147-4. Prohibition.
No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any property owned or occupied by, within the
Borough of Coopersburg, any condition detrimental to the public health and safety or so found to be
after investigation by the Board of Health upon the receipt of a notice from the Board of Health that
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 67/301
A.
B.
C.
such a condition exists on a property owned or occupied by. It shall be that person's duty to abate the
specified nuisance to the satisfaction of the Board of Health within the time limit specified in said
notice.
§ 147-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and cost of prosecution and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment of not more than 30 days; provided: each day's continuance of a
violation shall constitute a separate offense; provided further: such fine and costs may be in addition to
the costs and expenses of abatement of any nuisance created or maintained as a result of such
violation, and any penalty authorized to be charged in addition to such costs and expenses, in cases
where abatement thereof is done by the Health Inspector or a nominee of the Borough Council.
Chapter 151. Peddling and Soliciting
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 12-13-1960 by Ord. No.
213 (Ch. 13, Part 2 of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 151-1. Definitions; administration.
Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PEDDLER
Any person who shall engage in peddling, as herein defined.
PEDDLING
Engaging in peddling, canvassing, soliciting or taking of orders, either by sample or otherwise,
for any goods, wares or merchandise, upon any of the streets or sidewalks or from house to
house within the Borough of Coopersburg. Provided; the word "peddling" shall not apply (1) to
farmers selling their own produce, (2) to the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, donated
by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose, or (3) to any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products, or milk or milk products.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the feminine
and the neuter.
The office of Mayor, for the purpose of this chapter only, shall be deemed to include an
administrative assistant, who, for the purpose of this chapter only, shall be the Chief of Police.
§ 151-2. License required.
No person shall engage in peddling in the Borough of Coopersburg without first having taken out a
license as herein provided.
§ 151-3. License application.
Every person desiring to engage in peddling in the Borough of Coopersburg shall first make application
to the Mayor for a license. If such person shall also be required to obtain a license from any county
officer, he shall, when making such application, exhibit a valid county license. Upon such application,
such person shall give his name; address; his previous criminal record, if any; the name of the person
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 68/301
for whom he works, if any; the type of goods, wares and merchandise he wishes to peddle; the length
of time for which he wishes to be licensed; the type of vehicle he uses, if any; and the number of
helpers he has. Provided, where a person makes application for himself and one or more helpers, all
applicable personal information specified above shall be given for each helper, and an individual
license shall be required for each helper. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable
from one person to another.
§ 151-4. License fee.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
No license shall be issued under this chapter until the proper fee, as established from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council, shall be paid to the Mayor, which shall be for the use of the Borough.
§ 151-5. Issuance of license; display upon request.
Upon making application therefor and paying the proper fee, as herein specified, a license shall be
issued to every peddler. Such license shall contain the information required to be given upon the
application therefor. Every peddler shall at all times when engaged in peddling in the Borough carry
such license upon his person and shall exhibit such license, upon request, to all police officers,
Borough officials and citizens. No peddler shall engage in selling any product not mentioned upon such
license nor shall any person having a foot-peddlers license operate from or with any horse-drawn or
motor vehicle.
§ 151-6. Hours of operation.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall engage in peddling at any time on Sunday or
upon any other day of the week before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m.
§ 151-7. Noise levels.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets
or sidewalks of the Borough, nor shall he use any loudspeaker, bull horn or any other device for
announcing his presence by which the public is annoyed.
§ 151-8. Restrictions on use of vehicles.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall park any vehicle upon any of the streets or
alleys of the Borough in order to sort, rearrange or clean any of his goods, wares or merchandise; nor
may any such person place or deposit any refuse upon any of such streets or alleys; nor may any such
person maintain or keep a street or curbstone market by parking any vehicle upon any street or alley in
the Borough for longer than necessary in order to sell therefrom to persons residing in the immediate
vicinity.
§ 151-9. Operation from fixed locations.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall occupy any fixed location upon any of the
streets, alleys or sidewalks of the Borough for the purpose of peddling, with or without any stand or
counter.
§ 151-10. Borough records.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 69/301
The Mayor shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this chapter and the Chief of Police shall
apply daily to the Mayor for a list of all licenses issued hereunder since the previous day. The Mayor
and the Chief of Police shall supervise the activities of all holders of such licenses.
§ 151-11. Suspension of license.
The Mayor of the Borough of Coopersburg is hereby authorized to suspend any license issued under
this chapter when he deems such suspension to be beneficial to the public health, safety or morals, or
for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or for giving false information upon any application
for a license hereunder.
§ 151-12. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 156. Personal Property, Transfer or Removal
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 12-8-1987 by Ord. No.
421 (Ch. 11, Part 1 of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 156-1. Definitions.
The following words when used in this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH
The area within the corporate limits of the Borough of Coopersburg.
LESSOR or LANDLORD
One who grants a lease or rents real estate to another either for business or dwelling purposes.
PERSON
Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or corporation. The singular shall include the
plural and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
PERSONAL PROPERTY or HOUSEHOLD GOODS
Any tangible property that is the subject of ownership and is possible of being moved, and which is
generally used in the operation of a business or for the maintenance of the household.
TRANSPORTATION
The moving of personal property or household goods by way of public streets or highways.
§ 156-2. Permit required.
No person shall move or transport, or cause to be moved or transported, from place to place within the
Borough to another place therein or places beyond the limits thereof, any personal property or
household goods, in bulk, without first securing from the Borough Secretary a permit for such moving
or transportation.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 70/301
§ 156-3. Permit application.
Any person desiring such a permit for the removal or transportation of personal property or household
goods in the manner herein described, shall make application to the Borough Secretary setting forth
his name and address, and also setting forth the name of the owners or reputed owners of the
personal property or household goods to be moved or transported, the address and location from
which the personal property or household goods are to be moved or transported, and the new address
or location of the place to which the personal property or household goods are to be moved or
transported.
§ 156-4. Issuance of permit.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
The Borough Secretary shall, upon application, issue a permit, the charge for which shall be
established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council, setting forth the name of the permittee
as well as the name or names of the owners of the personal property or household goods to be moved
or transported, and the address from which the personal property or household goods are to be moved
and the address to which the personal property or household goods are to be delivered. A copy of said
permit shall be delivered to the Borough Police if deemed necessary by the Borough Secretary.
§ 156-5. Notice by lessor or landlord.
Any lessor or landlord leasing or renting any premises, or part thereof, within the Borough to another
person for the purpose of either a business or as a dwelling shall give the Borough Secretary at least
24 hours' notice of the intention of the lessee or tenant to remove or vacate the leased or rented
premises.
§ 156-6. Duty of movers.
Any person who is in the business of transporting or moving personal property or household goods in
bulk from one location to another, as hereinbefore described, shall be obligated to verify that the proper
permit has been issued prior to the moving or transporting of any personal property or household
goods either within the Borough or to a point outside the Borough.
§ 156-7. Conditions for issuance of permit.
The Borough Secretary shall not issue any permit until after the applicant for a permit has paid all
taxes and fees levied and prorated, if applicable, with the exception of real estate taxes.
§ 156-8. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any person, lessor or landlord violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or furnishing false
information to the Borough Secretary or using false names or addresses, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs and, in default of payment thereof,
shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 161. Public Property Protection
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 71/301
A.
B.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 8-2-1880 by Ord. No. 5;
amended in its entirety 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509 (Ch. 6, Part 2 of the 1996 Code). Subsequent
amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 161-1. Definitions and word use.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERSON
Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, firm, or other legal entity.
The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the singular; and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 161-2. Tampering with public property on streets, alleys or
public ground prohibited.
No person shall destroy, injure, tamper with or deface any public property of the Borough of
Coopersburg, or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building or streetlight on or in any of the
streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds in the Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 161-3. Tampering with stakes, posts and monuments
prohibited.
No person shall in any manner interfere or meddle with, or pull, drive, change, alter, or destroy any
stake, post, monument, or other marking, made, placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or set, or
caused to be done by the authorities of the Borough of Coopersburg, to evidence the location,
elevation, line, grade, corner, or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, drain, or other
public work or thing.
§ 161-4. Tampering with warning lamps, signs or barricades
prohibited.
No person shall destroy, remove, deface, obliterate or cover up any lamp, sign or barricade erected as
a warning of danger by the authorities of the Borough of Coopersburg or by any person doing work by
permission of the authorities of the Borough on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or bridges in the
Borough or on any public grounds of the Borough, within or without the Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 161-5. Removal of material from streets, alleys or public
grounds prohibited.
No person shall take any earth, stone, or other material from any street, alley, or public grounds in the
Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 161-6. Deposit of harmful substances on streets, alleys,
sidewalks or public grounds prohibited.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 72/301
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
No person shall pour, throw or deposit any harmful or destructive substance or matter on any street,
alley, sidewalk or public grounds in the Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 161-7. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to normal activities in connection with construction, maintenance and
repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon
or therein, or to incidental results of work done thereon or therein upon permit from or by authority of
the Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 161-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $600, and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Every day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 169. Rental Property, Residential
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 5-24-2005 by Ord. No.
577; amended in its entirety 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. 650. Subsequent amendments noted where
applicable.]
§ 169-1. Inspections required.
All Residential Rental Properties shall be inspected to assure compliance with the ordinances and
codes of the Borough and the maintenance requirements and standards for such properties set
forth in this chapter. Such inspection shall occur each time the property changes ownership or
every three years, whichever is shorter.
"Residential Rental Property" means a rooming unit or dwelling unit let for rent, or an other-thanowner-
occupied residential unit. A Residential Rental Property shall not include a fraternity, hotel,
or motel unit. A Residential Rental Property shall include residential properties under lease
purchase agreements.
"Change of ownership" means the transfer of legal or equitable title to the property by deed or
other written instrument whether recorded or not. The definition also includes an agreement of
sale that provides for the transfer of title after a certain number of installment payments by the
tenant.
The owner shall maintain the Residential Rental Property in compliance with all applicable
ordinances and codes of the Borough and shall comply with the following maintenance
requirements and standards for Residential Rental Properties:
Exterior property areas. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition and all walkways shall be maintained free from hazardous conditions.
Exterior structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, and watertight.
Interior structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in sanitary
condition.
Handrails shall be required at:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 73/301
(a)
(b)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(8)
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
All exterior and interior stairways three risers high or more.
All porches, decks, landings, etc. over 30 inches high; shall have handrails and guardrails
spaced to prevent a four-inch sphere from passing through.
Windows. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. Every
operable window shall be capable of being held up by its own hardware.
Smoke detectors shall be required on every floor, including basement and every bedroom.
Fire protection systems. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm
or suppress a fire shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times. There shall be a
working fire extinguisher on each floor.
Electrical. GFIC receptacles shall be required in all bathrooms, powder rooms, garages,
unfinished basements, and all outside receptacles.
All receptacles will be checked for polarity and correct wiring.
Every tenant shall be served by a main service of not less than 60 amps, three wires
which shall be accessible to the tenant.
All electric wiring must be secured. Conductors must terminate and/or connect to an
enclosed junction box.
Extension cords over six feet long are not allowed for permanent use.
In a multiple-unit property, exit signs shall be illuminated at all times and emergency
lighting shall be adequate and operational.
Every three years an owner or tenant shall secure from the Borough of Coopersburg a certificate
of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the inspection required by this
chapter has been completed and all violations are abated. No tenant shall occupy a Residential
Rental Property and no owner shall allow a tenant to occupy a Residential Rental Property unless
a current certificate of occupancy is issued for the Residential Rental Property.
Where a Residential Rental Property is to be demolished and a valid demolition permit conforming
to the Building Code of the Borough of Coopersburg has been obtained, the provisions set forth in
this chapter shall not be applicable and a certificate shall not be required provided such
Residential Rental Property is demolished.
When a Residential Rental Property is being refinanced by the current owner, the certificate set
forth in this chapter shall not be required.
All property owned by the Housing Authority of the County of Lehigh which is inspected annually
by governmental agencies to assess conformance with federal standards, or properties that are
inspected annually for compliance with the requirements of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development or the Pennsylvania Housing Finance Agency, shall be exempt
from the provisions of this chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, group homes, or other
rental units used for human habitation which offer or provide medical or nursing services, and
wherein all operations of such facilities are subject to county, state, or federal licensing or
regulation concerning the health and safety of the users, patients or tenants.
Failure and/or refusal by the Residential Rental Property owner and his/her designated agent to
secure the necessary certificate of occupancy, or failure and/or refusal to provide access for
inspection upon reasonable notice shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 74/301
K.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Upon a showing of probable cause that a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the
Borough has occurred, the Code Enforcement Officer may apply to the Magisterial District Justice
having jurisdiction in the Borough for a search warrant to enter upon and in and inspect the
Residential Rental Property.
§ 169-2. Repairs.
In case the owner of the Residential Rental Property shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with any
notice from the Borough or its Code Enforcement Officer to correct a violation relating to the
maintenance and repair of the Residential Rental Property under any ordinance or code of the
Borough within the time stated in such notice, the Borough may cause the violation to be corrected by
Borough employees or by an independent contractor hired by the Borough for such purpose. There
shall be imposed upon the owner a charge of the actual cost to correct the violation plus 10% of said
cost for administrative expenses to be billed after the work has been completed. Any such bill which
remains unpaid and outstanding for payment more than 30 days after the date of the bill shall be
grounds for the imposition of a municipal lien upon the Residential Rental Property as provided by law.
Such lien may be reduced to judgment and enforced and collected as provided by law, together with
interest at the legal rate, attorney fees and costs. The remedies provided by this section shall not be
exclusive and the Borough may invoke such other remedies available under this chapter or other
applicable laws or ordinances of the Borough, including, where appropriate, condemnation
proceedings or nonrenewal of any certificate of occupancy.
§ 169-3. Fees.
The fees for the inspections conducted pursuant to this chapter are $102 per unit for the first inspection
and $30 for any reinspection after a violation has been noted. The fees shall be paid in advance and
shall be the sole responsibility of the current owner of the Residential Rental Property. All fees are
subject to change by authorization of Borough Council.
§ 169-4. Registration.
All owners of a Residential Rental Property located in the Borough of Coopersburg shall register
all units with the Borough Office.
The registration form shall list the name, address, and telephone number of the Residential Rental
Property owner, the location of the property, the number of units in the Residential Rental
Property, and the names of the respective tenants.
Failure to register the units with the Borough Office within 90 days from the date of the passage of
this chapter or within 30 days following the purchase or conversion of a structure to a Residential
Rental Property shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 169-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or any other entity which violates the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the following penalties:
First violation: a fine up to $200;
Second violation: a fine up to $500;
Third and each subsequent violation: a fine up to $1,000.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 75/301
D.
A.
B.
C.
[1]
If any Residential Rental Property is owned by more than one person, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation or any other entity, in any form or manner, each person, partnership, limited
liability company, corporation or any other entity shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
duties imposed under this chapter and shall be subject to prosecution for the violation of this
chapter jointly and/or severally.
§ 169-6. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective 60 days from the date of its adoption.
§ 169-7. Miscellaneous provisions; severability.
By conducting the inspections pursuant to this chapter, the Borough does not warrant or
guarantee the complete safety or suitability of Residential Rental Property.
For all inspections conducted pursuant to this chapter, the Borough of Coopersburg shall not be
responsible for violations that occur between the inspection and settlement date and/or rental
period.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof is held invalid, the invalidity shall not
affect any other provisions or applications of this chapter, and the remaining provisions shall be
given full force and effect as completely as if the part or parts held invalid had not been included
herein.
Chapter 177. Sewers
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Individual and Extended Area Sewage Disposal
Systems
[Adopted 4-2-1968 by Ord. No. 263 (Ch. 18, Part 3 of the 1996 Code)]
§ 177-1. Permit required.
No person shall install an individual or extended-area sewage disposal system within the Borough of
Coopersburg, or construct any building or buildings in which an individual or extended-area sewage
disposal system shall be joined or connected, except pursuant to a permit issued by the Borough of
Coopersburg based upon plans and specifications for the construction of such a sewage disposal
system, which plans and specifications shall be in compliance with provisions and standards
promulgated by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act of 1966 and its amendments.
§ 177-2. Meanings of terms.
The nomenclature employed in this article shall be the same and subject to the definitions set forth in
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act of 1966[1] with the exception of "community sewerage system"
which is not used in this article. The term "extended-area sewage disposal system" shall replace the
foregoing rejected language and bear the identical definition of said rejected terminology.
Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 76/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
§ 177-3. Administration.
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the Borough Engineer or a qualified sanitarian
appointed from time to time by Borough Council, under the office and title of Sewage Facilities Officer.
§ 177-4. Fees.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
A permit shall be issued by the Sewage Facilities Officer under the provisions of this article only upon
the payment of a fee, as established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council, said fee to be
paid upon the submission of an application. In the event that the application shall be for an extendedarea
sewage disposal system permit, the fee collectable shall be in such multiples of the fee, as
established from time to time by resolution of Council, as the number of buildings or residence units to
be served by said system.
§ 177-5. Right of appeal.
Any person or persons aggrieved by a decision of the Sewage Facilities Officer shall have rights of
appeal as set forth in the Sewage Facilities Act of 1966, which provisions are incorporated by
reference herein.
§ 177-6. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article and any of the provisions and standards
of the Sewage Facilities Act of 1966, which provisions are incorporated by reference herein, shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not less than $25 and not exceeding $1,000
and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
All rules promulgated by the Sewage Facilities Officer shall be deemed "provisions of this article"
and subject to like penalties for the violation thereof.
§ 177-7. Compensation of Sewage Facilities Officer.
The Sewage Facilities Officer shall be compensated as follows:
If said office shall be held by a duly qualified registered professional engineer, his compensation
shall be at the prevailing rates for such service;
If said office be staffed by a person not qualified as a registered professional engineer, his
compensation shall be determined on an hourly basis by Borough Council.
Article II. Connections to Sewer System
[Adopted 6-13-1972 by Ord. No. 291 (Ch. 18, Part 1 of the 1996 Code)]
§ 177-8. Definitions.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 77/301
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms and phrases used
in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
The Municipal Authority of the Borough of Coopersburg, a Pennsylvania municipality authority.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Coopersburg, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, a municipality of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Council or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through
its authorized representatives.
BUILDING SEWER
The extension from the sewage drainage system of any structure to the lateral of a sewer,
including the connection to the lateral. Property owner shall own the building sewer and is
responsible for any required maintenance or repair of the building sewer.
[Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 530]
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property located within this Borough upon which there is erected or created a structure
intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals, and
from which structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure used or intended for use, in whole or in
part, in the operation of a business enterprise for the manufacturing, fabricating, processing,
cleaning, laundering or assembling of any product, commodity or article, or from which any
process waste, as distinct from sanitary sewage, shall be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or water borne wastes, or form of energy rejected or
escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course
of the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
LATERAL
That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the curbline or, if there shall be no
curbline, to the property line. For sewer service lines connected to sewers located within
easements, the lateral shall be that part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the
easement line. The Borough shall be responsible for any required maintenance or repair of the
lateral unless the maintenance or repair is necessitated by an illegal discharge from the building
sewer or root growth which enters the sewer system through the building sewer.
[Amended 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 530]
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any improved property.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust, corporation or other group or
entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE
Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes discharged from any improved property.
SEWER
Any pipe, main or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used or usable for sewage
collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 78/301
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
All facilities, as of any particular time, for collection, transporting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes, situate in or adjacent to this Borough, owned by the
Authority and leased to this Borough for operation and use.
§ 177-9. Use of public sewers required.
Notice to connect. The owner of any improved property benefited, improved or accommodated by
a sewer shall connect such improved property with such sewer, in such manner as this Borough
may require, within 45 days after notice to such owner from this Borough to make such
connection, for the purposes of discharge of all sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from such
improved property, subject to such limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or as
otherwise shall be established by this Borough, from time to time.
Use of sewer required. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property,
after connection of such improved property with a sewer shall be required under Subsection A,
shall be conducted into a sewer, subject to such limitations and restrictions as shall be established
herein or as otherwise shall be established by this Borough, from time to time.
Prohibited acts.
No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited upon public or private
property within this Borough any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of
Subsection A.
No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural outlet within this Borough
any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of Subsection A, except where suitable
treatment has been provided which is satisfactory to this Borough.
Prohibited receptacles.
No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle shall be used or
maintained at any time upon any improved property which has been connected to a sewer or
which shall be required under Subsection A to be connected to a sewer.
Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle in existence shall
be abandoned and, at the discretion of this Borough, shall be cleansed and filled at the
expense of the owner of such improved property and under the direction and supervision of
this Borough; and any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
not so abandoned and, if required by this Borough, cleansed and filled, shall constitute a
nuisance and such nuisance may be abated as provided by law, at the expense of the owner
of such improved property.
No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle at any time shall be connected
with a sewer.
The notice by this Borough to make a connection to a sewer, referred to in Subsection A, shall
consist of a copy of this article, including any amendments and/or supplements at the time in
effect, or a summary of each section hereof, and a written or printed document requiring the
connection in accordance with the provisions of this article and specifying that such connection
shall be made within 45 days from the date such notice is given. Such notice may be given at any
time after a sewer is in place which can receive and convey sanitary sewage and industrial wastes
for treatment and disposal from the particular improved property. Such notice shall be served upon
the owner either by personal service or by registered mail or by such other method as at the time
may be provided by law.
§ 177-10. Building sewers and connections.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 79/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[Amended 6-9-1987 by Ord. No. 419; 12-12-1989 by Ord. No. 446; 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Permit required. No person shall construct any connection to uncover, connect with, make any
opening into or use, alter or disturb, in any manner, any sewer main constituting a part of the
sewer system, without first making application for and securing a permit, in writing, from the
Borough Secretary. Such application shall be made on a form to be provided by the Borough.
Where a sewer lateral presently exists, in place, having been installed pursuant to a valid
permit, the applicant shall be subject to the payment of a permit fee, as established from time
to time by resolution of Borough Council, to cover administrative and inspection costs.
Where new service connection is requested for premises not previously served by a tap and
lateral, the applicant shall be subject to the payment of a permit fee, as established from time
to time by resolution of Borough Council, for a "first time" connection for one dwelling,
commercial, or industrial unit.
Where a service line presently exists or is to be installed by a developer, or is to be extended
to connect an additional dwelling units (as in an existing development area) a fee, as
established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council, per unit.
Application for a permit required under Subsection A shall be made by the property owner or an
agent with written authority from the property owner.
All connections to the sewer mains and the installation of any lateral service line shall be
accomplished in conformity with the rules, regulations and specifications of the Borough.
Only persons properly authorized by the Borough shall be permitted to make sewer service
line installations and lateral cuts and installations.
The Borough reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional rules and regulations as
it shall deem necessary and proper relating to connections with the sewer system, which
additional rules and regulations, to the extent applicable, shall be and shall be construed as
part of this article.
Except as otherwise provided in this Subsection D, each improved property shall be connected
separately and independently with a sewer through a building sewer. Grouping of more than one
improved property on one building sewer shall not be permitted except under special
circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good cause shown and then only after
special permission of this Borough, in writing, shall have been secured subject to such rules,
regulations and conditions as may be prescribed by this Borough.
All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs and expenses of
connection of a building sewer to a sewer, including testing, shall be borne by the owner of the
improved property to be connected; and such owner shall indemnify and save harmless this
Borough from all loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of
construction of a building sewer or of connection of a building sewer to a sewer.
A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place designated by this Borough and
where the lateral is provided. The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection shall be at
the same or higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and
the connection of a building sewer to the lateral shall be made secure and watertight
If the owner of any improved property benefited, improved or accommodated by a sewer, after 45
days notice from this Borough requiring the connection of such improved property with a sewer, in
accordance with § 177-9A, shall fail to connect such improved property, as required, this Borough
may make such connection and may collect from such owner the costs and expenses by a
municipal claim, an action in assumpsit or such other legal proceeding as may be permitted by
law.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 80/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
[1]
§ 177-11. Regulations governing connections to sewer.
Where an improved property, at the time connection to a sewer is required, shall be served by its
own sewage disposal system or device, the existing house sewer line shall be broken on the
structure side of such sewage disposal system or device and attachment shall be made, with
proper fittings, to continue such house sewer line as a building sewer.
No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved by this Borough. If
any part of a building sewer is covered before so being inspected and approved, it shall be
uncovered for inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved property to be
connected to a sewer.
Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe
operating condition by the owner of such improved property.
Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with barricades and lights to
protect all persons from damage and injury. Streets, sidewalks and all other public property
disturbed in the course of installation of a building sewer shall be restored at the cost and expense
of the owner of the improved property being constructed, in a manner satisfactory to the Borough.
If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice from this Borough, in writing, to remedy
any unsatisfactory condition with respect to a building sewer within 45 days of receipt of such
notice, this Borough may refuse to permit such person to discharge sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes into the sewer system until such unsatisfactory conditions shall have been remedied to the
satisfaction of this Borough.
This Borough reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional rules and regulations as it
shall deem necessary and proper relating to connections with a sewer and the sewer system,
which additional rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and shall be construed
as a part of this article.
§ 177-12. Enforcement.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall
be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this article shall be enforceable and recoverable in
the manner at the time provided by applicable law.
Article III. Waste Restrictions and Charges for Sewer Usage
[Adopted 6-13-1972 by Ord. No. 293 (Ch. 18, Part 2 of the 1996 Code)]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 12, Billing Procedures, Uniform.
§ 177-13. Definitions.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms and phrases used
in this article shall be as follows:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 81/301
AUTHORITY
The Municipal Authority of the Borough of Coopersburg, a Pennsylvania municipality authority,
acting by and through its Board or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized
representatives.
BILLING UNIT
Includes, as applicable, each of the following: a commercial establishment, a dwelling unit, an
industrial establishment and an institutional establishment.
BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND)
The quantity of oxygen, expressed in ppm, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedure for five days at 20° C. The standard laboratory procedure
shall be that found in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Coopersburg, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, municipality of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, acting by and through its Council or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its
authorized representatives.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any room, group of rooms, building or enclosure used or intended for use in the operation of one
business enterprise for the sale and distribution of any product, commodity, article or service or
used or intended for use for any social, amusement, religious, educational, charitable or public
purpose and containing plumbing facilities for kitchens, toilets, or washing facilities.
DWELLING UNIT
Any rooms, group of rooms, building or other enclosure occupied or intended for occupancy as
separate living quarters by a family or other group of persons living together or by a person living
alone.
GARBAGE
Solid wastes resulting from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from handling,
storage and sale of produce.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property located within this Borough upon which there is erected or created a structure
intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals, and
from which structure sanitary sewage and/or industrial waste shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure used or intended for use, in whole or in
part, in the operation of one business enterprise for manufacturing, fabricating, processing,
cleaning, laundering or assembling any product, commodity or article or from which any process
waste, as distinct from sanitary sewage, shall be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or
escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or in the course
of the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT
Any room, group of rooms, building or other enclosure which does not constitute a commercial
establishment, a dwelling unit or an industrial establishment.
MULTIPLE UNIT
Any improved property in which shall be located more than one billing unit.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 82/301
[1]
A.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any improved property.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, corporation or other group or entity,
including a municipal authority and any municipal subdivision.
pH
The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions, expressed in grams per liter of
solution, and indicates the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a substance.
SANITARY SEWAGE
The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from any improved property.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
The interceptor line, sewage treatment plant and related facilities owned by Upper Saucon
Authority and leased to the Township for operation and use for the purpose, inter alia, of
transportation, treatment and disposition of sanitary sewage and certain industrial wastes which
may be collected in the sewer system, including all additions thereto.
SEWER
Any pipe, main or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system and used for collection and
transportation of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes.
SEWER SYSTEM
All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting, transporting and disposing of sanitary sewage
and industrial wastes, situate in this Borough, owned by the Authority and leased to this Borough
for operation and use.
TOWNSHIP
The Township of Upper Saucon, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
TREATMENT AGREEMENT
The agreement, dated as of October 15, 1970, as supplemented, between the Authority and the
Borough, on the one hand, and Upper Saucon Authority and the Township, on the other hand,
including all future supplements and amendments thereto.
UPPER SAUCON AUTHORITY
Upper Saucon Township Municipal Authority, a Pennsylvania municipality authority.
WATER SYSTEM
The facilities owned by the Authority and used for the supply of water to the public in the Borough.
§ 177-14. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 177-14, Sewer rentals or charges, was repealed 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 599.
§ 177-15. Computation of sewer rentals or charges.
[Amended 2-12-1985 by Ord. No. 393; 11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 399; 6-9-1987 by Ord. No. 420; 3-27-
1990 by Res. No. 5-90; 12-11-1990 by Res. No. 7-90; 12-12-1995 by Ord. No. 503; 2-25-1997 by Ord.
No. 516]
Sewer rental charges for sewage and industrial waste discharged into the sewerage system shall be
determined as follows:
Billing basis for residential users.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 83/301
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
Sewer rental charges for sewage discharged into the sewerage system from any improved
property constituting an equivalent residential dwelling unit shall be comprised of the sum of
the following two charges:
A fixed or constant fee per unit per quarter annum; and
A flow charge per 1,000 gallons which flow shall be determined by the water meter
reading at the beginning and end of the quarter annum for which the bill is rendered or, in
the absence of a water meter, on the basis of 150 gallons per day (GPD) for apartments,
condominiums and mobile home dwellings and on the basis of 200 GPD for all other
dwelling units.
If metering is impractical, a customer shall have the right to petition the Borough for special
study by the Borough to determine an equitable rate. All such petitions shall be filed in the
office of the Borough Secretary.
There shall be a minimum charge equal to the fixed or constant fee per unit per quarter
annum for each improved property which is connected to the sewerage system.
Billing basis for commercial, institutional and industrial users.
Sewer rental charges for sewage and/or industrial waste discharged into the sewerage
system from any improved property constituting a commercial, institutional or industrial user
shall be comprised of the sum of the following two charges plus any additional or exceptional
strength charges as hereinafter provided:
A fixed or constant fee per equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) per quarter annum. The
number of EDUs for a customer shall be determined by converting water consumption
into EDUs on the basis of 200 GPD per EDU, using the water consumption for the
preceding year and shall not exceed a maximum of 10 EDUs for each improved property.
In the absence of water consumption records for the entire preceding year, the EDUs
shall be determined by converting the water consumption data which is available or, in
the absence of any water consumption data, on the basis of the Borough estimate.
A flow charge per 1,000 gallons, which flow shall be determined by the water meter
reading at the beginning and end of the billing period for which the bill is rendered.
In order to implement this sewer billing system all commercial, institutional and industrial
users shall install water meters or other methods of determining volume of water consumption
satisfactory to the Borough. In the absence of a method of measuring volume or water
consumption, the Borough shall use an estimate.
Notwithstanding the rates charges in Subsection B(1)(a) and (b), all commercial, institutional
and industrial users shall pay a minimum charge equal to the fixed or constant fee times the
number of EDUs as determined by the Classification of Nonresidential Users Table which
follows:
Borough of Coopersburg User Charge
Classification of Nonresidential Users
Classification Number of EDUs
(1) Residential dwelling unit 1
(2) Commercial establishments:
(a) Each social hall 1
(b) Each church 1
(c) Each retail gasoline station 1 1/2
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 84/301
C.
D.
Borough of Coopersburg User Charge
Classification of Nonresidential Users
Classification Number of EDUs
(d) Each motel, hotel or other establishment
providing overnight facilities and each nursing or
convalescent home which has private toilet or
washing facilities in or connected to a room
1/2 per room
(e) Each motel, hotel or other establishment
providing overnight facilities and each nursing or
convalescent home which does not have private
toilet or washing facilities in or connected to a
room
1/3 per room
Wherever a restaurant or bar room is conducted
in connection with any motel or hotel, a separate
sewer rental or charge shall be imposed for such
facilities in accordance with the classification set
forth in Subsection (f), below
(f) Each restaurant, bar room or other commercial
establishment which regularly dispenses food or
beverages for consumption on the premises
1/12 per employee plus
1/10 per seat, subject to a
minimum of 2 EDUs. An
owner shall be considered
an employee for purposes
of computing EDUs
(g) Each retail store, business or professional office,
barber shop or beauty shop (not operated in a
home by the home owner or tenant of the home)
1
(h) All the other commercial establishments not
classified above and not constituting a
combination dwelling unit and commercial
establishment as classified in Subsection (3),
below
1/12 per occupant plus 7/8
per public rest room,
subject to a minimum of
1 1/2 EDUs. An owner shall
be considered an employee
for purposes of computing
EDUs
(3) Each combination dwelling unit and commercial
establishment located in one structure and owned or
occupied and operated by the same person except
where the commercial establishment is a restaurant, bar
room or other commercial establishment which regularly
dispenses food or beverages for consumption on the
premises
1 1/2
(4) Institutional establishments:
(a) Each public or private school per full-time pupil,
teacher or employee
1/16 per student, teacher or
employee
(b) Each public or private school per part-time pupil,
teacher or employee
1/32 per student, teacher or
employee
User charge rates. The unit fixed or constant fee and the flow charge per 1,000 gallons shall be
the same for all classifications of users of the sewerage system and shall be the effective rate
established by this Borough, by resolution from time to time, for the billing period for which the
sewer rental or charge is rendered.
Multiple units. Each billing unit located in a multiple unit shall be billed as a separate entity, and
the foregoing sewer rentals or charges, as appropriate, shall be used in computing the sewer
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 85/301
(1)
(2)
E.
[1]
F.
[2]
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
H.
[1]
rentals or charges applicable to each such billing unit as though such billing units was a separate
structure and had a direct and separate connection to the sewerage system; provided, however,
that this shall not be applicable to a combination dwelling unit and commercial establishment as
specified in Subsection (3) in the Classification of Nonresidential Users Table included in this
article.
User classification charges.
If the use or classification of any improved property shall change during any billing period, the
sewer rental or charge shall be adjusted by this Borough, by prorating on a monthly basis to
the nearest calendar month, with a credit or charge, as shall be appropriate under the
circumstances, being made on the statement for the next succeeding billing period.
This Borough reserves the right, from time to time, to establish additional user classifications
and to establish billing rates therefore; and this Borough further reserves the right, from time
to time, to alter, modify, revise and/or amend user classifications and the billing applicable
thereto.
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Payment of bills, was repealed 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 599.
(Reserved)[2]
Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Collection of bills, was repealed 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 599.
Bypass cooling water use. Whenever an improved property or, if applicable, a billing unit or billing
units located therein, constituting a commercial, institutional or industrial establishment shall use
water for cooling or unpolluted commercial or industrial process purposes and all or part of the
water so used shall not be discharged into the sewerage system, the volume used as the measure
of discharge of sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing sewer rentals or charges pursuant to
this article may be adjusted by one of the following methods:
By installing a meter or other measuring device on the connection to the sewerage system.
The readings from such meter or measuring device shall be used as the measure of
discharge of sewage and or industrial waste in computing sewer rentals or charges.
By installing a meter or other measuring device to measure the volume not being discharged
into the sewerage system. The readings from such meter or measuring device shall be
deducted from the total water meter readings and the remainder shall be used as the
measure of discharge of sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing sewer rentals or
charges.
If it is not practical, in the opinion of this Borough, to install a meter or other measuring device
to determine continuously the volume not discharged into the sewerage system, this Borough
shall determine in such manner and by such method as it may prescribe, the percentage of
metered water which is being discharged into the sewerage system. The quantity of water
used as the measure of discharge of sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing sewer
rentals or charges shall be the percentage so determined of the quantity measured by the
water meter or meters. Any dispute as to such estimated percentage shall be submitted to
this Borough, after notice of such estimate. The decision of this Borough with respect to the
matter shall be final for the then current calendar year.
§ 177-16. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 177-16, Time and method of payment, was repealed 10-23-2007 by Ord. No.
599.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 86/301
[1]
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
A.
§ 177-17. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 177-17, Liens for sewer rentals; filing and collection, was repealed 10-23-2007
by Ord. No. 599.
§ 177-18. Measuring volume of wastes for industrial
establishments.
Methods of measuring volume.
Whenever the entire water supply of an improved property or, if applicable, a billing unit or
billing units located therein, constituting an industrial establishment, which shall be
discharging sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes into the sewer system, is supplied by
the water system, the volume of water furnished, as determined from meter readings of the
water system, shall be used as the measure of discharge of sanitary sewage and/or industrial
wastes in computing sewer rentals or charges, subject to adjustment, if appropriate, as
provided in this article.
Whenever an improved property or, if applicable, a billing unit or billing units located therein,
constituting an industrial establishment, which shall be discharging sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes into the sewer system, shall have a source of water supply in addition to or
other than the water system, the owner of such improved property shall provide a meter or
meters on such additional or other source or sources of water supply. The total volume of
water consumed, as determined from the meter readings of the water system and the meter
readings of the meter or meters on such additional or other source or sources of water supply,
or the meter readings of the meter or meters on such other source or sources of water supply,
as appropriate, shall be used as the measure of discharge of sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes in computing the sewer rentals or charges, subject to adjustment, in
appropriate, as provided in this article.
Whenever an improved property or, if applicable, a billing unit or billing units located therein,
constituting an industrial establishment, shall use water from the water system and/or water
from a source or sources of supply in addition to or other than the water system for cooling or
unpolluted commercial or industrial process purposes and all or part of the water so used
shall not be discharged into the sewer system, the volume used as the measure of discharge
of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing sewer rentals or charges may be
adjusted by one of the following methods:
By installing a meter or other measuring device on the connection to the sewer system.
The readings from such meter or measuring device shall be used as the measure of
discharge of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing sewer rentals or
charges.
By installing a meter or other measuring device to measure the volume not being
discharged into the sewer system. The readings from such meter or measuring device
shall be deducted from the total water meter readings and the remainder shall be used as
the measure of discharge of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing
sewer rentals and charges.
If it is not practical, in the opinion of this Borough, to install a meter or other measuring
device to determine continuously the volume not discharged into the sewer system, this
Borough shall determine in such manner and by such method as it may prescribe, the
percentage of metered water which is being discharged into the sewer system. The
quantity of water used as the measure of discharge of sanitary sewage and/or industrial
wastes in computing sewer rentals or charges shall be the percentage so determined of
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 87/301
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
C.
the quantity measured by the water meter or meters. Any dispute as to such estimated
percentage shall be submitted to this Borough, after notice of such estimate. The
decision of this Borough with respect to the matter shall be final for the then current
calendar year.
Whenever an industrial establishment shall discharge only industrial wastes into the sewer
system, the volume of water used, measured as herein provided, shall be used as a measure
of the quantity of industrial wastes so discharged.
Whenever an industrial establishment shall discharge combined sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes into the sewer system, the volume of water used, measured as herein
provided, chargeable as industrial wastes shall be the total volume of water used, less the
volume of water determined to be sanitary sewage. The volume of water determined to be
sanitary sewage shall be determined, at the option of the Borough, in either of the following
ways:
Actual measured flow; or
By multiplying the average number of employees in the industrial establishment during
the calendar quarter-annum immediately preceding the billing date by 900 gallons.
Measuring devices. Meters or other measuring devices which shall be available in connection with
the water system, but which shall be required or permitted under provisions of this article, shall be
furnished and installed in accordance with specifications of this Borough by the owner of the
improved property at his expense, shall be under the control of this Borough and may be tested,
inspected or repaired by this Borough whenever necessary. The owner of the improved property
upon which such meter or other measuring device shall be installed shall be responsible for its
maintenance and safekeeping and all repairs thereto shall be made at the expense of the owner,
whether such repairs shall be made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or other causes. Bills for
such repairs, if made by this Borough, shall be due and payable immediately upon completion of
such repairs and shall be collected in the same manner as quarterly bills for sewer rentals or
charges.
Meter readings. This Borough, except to the extent that meter readings are made by any other
person in connection with the water system and are made available to this Borough for purposes
of the article, shall be responsible for the reading of all meters or other measuring devices and the
same shall be available to this Borough at all reasonable times.
§ 177-19. Admission of industrial wastes into the sewer system.
Approval required for industrial wastes. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
the sewer system any industrial wastes except upon application to this Borough and upon receipt
of a written permit therefor from this Borough.
Required survey data. Any person desiring to make or use a connection to the sewer system
through which industrial wastes shall be discharged into the sewer system shall file with this
Borough an Industrial Wastes Questionnaire, to be furnished by this Borough which shall supply to
this Borough pertinent data, including estimated quantity of flow, characteristics and constituents,
with respect to industrial wastes proposed to be discharged into the sewer system. The cost of
obtaining all such data shall be borne by the person desiring to make or use a connection to the
sewer system.
Control manholes.
Any person who shall discharge industrial wastes into the sewer system, when required by
this Borough, shall construct and thereafter properly shall maintain, at his own expense, a
suitable control manhole and other devices as may be approved by this Borough to facilitate
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 88/301
(2)
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
observation, measurement and sampling by this Borough of industrial wastes discharged to
the sewer system.
Any such control manhole, when required by this Borough, shall be constructed at an
accessible, safe, suitable and satisfactory location in accordance with plans approved by this
Borough prior to commencement of construction.
Changes in type of wastes. Any industrial establishment discharging sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes into the sewer system and contemplating a change in the method of operation
which will alter the characteristics and/or volumes of wastes at the time being discharged into the
sewer system shall notify this Borough, in writing, at least 10 days prior to consummation of such
change.
Interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the owner of any industrial
establishment, when required by this Borough, for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing
grease in excessive amounts or any inflammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. Any
interceptor, when required by this Borough, shall be of a type and capacity approved by this
Borough and constructed or installed at an accessible, safe, suitable and satisfactory location in
accordance by this Borough prior to installation or commencement of construction.
This Borough reserves the right to require industrial establishments having large variations in rates
of waste discharge to install suitable regulating devices for equalizing waste flows to the sewer
system.
§ 177-20. Access.
This Borough shall have the right of access at reasonable times to any part of improved property
served by the sewer system and any meters used for purposes of inspection, measurement, sampling
and testing and for performance of other functions relating to service rendered by this Borough in
connection with the sewer system.
§ 177-21. Prohibited wastes.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, spring water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, building foundation drainage, cellar drainage,
drainage from roof leader connections, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial
process waters into any sewer.
This Borough reserves the right to refuse permission to connect to the sewer system, to compel
discontinuance of use of the sewer system, or to compel pretreatment of industrial wastes by any
industrial establishment and to prevent discharges deemed harmful or to have a deleterious effect
upon any sewer or the sewer system or the sewage disposal system.
No sanitary sewage or industrial wastes shall be discharged to the sewer system:
Containing any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil or other inflammable or explosive liquids,
solids or gases.
Containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly, or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant constituting part of the sewage disposal
system including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as
discharged to a sewer.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 89/301
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(13)
(14)
Having pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works constituting part of the
sewage disposal system.
Containing solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewer or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage
treatment plant constituting part of the sewage disposal system, such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups or milk containers, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
Having a temperature higher than 150° F (65° C).
Containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F
and 150° F (0° C and 85° C).
Containing any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation
of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower (0.78 hp metric) or greater
shall be subject to the review and approval of this Borough.
Containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether
neutralized or not.
Containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or
wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment plant constituting part of the
sewage disposal system exceeds the limits establishment by the Township for such materials.
Containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations
exceeding limits which may be established by this Borough as necessary, after treatment of
the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies
for such discharge to the receiving waters.
Containing radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed
limits established by this Borough in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
Having a pH in excess of 9.5.
Containing materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's
earth, lime, slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to,
sodium chlorine and sodium sulfate.)
Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions).
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant constituting part of the
sewage disposal system.
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs," as such term is
used by sanitary engineers.
Containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage
treatment processes employed by the sewage disposal system, or are amenable to treatment
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 90/301
(15)
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
E.
A.
B.
only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of
other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, any waste containing substances or having other
characteristics which violate provisions of the treatment agreement or which are prohibited by
the Township to be discharged into the sewage disposal system.
Pretreatment facilities.
Where necessary all owners shall install suitable pretreatment facilities in order to comply with
Subsection C.
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed facilities for
preliminary treatment and handling of wastes shall be submitted for approval of this Borough
and no construction of any such facility shall be commenced until approval thereof first shall
have been obtained, in writing, from this Borough, and until approval thereof first shall have
been obtained from any governmental regulatory body having jurisdiction.
Whenever facilities for preliminary treatment and handling of wastes shall have been provided
by any owner, such facilities continuously shall be maintained, at the expense of such owner,
in satisfactory operating condition; and this Borough shall have access to such facilities at
reasonable times for purposes of inspection and testing.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement or
arrangement between this Borough and any person whereby industrial wastes of unusual strength
or character may be admitted into the sewer system by this Borough either before or after
preliminary treatment, provided such special agreement or arrangement also is approved by the
Township.
§ 177-22. Responsibility of owners of improved property.
The owner of each improved property connected to the sewer system shall be responsible for all acts
of tenants or other occupants of such improved property insofar as such acts shall be governed by
provisions of this article.
§ 177-23. Adoption of additional rules and regulations.
This Borough reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, such additional rules and regulations as it
shall deem necessary and proper in connection with use and operation of the sewer system, which
rules and regulations shall be, shall become and shall be construed as part of this article.
§ 177-24. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any user who is found to have violated an order of the Borough Council or willfully or negligently
fails to comply with any provision of this article and with the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to a fine of not more than $1,000
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to
exceed 30 days. Each day in which a violation shall occur or continue to occur shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense.
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Borough may recover penalties, damages, costs,
reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 91/301
A.
B.
appropriate suit at law against the person or user found to have violated this article or the orders,
rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.
Article IV. Sewage Flow Equalization
[Adopted 4-27-1999 by Ord. No. 531]
§ 177-25. Intent.
[Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 631]
As a result of Borough Of Coopersburg Resolution No. 2008-011 dated November 25, 2008, and the
Borough Of Coopersburg Sanitary Sewage System Corrective Action Plan and Schedule, last revised
October 7, 2006, and approved by the Pennsylvania Department Of Environmental Resources by letter
dated December 20, 2006, certain sanitary sewer connections will only be permitted if sewage flow
equalization facilities are provided which will stop flow during high flow conditions to the public sanitary
sewer.
§ 177-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish procedures for the use, maintenance and operation of flow
equalization facilities for the purpose of controlling discharge of proposed flows from sanitary sewer
connections to the public sanitary sewer when high flows may make the public sanitary sewer
temporarily unavailable. It is hereby declared that the enactment of this article is necessary for the
protection, benefit, and preservation of the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Borough
of Coopersburg.
§ 177-27. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article
shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
Upper Saucon Sewage Treatment Authority, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH
Borough of Coopersburg, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
EQUALIZATION TANK
A watertight receptacle or an enlarged pump wet well which receives and detains sewage flow for
a period of time until the receiving sewer has available capacity to convey the flows.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU)
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
An EDU shall be a private single dwelling, each dwelling unit in a double house, in a row of
connecting houses, or in an apartment; any room, group of rooms, house trailer, enclosure,
etc., occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters by a family, by other
groups of persons living together, or by persons living alone. Each equivalent dwelling unit
(EDU) shall be considered to convey 300 gpd for storage tank capacity calculations.
NONRESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENTS (COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, SCHOOLS,
HOSPITALS, CHURCHES, APARTMENT BUILDINGS, INSTITUTIONS, ETC.)
An EDU for nonresidential establishments shall be based upon an estimate approved by the
Borough or, if available, the actual water consumed during the quarter for which the
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 92/301
establishment was in full-time operation. Sewage flows from each equivalent dwelling unit
(EDU) shall be equal to water usage at the rate of 300 gallons per day for storage tank
calculations.
FLOW EQUALIZATION FACILITY
A sewage facility consisting of mechanical, plumbing, and electrical components designed to
operate as a single system for the purpose of preventing sewage flow from entering the public
sewer system during high flow or surcharging conditions.
GRINDER PUMP
A pump designed to grind solids before conveying flows via the discharge force main to the
receiving sewer.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any property located in the
Borough.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, corporation or other group or entity.
SEWAGE
Any substance that contains any of the waste products or excrement or other discharge from the
bodies of human beings or animals and any noxious or deleterious substance being harmful or
inimical to the public health or to animal or aquatic life or to the use of water for domestic water
supply or for recreation.
§ 177-28. Administrative authority.
The Borough Council and its duly authorized agents are authorized and empowered to undertake
within the Borough the control of methods of flow equalization for institutional, industrial and residential
sewage use and the collection and transmission thereof.
§ 177-29. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Council is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such rules and regulations concerning
sewage which it may deem necessary from time to time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 177-30. Conformance with law required.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Borough shall be in conformity with the provisions herein,
all other ordinances of the Borough and all applicable laws, and regulations of administrative agencies
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 177-31. Storage and discharge to be under inspection of
Borough.
The storage and discharge of all sewage from any institutional, industrial, or residential use utilizing an
equalization tank shall be performed under the inspection of the Borough.
§ 177-32. Operational requirements.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 93/301
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
The owner of a property wishing to connect to the public sewer to which this article applies will
need to provide a flow equalization facility sufficient to retain flows for a period of no less than
three days.
[Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 631]
The flow equalization facility shall include a combination of some or all of the following
components in such a way as to automatically stop sewage flow from entering the public sewer
system during periods of high flow. The system shall include a time recording device which
establishes verification that the system is working at the appropriate times. The system shall also
include an audible and visible alarm which shall be activated when the level in the tank exceeds a
predetermined high level which is indicative of a system malfunction. The components are as
follows:
Precast concrete equalization tank with sufficient capacity for a minimum of three days
storage.
Grinder pump.
Solenoid-actuated valve.
Audible-visual alarm.
Telemetry equipment.
Automatic telephone dialer.
§ 177-33. Preinstallation procedure.
Before a flow equalization facility may be installed to service an institution, industrial, or residential use,
the property owner shall:
Obtain a permit for the flow equalization facility from the Borough.
File with the Borough Secretary a copy of a written agreement between the property owner and a
contractor covering the periodic inspection and maintenance of the facility.
Submit information on size, location and such other information as the Borough Engineer may
require in order to complete the review and approval. The Borough Engineer's approval shall be a
prerequisite to the grant of a permit.
Deposit and/or post the sum of money or security, in the form and/or amount as provided by the
rules and regulations promulgated for this article. These funds are to be held by the Borough and
used only in the event the Borough is required to perform any services or pay for any services,
relative to the pump station or equalization tank. The Council shall have the right to claim the
entire escrow deposit as reimbursement for Borough expenses.
Pay a fee to the Borough for the flow equalization facility permit in accordance with the schedule
of fees adopted by the Council from time to time.
Execute an agreement to hold the Borough harmless in the event of a claim against the Borough
arising from the operation of the flow equalization facility.
§ 177-34. Duties of property owner.
The owner of a property that utilizes a flow equalization facility shall:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 94/301
A.
B.
[1]
Maintain the flow equalization facility in conformance with the manufacturer's operation and
maintenance recommendations, this article or any ordinance of this Borough, the provisions of any
applicable law and rules and regulations of the Borough and any administrative agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Be responsible for the periodic inspection and maintenance of the flow equalization facility as well
as the cost thereof.
§ 177-35. Duties of the Borough.
Any obligation or duty assumed by the Borough under this article shall be limited to operation and
maintenance of the radio telemetry and metering equipment at the Borough's sanitary sewer meter
chamber.
§ 177-36. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof in summary
proceedings, be liable to the maximum penalty provided by law. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 177-37. Availability of sanitary sewer.
Where sanitary sewer lines are to be constructed as part of a development plan or as required by final
approval documents, the lines shall be installed according to specifications of the Borough. Installation
of the temporary flow equalization facility shall be completed in parallel with a gravity sanitary sewer
connection which will be temporarily and securely plugged in a manner acceptable to the Borough.
Whenever the sanitary sewer becomes available for full time use (without flow equalization), and if
directed by the Borough, the property owner shall disconnect and dispose of the flow equalization
facility in accordance with the Borough permit, and permanently connect to the sanitary sewer within
90 days after written notice to make connection.
§ 177-38. Abatement of nuisances.
In addition to any other remedies provided in this article, any violation of the article shall constitute a
nuisance and may be abated by the Borough by either seeking appropriate equitable or legal relief
from a court of competent jurisdiction.
Chapter 182. Solid Waste
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Collection Procedures
[Adopted 6-10-1986 by Ord. No. 407 (Ch. 20, Part 1 of the 1996 Code)]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 12, Billing Procedures, Uniform.
§ 182-1. Definitions.
[Amended 3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 488; 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 95/301
A.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section,
except in those instances where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ASHES
The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, charcoal, infectious waste (as defined in 25 Pa.
Code § 271.1) or other combustible materials for the purposes of heating and/or cooking.
CONTAINER
An appropriate carrier for the retention of refuse prior to collection. Appropriate carriers are metal
or plastic cans, not to exceed twenty-gallon capacity, with tight fitting lids, plastic bags (1.5 mil
minimum thickness) which have been tightly and securely closed, or such other container(s) as
the Board of Health may from time to time approve. No container should exceed 50 pounds gross
weight.
EQUIVALENT DISPOSAL UNIT (EDU)
The amount of refuse to be collected from the average unit during an average week. One EDU is
hereby defined as four twenty-gallon containers per week, or the equivalent. One 20 gallon
container is equivalent to one 30 gallon plastic bag, or one bundle or box of rubbish not to exceed
four feet in length, six feet in perimeter or circumference (as applicable), and 50 pounds in gross
weight.
GARBAGE
The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the storage, handling, preparation and
consumption of food. It shall not include more than a minimal amount of free liquid(s).
PERSON
A natural person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, and/or corporation.
REFUSE
Garbage, ashes, and rubbish as defined herein.
REFUSE PRODUCING SOURCE
Any number of persons, individually or as a group, is the basis of one refuse producing source
(RPS). For example, in an apartment house, each dwelling unit constitutes one refuse producing
source.
RUBBISH
All waste materials not included in garbage or ashes, except rubbish from building construction or
reconstruction, grass clippings, street refuse, industrial refuse, abandoned large machinery or
vehicles, dead animals, infectious waste (as defined in 25 Pa. Code § 271.1) or such other waste
materials as are not commonly produced in homes, stores or institutions.
TRUCK TIRES
A tire 15 inches in diameter or more. Any tire less than 15 inches in diameter shall be considered
a car tire.
§ 182-2. Administration.
[Amended 4-25-1989 by Ord. No. 438]
Authority. The accumulation, collection and disposal of refuse in the Borough of Coopersburg shall
be under the supervision of the Board of Health and the Coopersburg Police Department. Subject
to the authority of Borough Council, the Board of Health and the Coopersburg Police Department
shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this article and take all such action authorized by
this article or by statutory authority devolving upon it.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 96/301
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
Disposal by nonresidents. Any nonresident of the Borough of Coopersburg who shall dispose of
refuse by placing the same upon Borough streets or private property for Borough pickup shall be
committing an unlawful act and shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this article, as well as
any other Borough ordinance or state laws pertaining to the foreseeable consequences of such
unlawful acts.
Rules and regulations promulgated by Board of Health. All refuse accumulated in the Borough of
Coopersburg shall be subject to care and removal under the terms of this article or other rules and
regulations promulgated by the Board of Health and shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of
only with the approval of Borough Council. The cost of such service for the care and removal of
refuse shall be paid for as provided in the schedule of fees set forth in § 182-6 hereof by the
person or persons producing the refuse, or responsible for the existence or disposal thereof, or for
whom such refuse is removed. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or convey over any of
the streets or alleys of the Borough, or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the Borough except
with permission of Borough Council. Owners of premises desirous of personally disposing of
refuse or hiring an alternate contractor shall first apply for and be granted permission by Borough
Council to make such personal disposal of their own refuse after having satisfied Borough Council
of their compliance with the special regulations of the Borough for such activity as set forth below.
Alternate disposal must be approved by Council. The producers of refuse or the owners of
premises upon which refuse is accumulated who desire personally to collect and dispose of such
refuse or to hire an alternate contractor shall: Show cause why the use of the Borough of
Coopersburg collection system works a hardship upon them; and establish to the satisfaction of
the Borough that hauling will be performed under an agreement with a commercial hauler having
access to a legal dumping site [or show evidence (including dumping permits) of his ability to
personally haul and dispose of rubbish at a legal dumping site]; and that in all other matters
involving collection practices they will conform to the provisions of this article. The Board of Health
shall have authority to make investigations concerning individual disposal as it may be directed or
deemed necessary.
§ 182-3. Precollection practices.
Preparation of refuse.
All refuse shall be drained of as much liquid content as possible.
All garbage shall be wrapped in paper, or placed in paper or plastic bags.
All garbage shall then be placed in an approved container.
Tree trimmings, hedge clippings, and similar material shall be cut and bundled (or boxed)
such as to conform with the specifications set forth in § 182-2C.
Refuse containers.
All containers shall be kept as sanitary as possible in view of the use to which they are put.
All refuse containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of the
premises.
All refuse containers shall be maintained in good condition. Any container that does not
conform to the provisions of this article or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other
defect liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be promptly
replaced upon notice. Failure to comply may result in refusal to collect or the removal of the
defective container as refuse.
Storing of refuse.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 97/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
No person shall place any refuse at the edge of any street, alley or public place, or at the
edge of any private property whether owned by such person or not, within the Borough of
Coopersburg except it be at proper time and in proper containers for collection or under an
express approval granted by the Borough Council. No person shall throw or deposit any
refuse in any stream or other body of water.
Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any such refuse within 10 days after notification
shall be deemed a violation of this article.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the occupants of the premises on which refuse
containers are stored, or the collector, to remove the covers or any of the contents of refuse
containers.
Points of collection. Refuse containers shall be placed for collection at ground level on the
property, not within the right-of-way of a street or alley, and accessible to and not more than 10
feet from the side of the street or alley from which collection is made, unless with the express
approval of the Board of Health.
§ 182-4. Collection practices.
[Amended 3-27-1990 by Ord. No. 449; 3-9-1993 by Ord. No. 488; 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Frequency of collection. Refuse shall be collected on such days as designated by the Board of
Health.
Limitation of quantity. The normal quantity of refuse to be collected from each RPS is defined as
one EDU. The Board of Health may refuse to authorize the collection of larger amounts of refuse
or may make an additional charge for such amounts in accordance with § 182-6.
Special refuse problems.
Contagious disease refuse. The removal of wearing apparel, bedding or other refuse from
homes or other places where highly infectious or contagious disease has prevailed shall be
performed under the supervision and direction of the Board of Health. Such refuse shall not
be placed in containers for regular collection.
Inflammable, explosive or radioactive refuse. Highly inflammable, explosive or radioactive
materials shall not be placed in containers for regular collection but shall be disposed of as
directed by the Board of Health at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof.
White goods. White goods, including but not limited to refrigerators, dish washers and hot
water heaters, shall be subject to being collected by the contractor engaged by the Borough
of Coopersburg only upon the purchasing and affixing of a ticket to the aforementioned
product. Tickets shall be purchased from the Borough of Coopersburg upon payment of a fee,
as established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council, with each ticket to be valid
for one white good.
Tires. Car and truck tires shall be picked up by the contractor engaged by the Borough of
Coopersburg only if the tires have a ticket affixed thereto. Said tickets shall be purchased
directly from the Borough of Coopersburg upon payment of a fee, as established from time to
time by resolution of Borough Council, with each ticket to be valid for one tire.
§ 182-5. Disposal practices.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 98/301
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
C.
[1]
All municipal waste produced, collected and transported from within the jurisdictional limits of the
Borough of Coopersburg shall be, to the extent permitted by law, disposed of at disposal facilities
designated by the Borough of Coopersburg and in accordance with any currently effective solid waste
management plan for municipalities within the County of Lehigh of which the Borough of Coopersburg
is a participant. In the absence of such designated facilities or a currently effective solid waste
management plan, municipal waste from the Borough of Coopersburg must be disposed of at a statepermitted
facility.
§ 182-6. Fees.
[Amended 4-14-1987 by Ord. No. 415; 3-13-1990 by Res. No. 2-90; 12-11-1990 by Res. No. 8-90]
(Reserved)[1]
Editor's Note: Former Subsections A, B and C(1)(a), (2), (3) and (4), regarding billing procedures,
delinquent accounts and fees, were repealed 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 599. See now Ch. 12, Billing
Procedures, Uniform.
(Reserved)
Fees.
The base rate shall apply to the first EDU per RPS with an additional charge of 1/2 of the
base rate per EDU per RPS thereafter.
§ 182-7. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Former § 182-7, Violations and penalties, as amended, was repealed 10-23-2007 by Ord.
No. 599.
§ 182-8. Contracting services.
Borough Council may, in lieu of the maintenance of its own garbage collection system administered
and conducted by the Board of Health, contract for the exclusive right to collect refuse from refuse
producing sources within the Borough. Such contracts shall be awarded from time to time, for such
period of time as determined by the Borough Council, to the lowest responsible bidder, following the
procedure prescribed by the Borough Code. Such contract shall fix and regulate the manner, method
and time of collecting and conveying refuse. The person to whom such contract shall be awarded shall,
before undertaking any of his duties hereunder, give bond to the Borough for the faithful compliance
with the terms of the contract. Such bond to be in such sum and with such security as Borough Council
shall require. All consistent provisions of this article shall continue to be applicable in the event of
contract by the Borough under this section.
Article II. Recycling: Prohibited Conduct
[Adopted 4-23-1991 by Ord. No. 459 (Ch. 20, Part 2A of the 1996 Code)]
§ 182-9. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them
in this section:
AUTHORIZED COLLECTION
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 99/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
The collection of recyclable materials by a person, company or service which has a prior
agreement, contract or arrangement for removal of recyclable waste as a part of the recycling plan
of the Borough of Coopersburg.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Any police officer or a designated agent of the Borough, whether employed by the Borough or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution, cooperative enterprise or any
unauthorized municipal entity. For purposes of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and
directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PUBLIC PROPERTY
Property owned or leased by the Borough of Coopersburg, the County of Lehigh, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or the federal government.
RECYCLING CONTAINER (hereinafter known as "CONTAINER")
The container issued or approved by the Borough for the purpose of collecting, storing and placing
recyclables at the curbside for authorized collection.
SCAVENGING
The act or practice of removing, taking, scattering or disturbing recyclable materials which have
been collected and assembled in any recycling container, whether stored on private or public
property or placed by a roadway or curb for collection.
§ 182-10. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful and shall be deemed disorderly conduct for any person as defined above to
scavenge, remove, take, scatter or disturb recyclable materials which have been collected and
assembled in any container, whether stored on private or public property or placed by a roadway
or curb for collection. "Scavenging" shall not include the collection or picking up of scattered trash
or debris, whether or not recyclable, from roadsides or public property with the intent of properly
disposing of, or recycling, said waste.
It shall also be unlawful and shall be deemed disorderly conduct for any person as defined above
to damage, take, remove, deface or use for purposes other than approved recycling storage and
collection, the container, or other device issued or approved by the Borough of Coopersburg
and/or the County of Lehigh as a part of any recycling program or effort.
§ 182-11. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article or whose actions
constitute disorderly conduct thereunder, shall upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Provided, any act prohibited by this article which can also be prosecuted under any provision of
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be considered a violation of the applicable
state law and shall be prosecuted under such law and not under this article.
Article III. Recycling Regulations
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 100/301
A.
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
C.
D.
[Adopted 4-23-1991 by Ord. No. 460 (Ch. 20, Part 2B of the 1996 Code)]
§ 182-12. Title, severability, construction, effective date.
Title. This article shall be known as the "Borough of Coopersburg Mandatory Recycling
Ordinance."
Severability. In the event that any sentence, clause or section of this article is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such defect shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions of this article. It is hereby declared as the intent of the Borough of Coopersburg that this
article would have been adopted in substantially the same form had such invalid clause, section or
part thereof not been included herein.
Construction.
The various headings used throughout this article are intended only as an aid to its
organization, in order to facilitate ease of reading, and are not to be considered a substantive
part of this article.
In this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
The singular shall include the plural;
The plural shall include the singular; and
The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
Effective date. Mandatory recycling for all residential establishment, multifamily housing and
commercial establishments in the Borough of Coopersburg shall commence upon the enactment
of this article.
§ 182-13. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when appearing in the text of this article, shall have the meaning
given them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ALUMINUM CANS
Empty containers used for food or beverage, consisting entirely of aluminum.
BIMETALLIC CONTAINERS
Empty containers, consisting of either tin plated or steel, or steel only, or steel and aluminum,
which were used to contain either food or beverage or both.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Coopersburg organized and existing under the Borough Code, Act of February 1,
1966 (1965 P.L. 1656, No. 581), as amended, located in Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, including
the Borough Council, Borough Secretary and Borough staff and others, when duly authorized.
COATED PAPER
Any paper with a shiny or glossy finish or appearance, resulting from treatment of the surface or
application of a coating of kaolin, clay or other chemicals. The term includes the advertising inserts
which may be intermingled or distributed with newspaper.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT
All business, commercial, industrial, institutional activities, or municipal establishments and
community activities, and all multifamily housing of four or more residential dwellings.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 101/301
A.
B.
C.
CORRUGATED PAPER
The fabricated or manufactured structural paper material with an inner core shaped in rigid parallel
furrows and ridges, with one or more outer liners, often consisting of a material known as kraft
paper (mainly shopping bags).
CURBSIDE
The following location on the adjoining public street or road, and where the Borough contractor
usually picks up garbage:
On, or just in back of, the curb or curbline at the edge of the cartway, for streets or roads
which have curbs.
For streets or road which do not have curbs, within reasonable safe proximity of the paved
cartway.
As otherwise established by regulation of the Borough, where the above locations are not
clear or satisfactory.
CURBSIDE RECYCLING PROGRAM
The regularly scheduled operation of the designated contractor which provides labor, equipment
and services to collect recyclable materials from the curbside of designated residential and
commercial establishments and multifamily housing units within the Borough under and pursuant
to a contract with the Borough.
EQUIVALENT DISPOSAL UNIT (EDU)
The amount of refuse to be collected from the average unit during an average week. One EDU is
hereby defined as four twenty-gallon containers per week, or the equivalent [one twenty-gallon
container is equivalent to one thirty-gallon plastic bag, or one bundle or box of rubbish not to
exceed four feet in length, six feet in perimeter or circumference (as applicable) and 50 pounds in
weight].
GLASS CONTAINERS
Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown glass, comprised of sand, soda ash and limestone.
Excluded are plate glass, automotive glass, blue glass, porcelain, ceramic products and crystal.
HIGH GRADE OFFICE PAPER
Any white paper or the type commonly used for letter writing, stationery, note paper, plain paper
for photocopying machines, computer printers and other general purpose paper, whether or not
any printed or written matter is contained thereon. It does not include newspaper, magazines,
corrugated paper or any coated paper.
LEAD ACID BATTERIES
Includes, but is not limited to, automotive, truck and industrial batteries that contain lead.
LEAF WASTE
Leaves from trees, bushes and all other plants, garden residues, shrubbery and similar material,
but not including grass clippings.
MAGAZINES
Printed matter on coated paper containing miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or
varying intervals, also known as "periodicals," and includes telephone directories. Expressly
excluded are newspaper and all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING
Any four or more condominiums, apartments or other residential dwellings, regardless of the form
of ownership, tenancy or the physical arrangement of the structure, which are owned under a
single deed.
MUNICIPAL WASTE
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 102/301
A.
B.
Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid,
liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities and any sludge not
meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act from a
municipal, commercial or institutional waste supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or
air pollution control facility. The term does not include source separated recyclable materials.
NEWSPAPER
Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint" and distributed at fixed intervals, having
printed thereon news and opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded are advertising inserts printed on coated paper which are often distributed or
intermingled with newspapers.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution, cooperative enterprise or any
unauthorized municipal entity. For purposes of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and
directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLASTIC BEVERAGE CARRIER
The plastic rings or similar plastic connectors used as holding devices in the packaging of
beverages, including, but not limited to, all carbonated beverages, liquors, wines, fruit juices,
mineral waters, soda and beer.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS
Plastic containers of all varieties, types and chemical compositions of plastic.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
Materials identified by the Borough to be recycled, including, but not limited to, the materials listed
in § 1501 of the Act.
RECYCLING CONTAINER (hereinafter known as "CONTAINER")
The container issued or approved by the Borough for the purpose of collecting, storing and placing
recyclable at the curbside for authorized collection.
RECYCLING FACILITY
A facility employing a technology, that is a process, that separates or classifies municipal waste
and creates or recovers reusable material that can be sold to or reused by a manufacturer as a
substitute for or a supplement to or for virgin raw materials. The term "recycling facility" shall not
mean transfer stations or landfills for solid waste nor composting facilities or resource recovery
facilities.
REFUSE PRODUCING SOURCE
Any number of persons, individually or as a group, which is the basis of one refuse producing
source (RPS). For example, in an apartment house, each dwelling unit constitutes one refuse
producing source.
REGULATIONS
The rules, regulations, standards, specifications, orders, licenses, permits, interpretation,
schedules, zones, routes and waivers established from time to time by the Borough pursuant to
the authority of this article. Such regulations shall be deemed to be a part of this article and
included by reference as if written herein.
RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT
A single-family dwelling, EDU.
Each structure containing three or less residential dwellings, EDU(s).
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 103/301
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
A.
Each residential dwelling, EDU, within any structure containing three or less residential
dwellings.
These definitions shall apply regardless of either the form of ownership or tenancy, or the
physical arrangement of the structure.
SOURCE SEPARATE
To separate recyclable materials from municipal solid waste for the purpose of recycling.
WASTE
A material whose original purpose has been completed and which is directed to a disposal or
processing facility or is otherwise disposed, whether municipal, residual or hazardous waste, or
otherwise. The term does not include source separated recyclable materials or material approved
by the Department for beneficial use.
§ 182-14. Recyclable materials.
The following materials are hereby designated as "recyclable materials" within the Borough of
Coopersburg:
Residential. For all residential establishments, including multifamily housing, as defined by this
article:
Clear glass.
Brown and green glass.
Aluminum cans.
Bimetallic and steel cans.
Leaf waste.
Plastic containers, of the varieties, types and chemical compositions as specified by the
Borough.
Commercial. For all other commercial activities, except multifamily housing, as defined in this
article:
Clear glass.
Brown and green glass.
Aluminum cans.
Bimetallic and steel cans.
Leaf waste.
Educational institutions. Educational institutions are exempted from the operation of this article
only insofar as such institutions shall comply with § 1509 of Act 101.
§ 182-15. General operation of program requirements.
Recyclable materials. Every person in the Borough of Coopersburg shall be required to separate
each of the recyclable materials listed in § 182-14, Recyclable materials, in this article, in
accordance with the use of the property occupied by such person, for the purpose of recycling,
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 104/301
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
from all of the other municipal solid waste and other waste generated by that person. No person
may dispose of such recyclable materials with any other municipal solid waste or other waste.
Batteries. Lead acid or nickel cadmium (rechargeable) batteries shall not be disposed of or
included in with any municipal solid waste or recyclable materials. Lead acid or nickel cadmium
batteries shall be disposed only in accordance with all other applicable federal, commonwealth
and county ordinances, rules, regulations, specifications, standards, orders, permits and licenses.
Other waste. All other municipal solid waste and other waste materials, whether residual,
hazardous or otherwise, shall be generated, stored, separated, placed, collected and disposed in
accordance with all other applicable federal, commonwealth, county and Borough laws,
ordinances, rules, regulations, specifications, standards, orders, permits and licenses.
§ 182-16. Compliance by residential, multifamily housing and
commercial establishments.
All persons owning, occupying or operating residential establishments or commercial establishments
within the Borough of Coopersburg shall comply with the following requirements:
Separation. Separate the recyclable materials and maintain the materials in the separate recycling
container until collected by the Borough contractor.
Preparation. Prepare for recycling all of the recyclable materials generated by that person, in
accordance with the regulations for each respective material as established by the Borough, by
the time that those recyclable materials are placed for collection and maintain those materials in
that condition.
Recycling containers. Place recyclable materials in the separate official Borough of Coopersburg
container or other containers authorized by the Borough, in accordance with regulations
established by the Borough. Each residential establishment and commercial establishment shall
acquire and use one official Borough of Coopersburg container for this purpose.
Placement and time. Place or set out recyclable materials, in their proper container at curbside,
and remove empty container from curbside on the scheduled days for collection, in accordance
with the times and schedules established by the designated contractor under contract with the
Borough.
§ 182-17. Recycling containers.
One recycling container shall be acquired by each residential and commercial establishment. The
Borough shall have the power to require that each recycling container be identified with the residential
establishment, multifamily housing or commercial establishment to which it is assigned.
Manner of distribution of containers. Each residential and commercial establishment shall be
provided with one container from the Borough without charge. Each resident, including tenants
and owners in multifamily housing establishments and commercial establishments of the Borough,
shall personally pick up one container, supplied by the Borough, at Borough Hall, at such times as
designated by Borough Council by resolution. Residents who are unable to personally pick up a
container for their use, due to health reasons or otherwise, may designate in writing an individual
to pick up their container in their stead. The Borough Secretary shall maintain a registry of all
residents, including tenants and owners of multifamily housing establishments and commercial
establishments of the Borough for the purpose of the distribution of containers under this
provision. Each resident or his designee nominated in writing shall sign the registry so maintained,
upon receipt of one container during the time frame for distribution of containers designated by
Council by resolution. At the conclusion of the two-week period, during which residents, personally
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 105/301
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
D.
or by nominee, pick up their container for recyclable materials under this article, the Borough will
disburse containers to residents, who have not, with just cause, picked up their container as
provided in this provision. The residents to whom the Borough delivers a container shall be
assessed a delivery fee, the amount of which shall be established by Borough Council by
resolution.
Loss, theft or damage. The owner of each residential establishment, including the tenant of a
multifamily housing unit, and the operator of each commercial establishment, shall be responsible
for and shall bear the risk of loss or damage to the official recycling container supplied for the use
of that establishment except where any person is apprehended for the commission of theft or of or
for vandalizing to any container, that person shall be penalized as provided in this article. The
person responsible for the loss, theft or damage of a container shall pay a fee to the Borough for
the replacement of such container in an amount established by Borough Council by resolution.
Return. The owner of each residential establishment, including the landlord and tenant of any
multifamily housing unit, and the operator of each commercial establishment shall return to the
Borough the container issued to them by the Borough of Coopersburg prior to relocating outside
the corporate boundaries of the Borough of Coopersburg.
Records. The Borough Secretary shall establish and maintain records of the person to whom
containers have been disbursed, the address or location of the residential and commercial
establishment and multifamily housing unit to which the containers were supplied; the amounts
and dates that the replacement fees were paid for the loss, theft, damage of any containers; and
such other information that the Borough Secretary shall require.
§ 182-18. Collection of recyclable materials.
Curbside recycling program. The Borough's contractor shall collect all recyclable materials which
are placed at curbside by each residential and commercial establishment, in accordance with
zones, schedules and specifications established under its contract with the Borough.
Duty to collect. The Borough contractor shall collect and transport any designated recyclable
materials which have been properly prepared, separated and placed at curbside in time for
collection on the schedule collection days. The contractor shall have no obligation to collect any
materials which do not conform to this article or regulations.
Leaf waste. The Borough or its designated contractor shall collect leaf waste during the months of
October, November and December of each calendar year and at such other times as needed.
Sale and marketing.
Recyclable materials that are collected shall be recycled unless markets for them do not exist.
The Borough contractor shall transport, process, sell, market or dispose of all recyclable
materials collected by the contractor in the manner specified by its contract with the Borough
and shall report the tonnages of the various materials which are recycled.
The Borough Secretary shall establish and keep necessary records and report at least
quarterly to Borough Council the quantity of recyclable material collected and disposed.
The Borough shall accord consideration for the collection, marketing and disposition of
recyclable materials to person engaged in the business of recycling on the effective date of
Act 101, whether or not the persons were operating for profit, as required by § 1501 (f) of Act
101.
The contractor that markets the Borough's recyclable materials must provide written
documentation that either said materials are recycled, or that markets for those materials do
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 106/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
not exist.
§ 182-19. Borough ownership of recyclables.
All recyclable materials shall become the property of and shall be owned by the Borough of
Coopersburg or its authorized agents or contractors when such materials are picked up from the
curbside. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impair the ownership of recyclable materials by the
person who generated them before such pickup or delivery. Collection of recyclable materials by
persons not authorized by the Borough is prohibited by Article II, regarding scavengers.
§ 182-20. Regulations and administration by Borough.
Regulations. The Borough Council shall have the power to establish regulations for the following
parts of the Borough's recycling program.
Plastic containers -- varieties, types and chemical compositions to be collected for recycling in
the Borough's curbside recycling program or otherwise disposed into the municipal solid
waste.
Preparation of recyclable materials for recycling.
Separating, placing and combining recyclable materials in the official Borough of Coopersburg
container.
Exact locations for curbside pickup, where those locations are not established or are
otherwise unsatisfactory.
Zones, routes and schedules for collection days.
Times to set out and bring in the official Borough container.
Suspension.
Less than 30 days. The Borough Secretary or a designated agent of the Borough shall have
the power to alter or suspend any such regulation in the event of good cause owner or
emergency, including, but not limited to, snow storms and floods, without prior notice, for a
period not longer than 30 days.
Longer than 30 days. Any alteration or suspension extending longer than 30 days shall
require the express concurrence of the Borough Council.
§ 182-21. Public information and education program.
Notice. The Borough of Coopersburg shall notify the occupants of residential establishments
within its boundaries of the requirements of this article.
Timing. This notification shall occur prior to the initiation of the recycling program and at such time,
if any, as the recycling program is altered in any way.
Education programs. Education programs shall be furnished periodically upon request through the
schools and other organizations.
Other methods. The Borough Secretary shall have the power to use other methods of publication
to comply with the public information and education requirements of Act 101, as may be
satisfactory and adequate in the circumstances.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 107/301
(1)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
D.
§ 182-22. Incentives, violations, penalties and enforcement.
The Police Department or an authorized agent of the Borough shall be responsible for monitoring and
enforcing compliance with this article and regulations. Enforcement of this article shall begin after a
grace period commencing six months from the date of enactment of this article.
Administrative act and enforcement. For violations of this article by the owners, landlords,
occupants or operators of residential establishments or commercial establishments, the Borough
shall comply with the following administrative actions and enforcement procedure before
commencing any action before the district justice.
Letter. For the first two violations by the same person within the calendar year, which violation
shall be separate violations on different dates, under this article, the owner and landlord,
occupant or operator of any residential or commercial establishment shall be notified by letter,
sent by the Borough Secretary, to the said person by United States First Class Mail, of the
penalties for continued noncompliance with this article.
Civil liability before district justice. Any owner, landlord, occupant or operator of a residential or
commercial establishment who has been previously subjected to all of the administrative action
and enforcement procedures of this section within the calendar year, who violates any provision of
this article, shall be subject to the following civil penalties, payable to the Borough of Coopersburg,
upon a finding of liability therefor by the district justice:
First action. For the first action before the district justice within the calendar year, a civil
penalty of not more than $600 and costs.
Subsequent actions. For any action before the district justice within the same calendar year
subsequent to a previous finding by the district justice of civil liability by the same person for
any violation of this article, a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 and costs.
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be deemed to be a separate violation.
Each violation shall be deemed to be a separate violation.
Incentives. The Borough Secretary shall have the power to establish incentives to promote
compliance with this article, as may be appropriate, from time to time. The Borough Secretary
shall report at least annually to the Borough Council on the incentives which have been
established, and when and to whom those incentives have been granted.
Procurement options. The Borough may utilize the provisions of § 1507 of Act 101, Procurement
Procedures for Local Public Agencies, and § 1508, Procedure Options for Local Public Agencies
and Certain Commonwealth Agencies, if the Borough elects to do so.
Chapter 187. Stormwater Management
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 4-24-2007 by Ord. No.
595.[1] Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 195.
Water — See Ch. 220.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
Attachment 1 - Appendix A and Appendix B
Attachment 2 - Appendix C
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 108/301
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Attachment 3 - Appendix D
Attachment 4 - Appendix E
Attachment 5 - Appendix F
Attachment 6 - Appendix G
Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 187, Stormwater Management, adopted 4-14-
1992 by Ord. No. 472 (Ch. 26, Part 4 of the 1996 Code), as amended.
Article I. General Provisions
§ 187-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Saucon Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 187-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of Coopersburg Borough finds that:
Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting from development
throughout a watershed increases flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, changes the natural hydrologic patterns, destroys aquatic habitat, elevates aquatic
pollutant concentrations and loadings, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm
sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood control efforts in downstream communities, reduces
groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation of
development and activities causing accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is
fundamental to the public health, safety and welfare and the protection of the people of the
municipality and all of the people of the commonwealth, their resources and the environment.
Stormwater can be an important resource by providing groundwater recharge for water supplies
and base flow of streams, which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an essential component in
successfully addressing stormwater.
Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to implement a program of stormwater
controls. These municipalities are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES). Throughout the chapter, these provisions are from the DEP Guidance on MS4
Ordinance Provisions and are not required for municipalities not subject to the NPDES Phase II
regulations.
Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems can contribute to pollution
of waters of the commonwealth by the municipality.
§ 187-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and welfare within the Saucon
Creek Watershed by minimizing the damages and maximizing the benefits described in § 187-2 of this
chapter by provisions designed to:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 109/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating activities which cause such
problems.
Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems.
Encourage infiltration of stormwater, where appropriate, to maintain groundwater recharge, to
prevent degradation of surface and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the municipality and the
commonwealth.
Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater management BMPs that are
implemented in the municipality.
Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater planning, design and
management.
Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source which requires a minimum of structures
and relies on natural processes.
Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including regulations at 25 Pa. Code
Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain existing uses and maintain the level of water quality to
support those uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water quality in special protection
streams.
Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
§ 187-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority of the Act of October 4,
1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Stormwater Management Act," and
the Coopersburg Borough Code.
§ 187-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall only apply to those areas of the municipality which are located within the
Saucon Creek Watershed as delineated on an official map available for inspection at the municipal
office. (Municipalities subject to the NPDES Phase II regulations must ensure that all of the
ordinance provisions required to meet the MS4 NPDES requirements apply across the entire
municipality.)
The following activities are defined as regulated activities and shall be governed by this chapter:
Land development.
Subdivision.
Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 110/301
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
B.
C.
D.
Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
Regulated earth disturbance activities.
§ 187-6. Exemptions.
Impervious cover. Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined in § 187-5B(5) and (6),
which would create 10,000 square feet or less of additional impervious cover is exempt from the
drainage plan preparation provisions of this chapter. All of the impervious cover added
incrementally to a site above the initial 10,000 square feet shall be subject to the drainage plan
preparation provisions of this chapter. If a site has previously received an exemption and is
proposing additional development such that the total impervious cover on the site exceeds 10,000
square feet, the total impervious cover on the site proposed since the original ordinance date must
meet the provisions of this chapter.
The date of the municipal ordinance adoption of the original Saucon Creek Watershed Act
167 Stormwater Management Ordinance shall be the starting point from which to consider
tracts as "parent tracts" in which future subdivisions and respective impervious area
computations shall be cumulatively considered.
For development taking place in stages, the entire development plan must be used in
determining conformance with these criteria.
Additional impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to, additional indoor living spaces,
decks, patios, garages, driveways, storage sheds and similar structures, any roof, parking or
driveway areas and any new streets and sidewalks constructed as part of or for the proposed
regulated activity.
Any additional areas proposed to initially be gravel, crushed stone, porous pavement, etc.
shall be assumed to be impervious for the purposes of comparison to the exemption criteria.
Any existing gravel, crushed stone or hard-packed soil areas on a site shall be considered as
pervious cover for the purpose of exemption evaluation.
Prior drainage plan approval. Any regulated activity for which a drainage plan was previously
prepared as part of a subdivision or land development proposal that received preliminary plan
approval from the municipality prior to the effective date of this chapter is exempt from the
drainage plan preparation provisions of this chapter, except as cited in § 187-6C, provided that the
approved drainage plan included design of stormwater facilities to control runoff from the site
currently proposed for regulated activities consistent with ordinance provisions in effect at the time
of approval and the approval has not lapsed under the Municipalities Planning Code. If significant
revisions are made to the drainage plan after both the preliminary plan approval and the effective
date of this chapter, preparation of a new drainage plan subject to the provisions of this chapter
shall be required. Significant revisions would include a change in control methods or techniques,
relocation or redesign of control measures or changes necessary because soil or other conditions
are not as stated on the original drainage plan.
These exemptions shall not relieve the applicant from implementing such measures as are
necessary to protect health, safety, property, and state water quality requirements. These
measures include adequate and safe conveyance of stormwater on the site and as it leaves the
site. These exemptions do not relieve the applicant from the responsibility to secure required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
No exemptions shall be provided for regulated activities as defined in § 187-5E and F.
§ 187-7. Repealer.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 111/301
A.
B.
C.
Any ordinance of the municipality inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby
repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 187-8. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 187-9. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure
required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or
ordinance.
§ 187-10. Duty of persons engaged in the development of land.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, including exemption and waiver provisions, any
landowner and any person engaged in the alteration or development of land which may affect
stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to
prevent injury to health, safety or other property. Such measures shall include such actions as are
required to manage the rate, volume, direction and quality of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner
which otherwise adequately protects health and property from possible injury.
Article II. Definitions
§ 187-11. Word usage; definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall be interpreted as follows:
Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural,
and the plural number includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender;
and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the specific example but is intended to
extend its meaning to all other instances of like kind and character.
The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and "should" are permissive.
ACCELERATED EROSION
The removal of the surface of the land through the combined action of human activities and
natural processes, at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural processes alone.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP)
Activities, facilities, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater quantity and quality
impacts from the regulated activities listed in § 187-5, to meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this
chapter.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE PLAN
Documentation, included as part of a drainage plan, detailing the proposed BMPs, how they
will be operated and maintained and who will be responsible.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 112/301
(1)
(2)
BIORETENTION
Densely vegetated, depressed features that store stormwater and filter it through vegetation,
mulch, planting soil, etc. Ultimately, stormwater is evapotranspirated, infiltrated, or
discharged. Optimal bioretention areas mimic natural forest ecosystems in terms of species
diversity, density, distribution, use of native plants, etc.
BUFFER
STREAMSIDE BUFFER
- A zone of variable width located along a stream that is vegetated and is designed to
filter pollutants from runoff.
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURE BUFFER
A required isolation distance from a special geologic feature to a proposed BMP needed
to reduce the risk of sinkhole formation due to stormwater management activities.
CAPTURE/REUSE
Stormwater management techniques such as cisterns and rain barrels which direct runoff into
storage devices, surface or subsurface, for later reuse, such as for irrigation of gardens and
other planted areas. Because this stormwater is utilized and no pollutant discharge results,
water quality performance is superior to other noninfiltration BMPs.
CARBONATE BEDROCK
Rock consisting chiefly of carbonate minerals, such as limestone and dolomite; specifically a
sedimentary rock composed of more than 50% by weight of carbonate minerals that underlies
soil or other unconsolidated, superficial material.
CISTERN
An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CLOSED DEPRESSION
A distinctive bowl-shaped depression in the land surface. It is characterized by internal
drainage, varying magnitude, and an unbroken ground surface.
CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS
Constructed wetlands are similar to wet ponds (see below) and consist of a basin which
provides for necessary stormwater storage as well as a permanent pool or water level,
planted with wetland vegetation. To be successful, constructed wetlands must have adequate
natural hydrology (both runoff inputs as well as soils and water table which allow for
maintenance of a permanent pool of water). In these cases, the permanent pool must be
designed carefully, usually with shallow edge benches, so that water levels are appropriate to
support carefully selected wetland vegetation.
CULVERT
A pipe, conduit or similar structure including appurtenant works which carries surface water.
DAM
An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works, constructed for the purpose of
impounding or storing water or another fluid or semifluid or a refuse bank, fill or structure for
highway, railroad or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DESIGN STORM
The depth and time distribution of precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of
occurrence (e.g., one-hundred-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) and used in
computing stormwater management control systems.
DETENTION BASIN
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 113/301
A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it
at the appropriate release rate.
DEVELOPER
A person, partnership, association, corporation or other entity, or any responsible person
therein or agent thereof, that undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE)
The specific tract of land for which a regulated activity is proposed.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE
See "sheet flow."
DRAINAGE EASEMENT
A right granted by a landowner to a grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater
management purposes.
DRAINAGE PLAN
The documentation of the proposed stormwater quantity and quality management controls to
be used for a given development site, including a BMP operations and maintenance plan, the
contents of which are established in § 187-21.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY
A construction or other human activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but
not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road maintenance,
building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or earth
materials.
EROSION
The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice, or other geological agents.
EXISTING USES
Those uses actually attained in the water body on or after November 28, 1975, whether or not
they are included in the water quality standards (25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.1).
FILL
Man-made deposits of natural soils or rock products and waste materials.
FILTER STRIPS
See "vegetated buffers."
FREEBOARD
The incremental depth in a stormwater management structure, provided as a safety factor of
design, above that required to convey the design runoff event.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE
Replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies.
HARDSHIP WAIVER REQUEST
A written request for a waiver alleging that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary
hardship upon the applicant. A hardship waiver does not apply to and is not available from the
water quality provisions of this chapter and should not be granted.
HOT SPOT LAND USES
A land use or activity that generates higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or
other toxic substances than typically found in stormwater runoff.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG)
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 114/301
(a)
(b)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C and D) to indicate the minimum infiltration rates
which are obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture defines the four groups and
provides a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils
in the area of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can be
obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils become less
permeable as the HSG varies from A to D.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS COVER)
A surface which prevents the percolation of water into the ground.
INFILTRATION PRACTICE
A practice designed to direct runoff into the ground, e.g., French drain, seepage pit, seepage
trench or bioretention area.
KARST
A type of topography or landscape characterized by depressions, sinkholes, limestone towers
and steep-sided hills, underground drainage and caves. Karst is usually formed on carbonate
rocks, such as limestones or dolomites and sometimes gypsum.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for
any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether proposed
initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless
of the number of occupants or tenure; or
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between
or among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for the
purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or
other features.
A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
LOADING RATE
The ratio of the land area draining to the system, as modified by the weighting factors in
§ 187-18B, compared to the base area of the infiltration system.
"LOCAL" RUNOFF CONVEYANCE FACILITIES
Any natural channel or man-made conveyance system which has the purpose of transporting
runoff from the site to the mainstem.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT
A development approach that promotes practices that will minimize postdevelopment runoff
rates and volumes thereby minimizing needs for artificial conveyance and storage facilities.
Site design practices include preserving natural drainage features, minimizing impervious
surface area, reducing the hydraulic connectivity of impervious surfaces and protecting
natural depression storage.
MAINSTEM (MAIN CHANNEL)
Any stream segment or other conveyance used as a reach in the Saucon Creek hydrologic
model.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 115/301
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA)
A method for calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic
feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and
slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under
pressure.
MINIMUM DISTURBANCE/MINIMUM MAINTENANCE PRACTICES (MD/MM)
Site design practices in which careful limits are placed on site clearance prior to development
allowing for maximum retention of existing vegetation (woodlands and other), minimum
disturbance and compaction of existing soil mantle and minimum site application of chemicals
postdevelopment. Typically, MD/MM includes disturbance setback criteria from buildings as
well as related site improvements such as walkways, driveways, roadways, and any other
improvements. These criteria may vary by community context as well as by type of
development being proposed. Additionally, MD/MM also shall include provisions (e.g., deed
restrictions, conservation easements) to protect these areas from future disturbance and from
application of fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides.
MUNICIPALITY
Coopersburg Borough, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
NO HARM OPTION
The option of using a less restrictive runoff quantity control if it can be shown that adequate
and safe runoff conveyance exists and that the less restrictive control would not adversely
affect health, safety and property.
NRCS
Natural Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. (Formerly the Soil
Conservation Service.)
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR
A structural mechanism designed to remove free oil and grease (and possibly solids) from
stormwater runoff.
OUTFALL
"Point source" as described in 40 CFR § 122.2 at the point where the municipality's storm
sewer system discharges to surface waters of the commonwealth.
OWNER
One with an interest in and often dominion over a property.
PEAK DISCHARGE
The maximum rate of flow of stormwater runoff at a given location and time resulting from a
specified storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (PSRM)
The computer-based hydrologic modeling technique adapted to each watershed for the Act
167 plans. The model was calibrated to reflect actual flow values by adjusting key model input
parameters.
PERSON
An individual, partnership, public or private association or corporation, firm, trust, estate,
municipality, governmental unit, public utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POINT SOURCE
Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe,
ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined
in state regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 116/301
PRELIMINARY SITE INVESTIGATION
The determination of the depth to bedrock, the depth to the seasonal high water table and the
soil permeability for a possible infiltration location on a site through the use of published data
and on-site surveys. In carbonate bedrock areas, the location of special geologic features
must also be determined along with the associated buffer distance to the possible infiltration
area. See Appendix G.[1]
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER
A person who owns or operates a public water system.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM
A system which provides water to the public for human consumption which has at least 15
service connections or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60
days out of the year. (See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 109.)
QUALIFIED GEOTECHNICAL PROFESSIONAL
A licensed professional geologist or a licensed professional engineer who has a background
or expertise in geology or hydrogeology.
RATIONAL METHOD
A method of peak runoff calculation using a standardized runoff coefficient (rational 'c'),
acreage of tract and rainfall intensity determined by return period and by the time necessary
for the entire tract to contribute runoff. The rational method formula is stated as follows: Q =
ciA, where "Q" is the calculated peak flow rate in cubic feet per second, "c" is the
dimensionless runoff coefficient (see Appendix C[2]), "i" is the rainfall intensity in inches per
hour, and "A" is the area of the tract in acres.
REACH
Any of the natural or man-made runoff conveyance channels used for watershed runoff
modeling purposes to connect the subareas and transport flows downstream.
RECHARGE VOLUME (REv)
The portion of the water quality volume (WQv) used to maintain groundwater recharge rates
at development sites. (See § 187-15J.)
REGULATED ACTIVITIES
Actions or proposed actions which impact upon proper management of stormwater runoff and
which are governed by this chapter as specified in § 187-5.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES
Earth disturbance activity other than agricultural plowing or tilling of one acre or more with a
point source discharge to surface waters or to the municipality's storm sewer system or earth
disturbance activity of five acres or more regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth
disturbance on any portion of, part or during any stage of a larger common plan of
development.
RELEASE RATE
The percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of runoff for a development site to which the
postdevelopment peak rate of runoff must be controlled to avoid peak flow increases
throughout the watershed.
RETURN PERIOD
The average interval in years over which an event of a given magnitude can be expected to
recur. For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall or runoff event would be
expected to recur on the average once every 25 years.
ROAD MAINTENANCE
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 117/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
Earth disturbance activities within the existing road cross section, such as grading and
repairing existing unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage
ditches and other similar activities.
RUNOFF
That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SEDIMENT TRAPS/CATCH BASIN SUMPS
Chambers which provide storage below the outlet in a storm inlet to collect sediment, debris
and associated pollutants, typically requiring periodic clean out.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH
An area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or similar material and into which surface
water is directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM
A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains) primarily
used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW
Stormwater runoff flowing in a thin layer over the ground surface.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD
A method of runoff computation developed by NRCS which is based upon relating soil type
and land use/cover to a runoff parameter called a curve number.
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURES
Carbonate bedrock features, including but not limited to closed depressions, existing
sinkholes, fracture traces, lineaments, joints, faults, caves, pinnacles and geologic contacts
between carbonate and noncarbonate bedrock which may exist and must be identified on a
site when stormwater management BMPs are being considered.
SPILL PREVENTION AND RESPONSE PROGRAM
A program that identifies procedures for preventing and, as needed, cleaning up potential
spills and makes such procedures known and the necessary equipment available to
appropriate personnel.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS
As defined under state regulations, protection of designated and existing uses (see 25 Pa.
Code Chapters 93 and 96), including:
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a designated use, such as cold water
fisheries or potable water supply, which is listed in Chapter 93. These uses must be
protected and maintained, under state regulations.
Existing uses are those attained as of November 1975, regardless whether they have
been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth disturbance activities must be designed
to protect and maintain existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in special
protection streams.
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical characteristics of surface
water bodies. After regulated earth disturbance activities are complete, these
characteristics can be impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment and changes
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result of changes in land
surface area from those activities. Therefore, permanent discharges to surface waters
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 118/301
must be managed to protect the stream bank, streambed and structural integrity of the
waterway to prevent these impacts.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD
A method of routing or moving an inflow hydrograph through a reservoir or detention
structure. The method solves the mass conservation equation to determine an outflow
hydrograph as it leaves the storage facility.
STORM DRAINAGE PROBLEM AREAS
Areas which lack adequate stormwater collection and/or conveyance facilities and which
present a hazard to persons or property. These areas are either documented in Appendix B[3]
of this chapter or identified by the municipality or Municipal Engineer.
STORM SEWER
A system of pipes or other conduits which carries intercepted surface runoff, street water and
other wash waters, or drainage, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER
The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching the ground surface.
STORMWATER FILTERS
Any number of structural mechanisms such as multichamber catch basins, sand/peat filters,
sand filters, and so forth which are installed to intercept stormwater flow and remove
pollutants prior to discharge. Typically, these systems require periodic maintenance and clean
out.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
The plan for managing stormwater runoff adopted by Lehigh and/or Northampton County for
the Saucon Creek Watershed as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167),
as amended, and known as the "Stormwater Management Act."
STREAM
A watercourse.
SUBAREA
The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for hydrologic modeling purposes for which the
runoff control criteria have been established in the stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or
devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not
involving any new street or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be
exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH
Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and all other bodies or channels of
conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within or on the
boundaries of this commonwealth.
SWALE
A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water runoff. See also "vegetated
swale."
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 119/301
(1)
(2)
[1]
[2]
[3]
TECHNICAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE MANUAL AND INFILTRATION FEASIBILITY
REPORT, NOVEMBER 2002
The report written by Cahill Associates that addresses the feasibility of infiltration in carbonate
bedrock areas in the Little Lehigh Creek Watershed. The report is available at the Lehigh
Valley Planning Commission offices.
TRASH/DEBRIS COLLECTORS
Racks, screens or other similar devices installed in a storm drainage system to capture
coarse pollutants (trash, leaves, etc.).
VEGETATED BUFFERS
Gently sloping areas that convey stormwater as sheet flow over a broad, densely vegetated
earthen area, possibly coupled with the use of level spreading devices. Vegetated buffers
should be situated on minimally disturbed soils, have low-flow velocities and extended
residence times.
VEGETATED ROOFS
Vegetated systems installed on roofs that generally consist of a waterproof layer, a rootbarrier,
drainage layer (optional), growth media, and suitable vegetation. Vegetated roofs
store and eventually evapotranspirate the collected rooftop rainfall; overflows may be
provided for larger storms.
VEGETATED SWALES
Vegetated earthen channels designed to convey stormwater. These swales are not
considered to be water quality BMPs.
Broad, shallow, densely vegetated, earthen channels designed to treat stormwater while
slowly infiltrating, evapotranspirating, and conveying it. Swales should be gently sloping
with low-flow velocities to prevent erosion. Check dams may be added to enhance
performance.
WATERCOURSE
Any channel of conveyance of surface water having defined bed and banks, whether natural
or artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATER QUALITY INSERTS
Any number of commercially available devices that are inserted into storm inlets to capture
sediment, oil, grease, metals, trash, debris, etc.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv)
The volume needed to capture and treat 90% of the average annual rainfall volume. (See
§ 187-15B.)
WATERSHED
The entire region or area drained by a river or other body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WET DETENTION PONDS
Basins that provide for necessary stormwater storage as well as a permanent pool of water.
To be successful, wet ponds must have adequate natural hydrology (both runoff inputs as well
as soils and water table which allow for maintenance of a permanent pool of water) and must
be able to support a healthy aquatic community so as to avoid creation of mosquito and other
health and nuisance problems.
Editor's Note: Appendix G is included at the end of this chapter.
Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
Editor's Note: The maps contained in Appendix B are on file in the Borough's offices.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 120/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
[1]
I.
Article III. Stormwater Management Requirements
§ 187-12. General requirements.
All regulated activities in the municipality shall be subject to the stormwater management
requirements of this chapter.
Storm drainage systems shall be provided to permit unobstructed flow in natural watercourses
except as modified by stormwater detention facilities, recharge facilities, water quality facilities,
pipe systems or open channels consistent with this chapter.
The existing locations of concentrated drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall not be
altered without written approval of the affected property owner(s).
Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall be managed such that,
at minimum, the peak diffused flow does not increase in the general direction of discharge, except
as otherwise provided in this chapter. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and
discharged onto adjacent property, the developer must document that there are adequate
downstream conveyance facilities to safely transport the concentrated discharge to the point of
predevelopment flow concentration, to the stream reach or otherwise prove that no harm will result
from the concentrated discharge. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to
any applicable release rate criteria in the general direction of existing discharge whether they are
proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage areas.
Where a site is traversed by watercourses other than those for which a one hundred-year
floodplain is defined by the municipality, there shall be provided drainage easements conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourses. The width of any easement shall be adequate to
provide for unobstructed flow of storm runoff based on calculations made in conformance with
§ 307 for the one hundred-year return period runoff and to provide a freeboard allowance of 0.5
foot above the design water surface level. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation,
the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations which may adversely affect the flow of
stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also, periodic maintenance of the easement to
ensure proper runoff conveyance shall be required. Watercourses for which the one hundred-year
floodplain is formally defined are subject to the applicable municipal floodplain regulations.
When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural drainage swales on the site
cannot adequately provide for drainage, open channels may be constructed conforming
substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainage swales. Capacities of open channels
shall be calculated using the Manning equation.
Postconstruction BMPs shall be designed, installed, operated and maintained to meet the
requirements of the Clean Streams Law and implementing regulations, including the established
practices in 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102 and the specifications of this chapter as to prevent
accelerated erosion in watercourse channels and at all points of discharge.
No earth disturbance activities associated with any regulated activities shall commence until
approval by the municipality of a plan which demonstrates compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.
Techniques described in Appendix F[1] (Low Impact Development) of this chapter are encouraged
because they reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter and the state
water quality requirements.
Editor's Note: Appendix F is included at the end of this chapter.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 121/301
[2]
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
Infiltration for stormwater management is encouraged where soils and geology permit, consistent
with the provisions of this chapter and, where appropriate, the Recommendation Chart for
Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix D.[2]
Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 187-13. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements apply to certain regulated and earth disturbance activities and
must be met prior to commencement of regulated and earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
All regulated and earth disturbance activities subject to permit requirements by DEP under
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102
and Chapter 105.
Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or adjacent to surface waters of
the commonwealth, including wetlands, subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state highway right-of-way or
require access from a state highway shall be subject to approval by the PennDOT.
Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass or convey flows from
the tributary area and any facility which may constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under
25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
§ 187-14. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall commence until approval by
the municipality of an erosion and sediment control plan for construction activities. Written
approval by DEP or a delegated county conservation district shall satisfy this requirement.
An erosion and sediment control plan is required by DEP regulations for any earth disturbance
activity of 5,000 square feet or more under Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
A DEP NPDES stormwater discharges associated with construction activities permit is required for
regulated earth disturbance activities under Pa. Code Chapter 92.
Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance activities from the appropriate
DEP regional office or county conservation district must be provided to the municipality before the
commencement of an earth disturbance activity.
A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any permit, as required by DEP regulations,
shall be available at the project site at all times.
§ 187-15. Postconstruction water quality criteria.
No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall commence until approval by
the municipality of a drainage plan which demonstrates compliance with this chapter. This chapter
provides standards to meet NPDES permit requirements associated with construction activities
and MS4 permit requirements.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 122/301
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
[1]
H.
(1)
I.
The water quality volume (WQv) shall be captured and treated. The WQv shall be calculated two
ways.
First, WQv shall be calculated using the following formula:
WQv = [(c)(P)(A)]/12
Where:
WQv = water quality volume in acre-feet
c = Rational Method postdevelopment runoff coefficient for the two-year
storm
P = 1.25 inches
A = Area in acres of proposed regulated activity
Second, the WQv shall be calculated as the difference in runoff volume from predevelopment
to postdevelopment for the two-year return period storm. The effect of closed depressions on
the site shall be considered in this calculation. The larger of these two calculated volumes
shall be used as the WQv to be captured and treated, except that in no case shall the WQv
be permitted to exceed 1.25-inches of runoff over the site area. This standard does not limit
the volume of infiltration an applicant may propose for purposes of water quantity/peak rate
control.
The WQv shall be calculated for each postdevelopment drainage direction on a site for sizing
BMPs. Site areas having no impervious cover and no proposed disturbance during development
may be excluded from the WQv calculations and do not require treatment.
If an applicant is proposing to use a dry extended detention basin, wet pond, constructed wetland
or other BMP that ponds water on the land surface and may receive direct sunlight, the discharge
from that BMP must be treated by infiltration, a vegetated buffer, filter strip, bioretention, vegetated
swale or other BMP that provides a thermal benefit to protect the high quality waters of the
Saucon Creek from thermal impacts.
The WQv for a site as a result of the regulated activities must either be treated with infiltration or
two acceptable BMPs such as those listed in § 187-15O, except for minor areas on the periphery
of the site that cannot reasonably be drained to an infiltration facility or other BMP.
Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed on fill unless the applicant demonstrates that the fill is
stable and otherwise meets the infiltration BMP standards of this chapter.
The applicant shall document the bedrock type(s) present on the site from published sources. Any
apparent boundaries between carbonate and noncarbonate bedrock shall be verified through
more detailed site evaluations by a qualified geotechnical professional.
For each proposed regulated activity in the watershed where an applicant intends to use infiltration
BMPs, the applicant shall conduct a preliminary site investigation, including gathering data from
published sources, a field inspection of the site, a minimum of one test pit and a minimum of two
percolation tests, as outlined in Appendix G.[1] This investigation will determine depth to bedrock,
depth to the seasonal high water table, soil permeability and location of special geologic features,
if applicable. This investigation may be done by a certified Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO)
except that the location(s) of special geologic features shall be verified by a qualified geotechnical
professional.
Editor's Note: Appendix G is included at the end of this chapter.
Sites where applicants intend to use infiltration BMPs must meet the following criteria:
Depth to bedrock below the invert of the BMP greater than or equal to two feet.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 123/301
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(4)
(1)
[2]
(2)
(3)
(4)
J.
Depth to seasonal high water table below the invert of the BMP greater than or equal to three
feet; except for infiltration of residential roof runoff where the seasonal high water table must
be below the invert of the BMP. (If the depth to bedrock is between two and three feet and the
evidence of the seasonal high water table is not found in the soil, no further testing to locate
the depth to seasonal high water table is required.)
Soil permeability (as measured by the adapted 25 PA Code § 73.15 percolation test in
Appendix G) greater than or equal to 0.5 inches per hour and less than or equal to 12 inches
per hour.
Setback distances or buffers as follows:
One-hundred feet from water supply wells;
Fifteen feet downgradient or 100 feet upgradient from building foundations; except for
residential development where the required setback is 15 feet downgradient or 40 feet
upgradient from building foundations;
Fifty feet from septic system drainfields; except for residential development where the
required setback is 25 feet from septic system drainfields;
Fifty feet from a geologic contact with carbonate bedrock unless a preliminary site
investigation is done in the carbonate bedrock to show the absence of special geologic
features within 50 feet of the proposed infiltration area;
One hundred feet from the property line unless documentation is provided to show that
all setbacks from existing or potential future wells, foundations and drainfields on
neighboring properties will be met; except for one- and two-family residential dwellings
where the required setback is 40 feet unless documentation is provided to show that all
setbacks from existing or potential future wells, foundations and drainfields on
neighboring properties will be met.
For entirely noncarbonate sites, the recharge volume (REv) shall be infiltrated unless the applicant
demonstrates that it is infeasible to infiltrate the REv for reasons of seasonal high water table,
permeability rate, soil depth or setback distances.
The REv shall be calculated as follows:
REv = (0.25) * (I)/12
Where:
REv = Recharge Volume in acre-feet
I = impervious area in acres
The preliminary site investigation described in § 187-15H is required and shall continue on
different areas of the site until a potentially suitable infiltration location is found or the entire
site is determined to be infeasible for infiltration. For infiltration areas that appear to be
feasible based on the preliminary site investigation, the additional site investigation and
testing as outlined in Appendix G[2] shall be completed.
Editor's Note: Appendix G is included at the end of this chapter.
If an applicant proposes infiltration, the municipality may determine infiltration to be infeasible
if there are known existing conditions or problems that may be worsened by the use of
infiltration.
The site must meet the conditions listed in § 187-15I.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 124/301
(5)
(6)
[3]
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.
A.
B.
If it is not feasible to infiltrate the full REv, the applicant shall infiltrate that portion of the REv
that is feasible based on the site characteristics. If none of the REv can be infiltrated, REv
shall be considered as part of the WQv and shall be captured and treated as described in
§ 187-15O.
If REv is infiltrated, it may be subtracted from the WQv required to be captured and treated.
In entirely carbonate areas, where the applicant intends to use infiltration BMPs, the preliminary
site investigation described in § 187-15H shall be conducted. For infiltration areas that appear
feasible based on the preliminary site investigation, the applicant shall conduct the additional site
investigation and testing as outlined in Appendix G. The soil depth, percolation rate and proposed
loading rate, each weighted as described in § 187-18, along with the buffer from special geologic
features shall be compared to the Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management
BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix D to determine if the site is recommended for infiltration.
In addition to the recommendation from Appendix D, the conditions listed in § 187-15I are required
for infiltration in carbonate areas. Applicants are encouraged to infiltrate the REv, as calculated in
§ 187-15J, but are not required to use infiltration BMPs on a carbonate site even if the site falls in
the "recommended" range on the chart in Appendix D.[3] Any amount of volume infiltrated can be
subtracted from the WQv to be treated by noninfiltration BMPs. If infiltration is not proposed, the
full WQv shall be treated by two acceptable BMPs, as specified in § 187-15O.
Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
If a site has both carbonate and noncarbonate areas, the applicant shall investigate the ability of
the noncarbonate portion of the site to fully meet this chapter to meet the requirements for REv for
the whole site through infiltration. If that proves infeasible, infiltration in the carbonate area as
described in § 187-15K or two other noninfiltration BMPs as described in § 187-15O must be
used. No infiltration structure in the noncarbonate area shall be located within 50 feet of a
boundary with carbonate bedrock, except when a preliminary site investigation has been done
showing the absence of special geologic features within 50 feet of the proposed infiltration area.
If infiltration BMPs are proposed in carbonate areas, the postdevelopment two-year runoff volume
leaving the site shall be 80% or more of the predevelopment runoff volume for the carbonate
portion of the site to prevent infiltration of volumes far in excess of the predevelopment infiltration
volume.
Site areas proposed for infiltration shall be protected from disturbance and compaction except as
necessary for construction of infiltration BMPs.
If infiltration of the entire WQv is not proposed, the remainder of the WQv shall be treated by two
acceptable BMPs in series for each discharge location. Sheet flow draining across a pervious area
can be considered as one BMP. Sheet flow across impervious areas and concentrated flow shall
flow through two BMPs. If sheet flow from an impervious area is to be drained across a pervious
area as one BMP, the length of the pervious area must be equal to or greater than the length of
impervious area. In no case may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet the
requirement of this section.
§ 187-16. Stormwater management districts.
Mapping of stormwater management districts. To implement the provisions of the Saucon Creek
Watershed stormwater management plan, the Borough is hereby divided into stormwater
management districts consistent with the Saucon Creek Release Rate Map presented in the plan
update. The boundaries of the stormwater management districts are shown on an official map
which is available for inspection at the municipal office.
Description of stormwater management districts. Two types of stormwater management districts
may be applicable to the municipality, namely Conditional/Provisional No Detention Districts and
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 125/301
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
Dual Release Rate Districts, as described below.
Conditional/Provisional No Detention Districts. Within these districts, the capacity of the
"local" runoff conveyance facilities (as defined in Article II) must be calculated to determine if
adequate capacity exists. For this determination, the developer must calculate peak flows
assuming that the site is developed as proposed and that the remainder of the local
watershed is in the existing condition. The developer must also calculate peak flows
assuming that the entire local watershed is developed per current zoning and that all new
development would use the runoff controls specified by this chapter. The larger of the two
peak flows calculated will be used in determining if adequate capacity exists. If adequate
capacity exists to safely transport runoff from the site to the main channel (as defined in
Article II), these watershed areas may discharge postdevelopment peak runoff without
detention facilities. If the capacity calculations show that the "local" runoff conveyance
facilities lack adequate capacity, the developer shall either use a one-hundred-percent
release rate control or provide increased capacity of downstream elements to convey
increased peak flows consistent with § 187-17P. Any capacity improvements must be
designed to convey runoff from development of all areas tributary to the improvement
consistent with the capacity criteria specified in § 187-17D. By definition, a storm drainage
problem area associated with the "local" runoff conveyance facilities indicates that adequate
capacity does not exist. Sites in these districts are still required to meet all of the water quality
requirements in § 187-15.
Dual Release Rate Districts. Within these districts, the two-year postdevelopment peak
discharge must be controlled to 30% of the predevelopment two-year runoff peak. Further, the
ten-year, twenty-five-year and one hundred-year postdevelopment peak runoff must be
controlled to the stated percentage of the predevelopment peak. Release rates associated
with the ten- through one hundred-year events vary from 50% to 100% depending upon
location in the watershed.
§ 187-17. Stormwater management district implementation
provisions.
Applicants shall provide a comparative preconstruction and postconstruction stormwater
management hydrograph analysis for each direction of discharge and for the site overall to
demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Any stormwater management controls required by this chapter and subject to a dual release rate
criteria shall meet the applicable release rate criteria for each of the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and
one hundred-year return period runoff events consistent with the calculation methodology
specified in § 187-18.
The exact location of the stormwater management district boundaries as they apply to a given
development site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using the two-foot topographic
contours provided as part of the drainage plan. The district boundaries as originally drawn
coincide with topographic divides or, in certain instances, are drawn from the intersection of the
watercourse and a physical feature such as the confluence with another watercourse or a potential
flow obstruction (e.g., road, culvert, bridge, etc.). The physical feature is the downstream limit of
the subarea and the subarea boundary is drawn from that point up slope to each topographic
divide along the path perpendicular to the contour lines.
Any downstream capacity analysis conducted in accordance with this chapter shall use the
following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased peak flow rates:
Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey the increased runoff
associated with a two-year return period event within their banks at velocities consistent with
protection of the channels from erosion.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 126/301
(2)
(3)
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey the increased twenty-fiveyear
return period runoff without creating any hazard to persons or property.
Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass or convey flows from
the tributary area must be designed in accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if
applicable) and, at minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff.
For a proposed development site located within one release rate category subarea, the total runoff
from the site shall meet the applicable release rate criteria. For development sites with multiple
directions of runoff discharge, individual drainage directions may be designed for up to a onehundred-
percent release rate so long as the total runoff from the site is controlled to the applicable
release rate.
For a proposed development site located within two or more release category subareas, the peak
discharge rate from any subarea shall be the predevelopment peak discharge for that subarea
multiplied by the applicable release rate. The calculated peak discharges shall apply regardless of
whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by subarea. An exception to the above may
be granted if discharges from multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the site. In this case,
peak discharge in any direction may be a one-hundred-percent release rate, provided that the
overall site discharge meets the weighted average release rate.
For a proposed development site located partially within a release rate category subarea and
partially within a Conditional/Provisional No Detention subarea, the size of the predevelopment
drainage area on a site may not be changed postdevelopment to create potentially adverse
conditions on downstream properties except as part of a "no harm" or hardship waiver procedure.
No portion of a site may be regraded between the Saucon Creek Watershed and any adjacent
watershed except as part of a "no harm" or hardship waiver procedure.
Within a release rate category area, for a proposed development site which has areas which drain
to a closed depression(s), the design release from the site will be the lesser of: a) the applicable
release rate flow assuming no closed depression(s); or b) the existing peak flow actually leaving
the site. In cases where b) would result in an unreasonably small design release, the design
discharge of less than or equal to the release rate will be determined by the available downstream
conveyance capacity to the main channel calculated using § 187-17D and the minimum orifice
criteria.
Off-site areas which drain through a proposed development site are not subject to release rate
criteria when determining allowable peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be
designed to safely convey off-site flows through the development site using the capacity criteria in
§ 187-17D and the detention criteria in § 187-18.
For development sites proposed to take place in phases, all detention ponds shall be designed to
meet the applicable release rate(s) applied to all site areas tributary to the proposed pond
discharge direction. All site tributary areas will be assumed as developed, regardless of whether
all site tributary acres are proposed for development at that time. An exception shall be sites with
multiple detention ponds in series where only the downstream pond must be designed to the
stated release rate.
Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development activity differs significantly from
the total site area, only the proposed impact area shall be subject to the release rate criteria. The
impact area includes any proposed cover or grading changes.
Development proposals which, through groundwater recharge or other means, do not increase
either the rate or volume of runoff discharged from the site compared to predevelopment are not
subject to the release rate provisions of this chapter.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 127/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
N.
O.
P.
"No harm" water quantity option. For any proposed development site not located in a
Conditional/Provisional No Detention District, the developer has the option of using a lessrestrictive
runoff control (including no detention) if the developer can prove that special
circumstances exist for the proposed development site and that no harm would be caused by
discharging at a higher runoff rate than that specified by the plan. Special circumstances are
defined as any hydrologic or hydraulic aspects of the development itself not specifically
considered in the development of the plan runoff control strategy. Proof of no harm would have to
be shown from the development site through the remainder of the downstream drainage network
to the confluence of the creek with the Delaware or Lehigh River. Proof of no harm must be shown
using the capacity criteria specified in § 187-17D if downstream capacity analysis is a part of the
"no harm" justification. Attempts to prove no harm based upon downstream peak flow versus
capacity analysis shall be governed by the following provisions:
The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the design return period storms
(two-, ten-, twenty-five- and one-hundred-year) shall be the values from the calibrated PSRM
Model for the Saucon Creek or as calculated by an applicant using an alternate method
acceptable to the Borough. The flow values from the PSRM Model would be supplied to the
developer by the Borough upon request.
Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance system as documented by a developer
may be used by the developer only in proportion to his development site acreage relative to
the total upstream undeveloped acreage from the identified capacity (i.e., if his site is 10% of
the upstream undeveloped acreage, he may use up to 10% of the documented downstream
available capacity).
Developer-proposed runoff controls which would generate increased peak flow rates at storm
drainage problem areas would, by definition, be precluded from successful attempts to prove
no harm, except in conjunction with proposed capacity improvements for the problem areas
consistent with § 187-17P. Any "no harm" justifications shall be submitted by the developer as
part of the drainage plan submission per Article IV. Developers submitting "no harm"
justifications must still meet all of the water quality requirements in § 187-15.
Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas within the study area, it may be more costeffective
to provide one control facility for more than one development site than to provide an
individual control facility for each development site. The initiative and funding for any regional
runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of prospective developers. The design of any
regional control basins must incorporate reasonable development of the entire upstream
watershed. The peak outflow of a regional basin would be determined based on the required
release rate at the point of discharge.
Capacity improvements. In certain instances, primarily within the Conditional/Provisional No
Detention areas, local drainage conditions may dictate more stringent levels of runoff control than
those based upon protection of the entire watershed. In these instances, if the developer could
prove that it would be feasible to provide capacity improvements to relieve the capacity deficiency
in the local drainage network, then the capacity improvements could be provided by the developer
in lieu of runoff controls on the development site. Peak flow calculations shall be done assuming
that the local watershed is in the existing condition and then assuming that the local watershed is
developed per current zoning and using the specified runoff controls. Any capacity improvements
would be designed using the larger of the above peak flows and the capacity criteria specified in
§ 187-17D. All new development in the entire subarea(s) within which the proposed development
site is located shall be assumed to implement the developer's proposed discharge control, if any.
Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary to implement any regional detention
alternatives or to implement a modified "no harm" option which proposes specific capacity
improvements to provide that a less stringent discharge control would not create any harm
downstream.
§ 187-18. Calculation methodology.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 128/301
A.
[1]
B.
[2]
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using either the Rational Method
or the Soil-Cover-Complex Methodology.
Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages in the Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater
Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix D[1] shall be calculated as follows:
Area tributary to infiltration BMP/base area of infiltration BMP* 100%
The area tributary to the infiltration BMP shall be weighted as follows:
All disturbed areas to be made impervious: weight at 100%
All disturbed areas to be made pervious: weight at 50%
All undisturbed pervious areas: weight at 0%
All existing impervious areas: weight at 100%
Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
Soil thickness is to be measured from the bottom of any proposed infiltration system. The effective
soil thickness in the Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in
Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix D is the measured soil thickness multiplied by the thickness factor
based on soil permeability (as measured by the adapted 25 PA Code § 73.15 percolation test in
Appendix G[2]), as follows:
Permeability Range* Thickness Factor
6.0 to 12.0 inches/hour 0.8
2.0 to 6.0 inches/hour 1.0
1.0 to 2.0 inches/hour 1.4
0.75 to 1.0 inches/hour 1.2
0.5 to 0.75 inches/hour 1.0
*If the permeability rate (as measured by the adapted 25 PA Code § 73.15 percolation test in
Appendix G) falls on a break between two thickness factors, the smaller thickness factor shall be
used. Sites with soil permeability greater than 12.0 inches per hour or less than 0.5 inches per
hour, as measured by the adapted 25 PA Code § 73.15 percolation test in Appendix G, are not
recommended for infiltration.
Editor's Note: Appendix G is included at the end of this chapter.
The design of any detention basin intended to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be
verified by routing the design storm hydrograph through the proposed basin using the storage
indication method or other methodology demonstrated to be more appropriate. For basins
designed using the Rational Method technique, the design hydrograph for routing shall be either
the Universal Rational Hydrograph or the Modified Rational Method trapezoidal hydrograph which
maximizes detention volume. Use of the Modified Rational Hydrograph shall be consistent with the
procedure described in Section "PIPE.RAT" of the Users' Manual for the Penn State Urban
Hydrology Model (1987).
BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface runoff or pipe flow shall be
routed using the storage indication method.
BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface runoff or pipe flow shall
provide storage volume for the full WQv below the lowest outlet invert.
Wet detention ponds designed to have a permanent pool for the WQv shall assume that the
permanent pool volume below the primary outlet is full at the beginning of design event routing for
the purposes of evaluating peak outflows.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 129/301
H.
I.
[3]
J.
K.
L.
M.
(1)
N.
All stormwater detention facilities shall provide a minimum one-foot freeboard above the maximum
pool elevation associated with the two- through twenty-five-year runoff events. A one-half-foot
freeboard shall be provided above the maximum pool elevation of the one hundred-year runoff
event. The freeboard shall be measured from the maximum pool elevation to the invert of the
emergency spillway. The two- through one hundred-year storm events shall be controlled by the
primary outlet structure. An emergency spillway for each basin shall be designed to pass the one
hundred-year return frequency storm peak basin inflow rate with a minimum one-half-foot
freeboard measured to the top of basin. The freeboard criteria shall be met considering any offsite
areas tributary to the basin as developed, as applicable. If this detention facility is considered
to be a dam as per DEP Chapter 105, the design of the facility must be consistent with the
Chapter 105 regulations, and may be required to pass a storm greater than the one hundred-year
event.
The minimum circular orifice diameter for controlling discharge rates from detention facilities shall
be three inches. Designs where a lesser size orifice would be required to fully meet release rates
shall be acceptable with a three-inch orifice, provided that as much of the site runoff as practical is
directed to the detention facilities. The minimum three-inch diameter does not apply to the control
of the WQv.
Runoff calculations using the Soil-Cover-Complex Method shall use the Natural Resources
Conservation Service Type II twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution. The 24-hour rainfall depths for
the various return periods to be used consistent with this chapter may be taken from NOAA Atlas
14, Volume 2 Version 2.1, 2004 or the PennDOT Intensity - Duration - Frequency Field Manual
("PDT-IDF") (May 1986) for Region 4. The following values are taken from the PDT-IDF Field
Manual:
Return Period
24-Hour Rainfall Depth
(inches)
1-year 2.40
2-year 3.00
5-year 3.60
10-year 4.56
25-year 5.52
50-year 6.48
100-year 7.44
A graphical and tabular presentation of the Type II-24 hour distribution is included in Appendix C.
[3]
Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
Runoff calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities consistent with
appropriate times of concentration and return periods and NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 2.1,
2004 or the Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves as presented in Appendix C.
Runoff curve numbers (CNs) to be used in the Soil-Cover-Complex Method shall be based upon
the matrix presented in Appendix C.
Runoff coefficients for use in the Rational Method shall be based upon the table presented in
Appendix C.
All time-of-concentration calculations shall use a segmental approach which may include one or all
of the flow types below:
Sheet flow (overland flow) calculations shall use either the NRCS average velocity chart
(Figure 3-1, Technical Release-55, 1975) or the modified kinematic wave travel time equation
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 130/301
(2)
[4]
(3)
(4)
O.
P.
Q.
(1)
(2)
A.
(equation 3-3, NRCS TR-55, June 1986). If using the modified kinematic wave travel time
equation, the sheet flow length shall be limited to 50 feet for designs using the Rational
Method and limited to 150 feet for designs using the Soil-Cover-Complex Method.
Shallow concentrated flow travel times shall be determined from the watercourse slope, type
of surface and the velocity from Figure 3-1 of TR-55, June 1986.
Open channel flow travel times shall be determined from velocities calculated by the Manning
equation. Bankfull flows shall be used for determining velocities. Manning 'n' values shall be
based on the table presented in Appendix C.[4]
Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
Pipe flow travel times shall be determined from velocities calculated using the Manning
equation assuming full flow and the Manning 'n' values from Appendix C.
If using the Rational Method, all predevelopment calculations for a given discharge direction shall
be based on a common time of concentration considering both on-site and any off-site drainage
areas. If using the Rational Method, all postdevelopment calculations for a given discharge
direction shall be based on a common time of concentration considering both on-site and any offsite
drainage areas.
The Manning equation shall be used to calculate the capacity of watercourses. Manning 'n' values
used in the calculations shall be consistent with the table presented in Appendix C or other
appropriate standard engineering 'n' value resources. Pipe capacities shall be determined by
methods acceptable to the municipality.
The Pennsylvania DEP, Chapter 105, Rules and Regulations, apply to the construction,
modification, operation or maintenance of both existing and proposed dams, water obstructions
and encroachments throughout the watershed. Criteria for design and construction of stormwater
management facilities according to this chapter may differ from the criteria that are used in the
permitting of dams under the Dam Safety Program.
Article IV. Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 187-19. General requirements.
For any of the regulated activities of this chapter, prior to the final approval of subdivision and/or land
development plans, or the issuance of any permit, or the commencement of any regulated earth
disturbance activity, the owner, subdivider, developer or his agent shall submit a drainage plan and
receive municipal approval of the plan.
§ 187-20. Exemptions.
Exemptions from the drainage plan requirements are as specified in § 187-6.
§ 187-21. Drainage plan contents.
The following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
General.
General description of project.
General description of proposed permanent stormwater controls.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 131/301
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
B.
(a)
(b)
(1)
C.
The name and address of the project site, the name and address of the owner of the property
and the name of the individual or firm preparing the drainage plan.
Map(s) of the project area showing:
The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or other identifiable landmarks.
Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot
contour intervals may be used. Off-site drainage areas impacting the project including
topographic detail.
Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the project area.
Other features including flood hazard boundaries, existing drainage swales, wetlands, closed
depressions, sinkholes and areas of natural vegetation to be preserved.
Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers and waterlines. The locations of all
existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers and waterlines within 50 feet of property lines
of the project site.
An overlay showing soil types and boundaries based on the Lehigh or Northampton County
Soil Survey, as applicable, latest edition. Any hydric soils present on the site should be
identified as such.
An overlay showing geologic types, boundaries and any special geologic features present on
the site.
Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot
contour intervals may be used.
Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the site.
Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent stormwater BMPs.
An adequate access easement around all stormwater BMPs that would provide municipal
ingress to and egress from a public right-of-way.
A schematic showing all tributaries contributing flow to the site and all existing man-made
features beyond the property boundary that would be affected by the project.
The location of all public water supply wells within 400 feet of the project and all private water
supply wells within 100 feet of the project.
Stormwater management controls and BMPs.
All stormwater management controls and BMPs shall be shown on a map and described,
including:
Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or trenches. When these
structures are used, the locations of septic tank infiltration areas and wells shall be
shown.
Other control devices or methods such as rooftop storage, semipervious paving
materials, grass swales, parking lot ponding, vegetated strips, detention or retention
ponds, storm sewers, etc.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 132/301
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
A.
All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the BMPs shall be shown.
All site testing data used to determine the feasibility of infiltration on a site.
All details and specifications for the construction of the stormwater management controls and
BMPs.
The BMP operations and management plan, as required in Article VII, describing how each
permanent stormwater BMP will be operated and maintained and the identity of the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance. A statement must be included, signed by the
landowner, acknowledging that the stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or
removed without approval by the municipality.
An environmental resources site design assessment that describes the following:
The extent to which the proposed grading and impervious cover avoid disturbance of
significant environmental resources and preserve existing site hydrology.
An assessment of whether alternative grading and impervious cover site design could lessen
the disturbance of significant environmental resources and/or make better use of the site
hydrologic resources.
A description of how the proposed stormwater management controls and BMPs serve to
mitigate any adverse impacts on environmental resources on the site. Significant
environmental resources considered in the site design assessment include, but are not limited
to, steep slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils, floodplains, riparian
vegetation, native vegetation and special geologic features.
§ 187-22. Plan submission.
For regulated activities specified in § 187-5A and B:
The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the Municipal Secretary (or other
appropriate person) as part of the preliminary plan submission for the subdivision or land
development.
Four copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
Distribution of the drainage plan will be as follows:
One copy to the municipal governing body.
One copy to the Municipal Engineer.
Two copies to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission, except for drainage plans
involving less than 10,000 square feet of additional impervious cover.
Drainage plans involving more than 10,000 square feet of additional impervious cover shall be
submitted by the developer (possibly through the municipality) to the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission as part of the preliminary plan submission. The Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission will conduct an advisory review of the drainage plan for consistency with the
Saucon Creek watershed stormwater management plan. The LVPC will not review details of
the erosion and sedimentation plan or the BMP operations and maintenance plan.
Two copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
The LVPC will provide written comments to the developer and the municipality, within a
time frame consistent with established procedures under the Municipalities Planning
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 133/301
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
Code, as to whether the drainage plan has been found to be consistent with the
stormwater management plan.
For regulated activities specified in § 187-5C and D, the drainage plan shall be submitted by the
developer to the municipal Building Permit Officer as part of the building permit application.
For regulated activities specified in § 187-5E, F and G:
The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission for coordination with the DEP permit application process under Chapter 105
(Dam Safety and Waterway Management), Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of DEP's
Rules and Regulations and the NPDES regulations.
One copy of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
Earthmoving for all regulated activities under § 187-5 shall be conducted in accordance with the
current federal and state regulations relative to the NPDES and DEP Chapter 102 regulations.
§ 187-23. Drainage plan review.
The municipality shall review the drainage plan, including the BMP operations and maintenance
plan, for consistency with the adopted Saucon Creek watershed stormwater management plan as
embodied by this chapter and with any permits issued by DEP. The municipality shall also review
the drainage plan against any additional storm drainage provisions contained in the municipal
Subdivision and Land Development or Zoning Ordinance, as applicable.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 195, Subdivision and Land Development, or Ch. 230, Zoning, respectively.
The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing whether the drainage plan, including the BMP
operations and maintenance plan, is approved.
The municipality shall not approve any subdivision or land development (Regulated activities,
§ 187-5A and B) or building permit application (Regulated activities § 187-5C and D) if the
drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with the stormwater management plan.
The municipality may require an "as-built survey" of all stormwater BMPs and an explanation of
any discrepancies with the drainage plan.
§ 187-24. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a proposed development site which involves a change
in control methods or techniques, or which involves the relocation or redesign of control measures, or
which is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the drainage plan (as
determined by the municipality) shall require a resubmission of the modified drainage plan consistent
with § 187-22, subject to review per § 187-23 of this chapter.
§ 187-25. Hardship waiver procedure.
The municipality may hear requests for waivers where it is alleged that the provisions of this
chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The waiver request shall be in writing and
accompanied by the requisite fee based upon a fee schedule adopted by the municipality. A copy
of the waiver request shall be provided to each of the following: Coopersburg Borough, the
Borough Engineer, the Borough Solicitor and the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission. The request
shall fully document the nature of the alleged hardship. The municipality may grant a waiver,
provided that all of the following findings are made in a given case:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 134/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular
property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not the
circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter, in the
stormwater management district in which the property is located;
That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the
property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter, including the
"no harm" provisions, and that the authorization of a waiver is therefore necessary to enable
the reasonable use of the property;
That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant;
That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum waiver that will afford relief and will
represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue; and
That financial hardship is not the criteria for granting of a hardship waiver.
In granting any waiver, the municipality may attach such conditions and safeguards as it may
deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter. If a hardship waiver is granted, the
applicant must still manage the quantity, velocity, direction and quality of resulting storm runoff as
is necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property.
For regulated activities described in § 187-5A and B, the Coopersburg Borough Council shall hear
requests for and decide on hardship waiver requests on behalf of the municipality.
For regulated activities in § 187-5C, D, E, F and G, the Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests
for and decide on hardship waiver requests on behalf of the municipality.
The municipality shall not waive the water quality provisions of this chapter.
Article V. Inspections
§ 187-26. Schedule of inspections.
DEP or its designees (e.g., County Conservation District) normally ensure compliance with any
permits issued, including those for stormwater management. In addition to DEP compliance
programs, the municipality or its designee may inspect all phases of the construction, operations,
maintenance and any other implementation of stormwater BMPs.
During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the municipality or its designee
determines that any BMPs are not being implemented in accordance with this chapter, the
municipality may suspend or revoke any existing permits issued by the municipality or other
approvals issued by the municipality until the deficiencies are corrected.
Article VI. Fees and Expenses
§ 187-27. General.
The municipality may charge a reasonable fee for review of the drainage plan, including the BMP
operations and maintenance plan, to defray review costs incurred by the municipality. The applicant
shall pay all such fees.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 135/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
§ 187-28. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
The review of the drainage plan, including the BMP operations and maintenance plan, by the
municipality.
The site inspection.
The inspection of required controls and improvements during construction.
The final inspection upon completion of the controls and improvements required in the plan.
Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any permit provisions regulated by this
chapter, correct violations, and assure the completion of stipulated remedial actions.
Administrative and clerical costs.
Article VII. Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance
Plan Requirements
§ 187-29. General requirements.
No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall commence until approval by
the municipality of the BMP operations and maintenance plan which describes how the permanent
(e.g., postconstruction) stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and maintained.
§ 187-30. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of
BMPs.
The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall establish responsibilities for
the continuing operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater BMPs, as follows:
If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately owned and in which streets,
sewers and other public improvements are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater
BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality;
If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single owner or if sewers and other public
improvements are to be privately owned and maintained, then the operation and maintenance
of stormwater BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner or private management entity.
The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing operations and maintenance
responsibilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject the operations and
maintenance responsibility for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
§ 187-31. Adherence to approved BMP operations and
maintenance plan.
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP required by an approved BMP
operations and maintenance plan or to allow the property to remain in a condition which does not
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 136/301
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
(1)
A.
conform to an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan unless an exception is granted in
writing by the municipality.
§ 187-32. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater BMPs.
The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance agreement with the municipality
covering all stormwater BMPs that are to be privately owned. The agreement shall be substantially
the same as the agreement in Appendix E of this chapter.[1]
Editor's Note: Appendix E is included at the end of this chapter.
Other items may be included in the agreement where determined by the municipality to be
reasonable or necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of all
permanent stormwater BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the
municipality.
§ 187-33. Stormwater management easements.
Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property owner if necessary for access
for inspections and maintenance or for preservation of stormwater conveyance, infiltration, detention
areas and other BMPs by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the easement shall
be specified in any agreement under § 187-32.
§ 187-34. Recording of approved BMP operations and
maintenance plan and related agreements.
The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed, constructed or implemented,
as described in the BMP operations and maintenance plan, shall record the following documents
in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Lehigh or Northampton County, as applicable, within 90
days of approval of the BMP.
The operations and maintenance plan or a summary thereof.
Operations and maintenance agreements under § 187-32.
Easements under § 187-33.
The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the project site upon discovery
of the failure of the owner to comply with this section.
§ 187-35. Municipal stormwater BMP operations and
maintenance fund.
If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the municipality for dedication, the municipality may require
the applicant to pay a specified amount to the municipal stormwater BMP operations and
maintenance fund to help defray costs of operations and maintenance activities. The amount may
be determined as follows:
If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the municipality, the amount shall cover the
estimated costs for operation and maintenance in perpetuity, as determined by the
municipality.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 137/301
(2)
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
B.
C.
D.
E.
The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual series values.
If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball field, lake), the municipality
may adjust the amount due accordingly.
Article VIII. Prohibitions
§ 187-36. Prohibited discharges.
No person in the municipality shall allow or cause to allow stormwater discharges into the
municipality's separate storm sewer system which are not composed entirely of stormwater except
as provided in Subsection B below or as allowed under a state or federal permit.
Discharges that may be allowed based on the municipality finding that the discharge(s) do not
significantly contribute pollution to surface waters of the commonwealth are listed below.
Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
Potable water sources including dechlorinated waterline and fire hydrant flushings.
Irrigation drainage.
Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents or other compounds.
Air-conditioning condensate.
Water from individual residential car washing.
Springs.
Water from crawl space pumps.
Uncontaminated water from foundation or footing drains.
Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
Lawn watering.
Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous materials have not
occurred (unless all spill material has been removed) and where detergents are not used.
Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
Uncontaminated groundwater.
In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges identified in § 187-36B
significantly contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth or is so notified by DEP, the
municipality will notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
Upon notice provided by the municipality under § 187-36C, the discharger will have a reasonable
time, as determined by the municipality, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under state law.
§ 187-37. Prohibited connections.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 138/301
(1)
(2)
A.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 187-36B above:
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows any
nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater and washwater to enter the
separate storm sewer system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor
drains and sinks.
Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the separate
storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records
and approved by the municipality.
§ 187-38. Roof drains.
Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers or roadside ditches, except
as provided in § 187-38B.
When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, connections of roof
drains to streets or roadside ditches may be permitted by the municipality.
Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to the maximum extent
practicable.
§ 187-39. Alteration of BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing stormwater BMP without the
written approval of the municipality unless it is part of an approved maintenance program.
No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into a stormwater BMP or within
a drainage easement, which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP, without the written
approval of the municipality.
Article IX. Right of Entry, Notification and Enforcement
§ 187-40. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials and with the consent of the landowner, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
municipality to inspect the implementation, condition or operation and maintenance of the
stormwater BMPs or to investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject property in regard to
any aspect regulated by this chapter.
In the event that the landowner refuses admission to the property, duly authorized representatives
of the municipality may seek an administrative search warrant issued by a district justice to gain
access to the property.
§ 187-41. Notification.
Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this chapter, the municipality may order compliance by written notice to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 139/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
B.
C.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the municipality intends
to take action.
The location of the property in violation.
The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges.
Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations.
The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the
restoration of any affected property.
Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
The implementation of stormwater BMPs.
Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a time limit for
correction of the violation(s). Said notice may further advise that, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done by the municipality or
designee and the expense thereof, together with all related lien and enforcement fees, charges
and expenses, shall be charged to the violator.
Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such person to the penalty provisions
of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the
municipality from pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
§ 187-42. Public nuisance.
The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public nuisance.
Each day that an offense continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 187-43. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by the municipality may be
suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the permit.
A violation of any provision of this chapter.
The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during construction or
development which constitutes or creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which endangers
the life or property of others.
A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the municipality when:
The municipality or designee has inspected and approved the corrections to the stormwater
BMPs or the elimination of the hazard or nuisance.
The municipality is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law or rule and regulation has
been corrected.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 140/301
(3)
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Payment of all municipal fees, costs and expenses related to or arising from the violation has
been made.
A permit or approval which has been revoked by the municipality cannot be reinstated. The
applicant may apply for a new permit under the procedures outlined in this chapter.
§ 187-44. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
municipality, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorney's fees incurred by the municipality as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If
the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the municipality may enforce the
judgment pursuant to a separate violation, unless the district justice, determining that there has
been a violation, further determines that there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership,
or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the
date of the determination of a violation by the district justice and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay upon causes shown, tolling
the per-diem judgment pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity
other than the municipality the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
section.
District justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought under this section.
In addition, the municipality, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive, mandamus or any other
appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court
of competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
§ 187-45. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee relevant to the provisions of this
chapter may appeal using the appeal procedures established in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
Chapter 191. Streets and Sidewalks
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Attachment 1 - Images
Article I. Sidewalk and Curb Construction
[Adopted 5-12-1987 by Ord. No. 416 (Ch. 21, Part 2 of the 1996 Code)]
§ 191-1. Duties of property owners.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 141/301
A.
B.
Whenever it shall be directed and required by the Council of the Borough of Coopersburg, it shall be
the duty of the owner or owners of the lot or lots of ground respectively fronting on the streets and
alleys of said Borough, and they are hereby enjoined and required to grade, pave and repair all
sidewalks on said streets and alleys and to construct and repair curbs and gutters at the edge of said
sidewalks, with such material and in such manner as hereinafter provided.
§ 191-2. Notice to construct.
The Borough Secretary shall give each such property owner no less than 60 days' notice and
opportunity to construct curb and sidewalk and make provision for such construction. In the event that
the property owner shall neglect or fail to complete construction or arrange for the completion of the
construction of curb and sidewalk, the Borough shall proceed with the same and place a lien for the
respective costs thereof against the property affected as provided by law.
§ 191-3. Permit fees.
[Amended 4-14-1992 by Ord. No. 474; 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
The Borough Secretary shall receive for the use of the Borough, from every owner of real estate
before a permit is issued for curbing, sidewalks and/or gutters, a permit fee as established from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
If a warrant of survey is required, additional fees, as established by resolution of Council will be
established.
§ 191-4. New sidewalk width.
The width of new sidewalks must be a minimum of five feet.
§ 191-5. Width of replacement sidewalks.
The width of all sidewalk replacement must be the greater of five feet or the width of the existing
sidewalk, except where the original sidewalk is less than five feet wide and Borough Council approves
the installation of a sidewalk less than five feet in width.
§ 191-6. New construction to be in cement concrete.
All new sidewalk, curb, handicap ramps and driveway aprons (that portion of the driveway from the
curb to the back or inside edge of the sidewalk) must be cement concrete and depressed curb must be
used for all driveway aprons.
§ 191-7. Planter strips.
Planter strips must be provided where required by Borough Council.
§ 191-8. Sidewalk block area requirements.
[Amended 3-21-2017 by Ord. No. 659]
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 142/301
[1]
[2]
All sidewalk blocks shall have a minimum area of 25 square feet and all sidewalk blocks greater than
100 square feet shall be reinforced with wire mesh.
§ 191-9. Curb expansion joints.
All curb sections shall be 10 feet in length and expansion joints shall be placed at intervals of 30 feet.
§ 191-10. Construction plan provided by Borough Engineer.
All sidewalk, curb, handicap ramps and driveway aprons must be constructed in accordance with the
attached details and must be approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 191-11. Plans available.
[Amended 3-21-2017 by Ord. No. 659[1]]
Accompanying this article are specimen plans for various types of construction prepared by Keystone
Consulting Engineers, Borough Engineer, dated August 23, 2016.[2] They shall become a part of this
article and are identified as follows:
Plan 1: Concrete Curb/Alternative Concrete Sidewalk Typical Sections
Plan 2: Standard Driveway Aprons
Editor’s Note: This ordinance also noted that the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg shall
adopt permit fees for curbing, sidewalks and/or gutters via separate resolution.
Editor's Note: The plans are included at the end of this chapter.
Article II. Street Excavations
[Adopted 10-10-1989 by Ord. No. 436 (Ch. 21, Part 1 of the 1996 Code)]
§ 191-12. Permit required.
In accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code and this article no opening or cut shall be made
within any Borough street for any purpose, whether it be to maintain, repair or install any gas pipe,
water pipe, sewer pipe, electrical conduits, or other piping, nor shall any telephone or electric light or
power poles, or any other impediments be erected upon or in any portion of a Borough street or rightof-
way except under conditions, restrictions, regulations and specifications for street repair as may be
prescribed by the Borough for such purpose.
§ 191-13. Applications for permit.
An application for a permit to cut or open a street shall be made on a form prescribed by the Borough
and submitted to the Borough in triplicate. The application shall be accompanied by the applicable
issuance and inspection fees in accordance with the Borough of Coopersburg schedule of fees for
roadway occupancy permits. In addition, the applicant shall provide three copies of a sketch showing
such dimensions as the location of the intended facility, width of the traveled roadway, right-of-way
lines and a dimension to the nearest intersecting street. If the applicant is proposing to detour traffic, a
detour plan must be submitted along with the application for review and approval by the Borough. Prior
to issuance of the permit, the applicant shall deposit security in a form acceptable to the Borough to be
held in a non-interest-bearing escrow account by the Borough to guarantee the restoration under or
within the road or right-of-way for a period of one year after completion of the work.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 143/301
§ 191-14. Issuance of permit.
A permit will be issued to the applicant after all the aforesaid documents have been filed and approved
and the appropriate security has been deposited.
§ 191-15. Notice of work commencement.
The applicant shall notify the Borough at least 48 hours prior to the commencement of work and shall
give written notice upon completion of the work.
§ 191-16. Inspections; correction of defective work.
Following completion of the work authorized by the permit, the Borough shall inspect the work and,
when necessary, enforce compliance with the conditions, restrictions, and regulations prescribed by
the permit. Where any settlement or defect in the work occurs within one year following the date of
completion, and if the applicant shall fail to rectify any such settlement or other defect within 10 days
after written notice from the Borough to do so, the Borough may do the work and shall deduct from the
security the cost thereof, together with an additional 20% of such cost. Any cost in excess of the
security shall be recoverable as provided by law. After the one-year maintenance period the applicant
shall request in writing by certified mail that the Borough return any undisbursed funds remaining in the
escrow account. Following a review of the account to determine the amount of the undisbursed funds,
the Borough shall return such remaining funds.
§ 191-17. Holes for survey markers.
Persons performing survey work which necessitates cutting hole(s) in the roadway pavement to find
property corners or other survey marks are exempt from the requirement of obtaining a street
occupancy permit. However, such persons are required to notify the Borough that such holes were
made and further to patch the holes with bituminous stockpile patching material or cold patch following
completion of the survey work.
§ 191-18. Establishment of fees.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Permit fees to cut or open public streets shall be established by Borough Council on the basis of the
purpose for the cut, the length of interruption of traffic and the danger inherent in making the cut or
excavation, the anticipated time and extent of inspection by Borough personnel of the intended cut,
and the prospect for necessary follow-up and maintenance. Such a fee schedule, as established from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council, shall be based upon reasonable rates, both
administrative and engineering, involved in such activity from the beginning of the application
procedure to a reasonable termination time determined in accordance with generally accepted
engineering practices.
§ 191-19. Civil penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any person, firm, corporation or utility which shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to civil proceedings for the collection of a judgment of not more than $600 and costs of action.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 144/301
§ 191-20. Work necessitating opening or excavation to be done
prior to street improvement and not until five years thereafter;
exception.
[Added 9-24-1996 by Ord. No. 512]
The Borough Secretary shall give timely notice to all persons owning property abutting any street
within the Borough about to be paved or improved and to all public utility companies operating in the
Borough, and all such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas or sewer connections,
as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the said street within 30 days
from the giving of such notice, unless such time is extended in writing for cause shown by the Borough
Council. New paving shall not be opened or excavated for a period of five years after the completion
thereof, except in case of emergency, the existence of which emergency and the necessity for the
opening or excavating of such paving to be determined by the Borough Council. If it is sought to
excavate upon or open a sewer within five years after the completion of the paving, applicant shall
make written application to the Borough Council, and a permit for such opening shall be issued only
after express approval of the Borough Council.
Article III. Sidewalk Maintenance
[Adopted 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 489 (Ch. 21, Part 3 of the 1996 Code)]
§ 191-21. Short title.
The short title of this article shall be the "Sidewalk Maintenance Ordinance."
§ 191-22. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section,
except in those instances where the context clearly indicates otherwise:
OWNER
Any person or persons holding an interest in the title to property abutting a street right-of-way. A
lessee in possession shall be considered as having "ownership" within the scope of this definition.
SIDEWALK AREA
That area of the public right-of-way adjacent to the curb or cartway which has been ordained for
pedestrian use.
STREET
Any public way or road, whether paved or not, with a right-of-way in excess of 20 feet, inclusive of
cartway and sidewalk area.
§ 191-23. Removal of ice and snow.
An owner of a lot fronting on, abutting or containing a sidewalk in a zoned district shall remove, or
cause to be removed, snow and/or ice from a path of at least 24 inches in width from any and all such
sidewalks within 16 hours after cessation of initial snowfall.
§ 191-24. Conditional postponement of removal.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 145/301
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
In the event that the accumulation of ice, snow, sleet or frozen rain, or any combination thereof, shall
be frozen sufficiently solid such as to preclude removal without damage to the sidewalk, the owner
shall, within the time specified in § 191-23, cause sufficient sand or other suitable abrasive material to
be spread upon the sidewalk such as to make pedestrian travel as safe as is reasonably possible.
§ 191-25. Prohibited snow and ice disposal.
Snow or ice removed from a sidewalk shall not be thrown or otherwise placed upon the cartway of a
street. Snow shall be placed in such a manner so as not to obstruct free passageway on any sidewalk
or street cartway.
§ 191-26. Encroachment of vegetation.
An owner shall not permit any form of vegetation, including but not limited to trees, shrubs,
bushes, hedges and/or ground cover to encroach into or upon the sidewalk area in any zoned
district after notice from the Borough to remove such encroachment.
To establish a wood place, or to pile or place any wood, bricks, stones, boards or other lumber or
any other items, upon any sidewalk, in any public street, or in any alley within this Borough,
excepting only where such materials are intended for building or repairing and then for said
purpose and in such manner as will not interfere with the free use of said sidewalks, streets or
alleys.
To suffer or permit any mud, sand, gravel, clay or other debris that may be washed or carried by
rains or flood upon any pavement or sidewalk in the said Borough, to remain thereon more than
16 working hours after the same shall have been deposited as aforesaid, and the owner of the
premises in front of which the same may be found shall be liable to the penalty hereinafter
prescribed for such offense.
§ 191-27. Remedial action by Borough.
In the event of the failure of an owner to comply fully with §§ 191-23, 191-25 and 191-26 hereof,
as applicable, the Mayor, his or her delegated representative, or the Secretary of the Board of
Health shall take appropriate steps such as to cause the necessary work to be done in order to
obtain compliance.
The Mayor, his or her delegated representative, or the Secretary of the Board of Health shall
ascertain and record the cost of securing compliance with this article as a result of the failure of
the owner to do so.
An owner whose failure to act makes it necessary that the Mayor, his or her delegated
representative, or the Secretary of the Board of Health cause remedial action to be taken in
accordance with this section shall be liable to the Borough for the actual cost of the work
performed (including appropriate overhead and tool-equipment rental, as applicant), plus a $10
administrative fee, except that in no event shall the total cost due under this section be less than
$20. Any and all costs which may become due and payable under this section are in addition to
any and all fines which may be levied under § 191-28, hereof.
§ 191-28. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 146/301
[1]
A.
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day a violation of this article
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 191-29. Continuing violation.
Any owner who, after being issued a citation for any violation of this article, shall continue to be in
violation of this article for an additional 24 hours, may be issued an additional citation for each and
every twenty-four-hour period for which the violation continues; and further, each and every citation so
issued is hereby deemed to constitute a separate violation and, if so adjudicated, a separate
conviction.
§ 191-30. Enforcement.
The Mayor, his or her delegated representative, or the Secretary of the Board of Health shall have the
authority to enforce this article. (Ord. 489, 10-12-1993, Art. B, 20)
Chapter 195. Subdivision and Land Development
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 5-8-2007 by Ord. No. 588.
Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 187.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 191.
Water — See Ch. 220.
Zoning — See Ch. 230.
Attachment 1 - Appendix A
Article I. Purpose, Authority, Title and Jurisdiction
§ 195-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate subdivision and land development in Coopersburg Borough,
Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
§ 195-2. Authority and title.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code[1] and may be cited
as the Coopersburg Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (SALDO).
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10101 et seq.
§ 195-3. Jurisdiction.
This chapter shall apply in the following circumstances:
To all subdivision and land development plans for property located in Coopersburg Borough
submitted after the effective date of this chapter.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 147/301
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a proposed development site which involves a
change in control methods or techniques, or which involves the relocation or redesign of control
measures, or which is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the
drainage plan (as determined by the Municipal Engineer) shall require a resubmission of the
modified drainage plan consistent with this chapter.
§ 195-4. Application.
No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall be made, and no street,
sanitary sewer, water main, gas, or electric transmission line, or other improvements in connection
therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or travel or for the
common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in accordance with this chapter.
No lot in a proposed subdivision or land development may be sold, and no final permit to erect any
building upon land in a subdivision or land development may be issued unless and until a final
plan has been approved and recorded and either Coopersburg Borough has been assured by
means of an improvements agreement acceptable to the Borough that the improvements will
subsequently be installed or the required improvements in connection therewith have been
constructed.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, including waiver provisions, any landowner and
any person engaged in the alteration or development of land which may affect stormwater runoff
characteristics shall implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to
health, safety or other property. Such measures shall include such actions as are required to
manage the rate, volume and direction of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise
adequately protects health and property from possible injury.
Article II. Submission Procedures
§ 195-5. Feasibility review submission.
Feasibility review maps and materials may be submitted for any proposed subdivisions and land
developments, for purposes of discussion between the Coopersburg Borough Council and the
developer.
Three copies of all feasibility review maps and materials, as set forth in § 195-12, shall be
submitted to the staff.
The staff shall refer one copy of the feasibility review maps and materials to the planning
Committee and the Borough Engineer for their review and recommendations.
§ 195-6. Feasibility review.
When feasibility review maps and materials have been submitted to the planning Committee, the
data presented will be reviewed by that body at its next regular meeting.
The Coopersburg Borough Council shall review the feasibility review data to determine the
development potential of the site, as indicated by the natural features analysis presented. The
general development concepts of the developer will be reviewed to determine their compatibility
with the development potential of the site and with relevant plans and ordinances. Also, the
feasibility review stage is designed to offer the developer an opportunity to informally discuss his
plans for the proposed subdivision or land development with the Borough Council.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 148/301
C.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
A.
Within 60 days of submission of feasibility review maps and materials to the Coopersburg Borough
Council, the Council shall make any recommendations to the developer which it deems necessary
or advisable in the public interest in order to provide an acceptable subdivision or land
development plan for the site. The staff shall send written recommendations of the Council's
recommendations to the applicant.
§ 195-7. Submission of the preliminary plan.
Applications, preliminary plans and all required supplementary data for all proposed subdivisions
and land developments shall be submitted to the staff at least 21 days prior to the meeting of the
Coopersburg Borough Council at which the application is to be considered . Only one subdivision
or land development plan may be submitted at one time. Additional submissions for the same
parcel will invalidate the previous submissions.
Official submission of a preliminary plan to the staff by a developer shall comprise of the following:
(Submissions which do not include the material specified in the following subsections shall not be
accepted as an official submission.)
Five copies of a completed Subdivision and Land Development Application.
Five black-on-white or blue-on-white prints on paper of the preliminary plan which shall fully
comply with the provisions of this chapter as set forth in § 195-13.
Five copies all required supplemental information as set forth in § 195-13F.
The review fees and escrow shall be submitted as set forth in the current fee schedule.
The staff shall refer preliminary plan submission materials to the various review bodies as needed.
The developer shall submit the preliminary plan to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission for
review and comment.
Supplemental submissions are permitted subject to the following provisions:
The supplemental submission shall consist of five complete sets of the plans, five copies of
any revised supporting documentation, a completed and executed application form which
notes the submission as a supplemental submission and a written summary of the changes
made. The summary of the changes made shall refer to the staff and other reviews to which
the changes are responding.
The submission shall be received at least 14 days prior to the date of the next meeting of the
Coopersburg Borough Council at which the application is to be considered.
Supplemental submissions which do not comply with the requirements of § 195-7E(1) shall
not be accepted for review. The submission of a final plan application will not be considered
as a supplemental submission.
§ 195-8. Review of preliminary plan.
By the Coopersburg Borough Council:
When a preliminary plan has been officially submitted, such plan shall be placed on the agenda of
the planning Committee for review at its next meeting, provided that such official submission has
occurred after approval of the submittal by the Borough Council.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 149/301
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
F.
G.
Within 90 days following the date of the meeting of the planning Commission next following the
date of the acceptance of the application by the Borough Council, the planning Committee shall, in
accordance with the provisions of relevant ordinances, take action by recommending approval,
conditional approval or disapproval of the preliminary plan and document the findings upon which
that action is based, in writing to:
The applicant or his engineer;
The Borough Council.
In no case shall the decision be communicated to the applicant in more than 15 days from the
date that the decision has been made.
§ 195-9. Submission of the final plan.
Within 12 months after approval of the preliminary plan, a final subdivision or land development
plan and all required supplemental data shall be submitted to the staff at least 14 days prior to the
meeting of the Coopersburg Borough Council at which the application is to be considered. An
extension of time may be granted by the Borough Council upon written request. Otherwise, the
plan submitted may be considered as a new preliminary plan and must adhere to current
ordinances.
The final plan shall conform in all significant respects to the preliminary plan as previously
approved by the Coopersburg Borough Council and shall incorporate all modifications required by
the Borough Council in its preliminary plan approval.
The final plan may be submitted in sections or stages, each covering a reasonable portion of the
entire proposed subdivision as shown on the reviewed preliminary plan, in accordance with the
regulations set forth in § 195-14. In the case of the final subdivision or land development plan
which is to be submitted in sections or stages over a period of years, the time between submission
of application for final approval of each stage or section shall be no greater than 12 months.
Final plans and all required supplementary data set forth in § 195-14 for all proposed subdivisions
and land developments shall be submitted to the staff.
Official submission of a final plan to the staff by a developer shall comprise of the following:
(submissions which do not include the material specified in the following subsections shall not be
accepted as an official submission.)
Five copies of a completed Subdivision and Land Development Application;
Five black-on-white or blue-on-white prints on paper of the final plan which shall fully comply
with the provisions of this chapter as set forth in § 195-14;
Five copies of all required supplemental information as set forth in § 195-14;
The review fee and escrow as set forth in the current fee schedule.
The staff shall refer final plan submission materials to the various review bodies as needed.
The developer shall submit the final plan to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission for review and
comment.
§ 195-10. Review of final plan.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 150/301
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
When a final plan has been officially submitted, such plan shall be placed on the agenda of the
planning Committee for review at its next meeting, provided that such official submission has
occurred no less than 14 calendar days prior to such regular meeting.
Within 90 days following the date of the meeting of the planning Committee, the planning
Committee shall, in accordance with the provisions of relevant ordinances, take action by
recommending approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the final plan and document the
findings upon which that action is based, in writing to:
The applicant or his engineer;
The Borough Council.
In no case shall the decision be communicated to the applicant in more than 15 days from the
date that the decision has been made.
§ 195-11. Recording of the final plan.
After the final plan is approved by the Borough Council, the applicant shall provide one Mylar
reproducible print and four paper prints of the final plan to the staff for endorsement.
The record plan shall be a clear and legible print of a type and material required by the County
Recorder of Deeds.
After the Borough Engineer and Borough Council has endorsed the record plan, the plan will be
recorded with the Lehigh County Recorder of Deeds within 90 days of the approval.
Article III. Plan Requirements
§ 195-12. Feasibility review.
The feasibility review submission shall include the following maps and materials:
A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being subdivided, drawn at a scale not smaller
than one inch equals 2,000 feet and showing the relation of the property, differentiated by tone or
pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads and municipal boundaries existing within one
mile of any part of the property. The key map may be based on USGS quad sheet maps.
A map illustrating an analysis of natural drainage patterns and water resources within the
proposed subdivision tract, including delineation of streams, natural drainage swales, ponds and
lakes, wetlands, floodplains subject to a one-hundred-year flood frequency, and permanent and
seasonal high water table areas. The map shall be based on USGS quad sheets, county soil
survey maps, and the flood boundary and floodway map from the Municipal Flood Insurance
Study, when available.
A topographic map of the site based on USGS quad sheets.
A map delineating additional significant physical features within the proposed subdivision tract,
such as woodland areas, large trees, rock outcroppings and scenic views. The map may be based
on USGS quad sheets and on-site survey work.
Where feasible and legible, the analysis involved in Subsections A through D may be illustrated on
one or a combination of composite maps. The combined impact of the natural characteristics upon
the development potential of the tract shall be clearly illustrated on the map or maps.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 151/301
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
D.
A letter of intent and a sketch of the proposed subdivision or land development tract at a scale of
one inch equals 100 feet explaining and illustrating the developer's general development concepts
for the tract. The type of development, density of development, form of ownership, circulation
patterns, and means of providing major utility service should be explained and illustrated. The
sketch may be based on deed and tax map information.
§ 195-13. Preliminary plan.
The preliminary plan of a proposed subdivision or land development shall be clearly and legibly
drawn at one of the following scales:
One inch equals 100 feet;
One inch equals 50 feet;
One inch equals 20 feet; and
One inch equals 10 feet.
The original drawing and all submitted prints shall be made on sheets of one of the following sets
of dimensions:
Eighteen inches by 24 inches;
Twenty-four inches by 36 inches;
Thirty-six inches by 48 inches.
If the preliminary plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram illustrating relative location of
the several sections shall be drawn on each sheet.
The preliminary plan shall indicate the following data:
Name and address of record owner;
Name of developer if different from owner;
Name of the proposed subdivision;
Name of the municipality or municipalities within which subdivision is proposed;
Names of all adjoining subdivisions, if any, and the names of owners of all adjacent unplatted
land;
Name, address, license number, and seal of the registered surveyor responsible for the
subdivision plan. The surveyor shall sign a statement attesting to the accuracy of the survey.
North point, graphic scale, written scale, and date including the month, day and year that the
original drawing was completed, and the month, day and year that the original drawing was
revised, for each revision;
A key map, for the purpose of locating the property being subdivided, drawn at a scale not
smaller than one inch equals 2,000 feet and showing the relationship of the property,
differentiated by tone or pattern, to adjoining property and to all streets, roads, and municipal
boundaries, within one mile of any part of the property;
Total tract boundaries of the property being subdivided showing bearings and distances, and
a statement of total acreage of the property;
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 152/301
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)
(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
E.
Tax map sheet, block and lot numbers within the proposed subdivision tract obtained from the
County tax assessor's office;
The zoning district or districts within which the proposed subdivision is located;
All existing buildings or other structures within the proposed subdivision tract;
All existing streets, including streets of record (recorded but not constructed), on or adjoining
the tract, including names, right-of-way widths, and pavement widths;
All existing sewer lines, septic systems, storm sewers, waterlines, wells, fire hydrants, utility
transmission lines, culverts, bridges, railroads, other man-made features, watercourses and
wetlands within the proposed subdivision tract and immediately adjacent to the subdivision
tract;
Location, width, and purpose of existing easements and utility rights-of-way within the
proposed subdivision tract;
Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than two feet for land with average natural slope
of 5% or less, and at intervals of not more than five feet for land with average natural slope
exceeding 5%. Location and elevation of the data to which contour elevations refer shall be
the closest United States Geologic Survey established benchmark, where available;
A signature block for the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission approval of the subdivision;
The following owner's statement shall be placed on the plan. The owner(s) shall execute the
statement before a notary public. The seal of the notary public acknowledging the owner(s)
statement shall be impressed on the plan. The statement shall read, "We (I), the owners of
this plat of land being duly sworn according to law, depose and say we (I) are (am) the sole
owner(s) of this property in peaceful possession of it and there are no suits pending affecting
title of same;"
Proposed locations of wells (if any), proposed locations of subsurface disposal fields and
alternate fields (if any), and the locations of percolation test holes and soil probe pits (if any);
A signature block, executed by the applicant, shall read "The applicant hereby authorizes the
Borough staff to enter upon and inspect the site for the purposes of conducting a review and
determining consistency with the requirements of the Coopersburg Borough SALDO during
the pendency of the application before the Borough;"
Significant natural features including but not limited to floodplains, ponds and lakes, wooded
areas and trees of greater than eight inches in caliper. Floodplain information shall delineate
the bounds of the one-hundred-year floodplain, floodway and flood fringe.
The full plan of proposed development, including:
Location and width of all streets and rights-of-way, with a statement of any conditions
governing their use;
Suggested street names;
Utility easement locations;
Building setback lines along each street;
Lot lines with approximate dimensions;
A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots and parcels;
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 153/301
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(1)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
[a]
[b]
[1]
[2]
(c)
(2)
(3)
F.
Lot numbers, a statement of total number of lots and parcels and the lot size in square feet or
acres for each lot;
Sanitary and/or storm sewers (and other drainage facilities), with the size and material of
each indicated, and any proposed connections with existing facilities;
Parks, playgrounds and other areas dedicated or reserved for public or common use, with any
conditions governing such use;
Location, width, and purpose of proposed easements and utility rights-of-way;
Copies of the proposed deed restrictions and protective and restrictive covenants referenced
to the preliminary plan;
A contour grading plan.
The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by the following supplementary data unless the
Borough Engineer has determined that the submission of such data is not necessary:
Preliminary profiles, typical cross sections and specifications for proposed street, sanitary
sewer, water system improvements, and storm drainage in accordance to the design
standards of §§ 195-18, 195-19, 195-20 and 195-21, respectively.
A storm drainage plan for the proposed subdivision tract which includes the following in
addition to the requirements of §§ 195-13D and E:
A narrative with a general description of the proposed subdivision and/or land
development and a general description of proposed permanent stormwater controls.
Maps of the project area showing:
Soil types and boundaries based on the Lehigh County Soil Survey.
Proposed structures, paved areas and buildings.
Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the site.
A schematic showing all tributaries contributing flow to the site and all existing manmade
features beyond the property boundary that would be affected by the project.
Stormwater management controls:
All stormwater management controls must be shown on a map and described,
including:
Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or trenches. When
these structures are used, the locations of septic tank infiltration areas and wells
must be shown.
Other control devices or methods such as rooftop storage, semipervious paving
materials, grass swales, parking lot ponding, vegetated strips, detention or
retention ponds, storm sewer, etc.
All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the control device or
method must be shown.
A landscape plan, where applicable, according to the standards set forth in § 195-24B(4),
Tree preservation and planting;
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 154/301
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(a)
(b)
(9)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
(b)
(10)
In the case of subdivisions or land development plans to be developed in stages or sections
over a period of time, a map delineating each stage or section of the proposed subdivision or
land development consecutively numbered so as to illustrate phasing of development and a
schedule indicating the approximate time for which application for final approval of each stage
or section are intended to be filed;
Preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts which may be required. Such designs shall
meet all applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Division of Dams and Encroachments and/or the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation;
A map illustrating the entire contiguous holdings of the landowner indicating the area or scope
of ultimate proposed subdivision and delineating the area which the preliminary plan
encompasses;
A sketch map of the proposed road system for the remainder of the area not included in the
preliminary plan;
When water service to the proposed subdivision is to be provided by an existing public
system, the developer shall submit one copy of a letter from the agency, authority or utility
which agrees to extend water service, subject to the execution of a service agreement.
Certification of sewage disposal systems.
When sewage disposal service to the proposed subdivision is to be provided by an
existing public system, the developer shall submit one copy of a letter from the agency,
authority or utility which agrees to provide sewer service subject to the execution of a
service agreement.
When sewage disposal service for the proposed subdivision is to be by individual on-lot
sewage disposal systems, the applicant shall submit two copies of the Borough Sewage
Enforcement Officer's approval of the planning module.
Whenever a subdivision or land development or part thereof is in an area of carbonate
geology as mapped in Map 1, the following provisions shall apply:
A recognized professional with competence in the field shall review aerial photographs,
soils, geologic and other related data available to him or her, as the data relates to the
subject property. The professional shall also conduct a site inspection of the property.
Based on the work required in § 195-13F(10)(a), the professional shall prepare a map of
the site showing all Karst features or feature indicators. The mapping shall indicate, but
shall not be limited to, the following features:
Closed depressions;
Open sinkholes;
Seasonal high water table indicators;
Outcrops of bedrock;
Unplowed areas in plowed fields;
Surface drainage into ground;
"Ghost lakes" after rainfall.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 155/301
(c)
(d)
(e)
(11)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(12)
Based upon the work performed in § 195-13F(10)(a), the professional shall determine
what further testing should be done by the applicant to ensure compliance with the
performance standards set forth in § 195-24D. Testing methodology shall be reasonable
under the circumstances, including the scale of the proposed development and the
hazards revealed by examination of available data and site inspection.
The applicant shall cause the additional testing established in § 195-13F(10)(c) to be
done. The test results shall be included with the submission and shall be referred to the
Borough Engineer, who shall be a recognized professional with competence in the field.
The Borough Engineer shall report to the Council, with a copy to the landowner, his or
her opinion as to the adequacy of the study and as to the capability of the site to support
the proposed development in a manner in which the risks attendant to development in
carbonate areas are either eliminated or minimized. Recommendations for site
development, including stormwater management, the layout of utility lines, and building
location, may be included. Additional studies or testing as deemed necessary by the
Borough Engineer in order to produce an adequate study given the scale of the proposed
development and the hazards revealed may be required of the applicant.
If the subdivision or land development includes wetlands or hydric soils, the applicant shall
submit either a written determination from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers that the area
does not contain wetlands, or copies of permits for the proposed activity from the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers pursuant to Sections 9 and 10 of the River and Harbor Act of 1899,
Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, and Section 103 of the Marine Protection Research and
Sanctuaries Act and from the Pennsylvania. Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to the Dam Safety and Encroachments Act. A copy of any wetlands study prepared
for the property, including a study prepared for the use of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
or the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection shall be submitted.
A traffic impact study and report shall be required for proposed developments that meet one
or more of the following criteria: Commercial, commercial building or buildings consisting of
10,000 square feet or more of total floor area; office, development consisting of 50,000
square feet or more of total floor area; industrial, development consisting of 50,000 square
feet or more of total floor area; other, use generating 250 or more trips per day as determined
by generation rates published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers Traffic Impact
Study. The study will enable the Borough Council to assess the impact of a proposed
development on the traffic system. Its purpose is to ensure that proposed developments do
not adversely affect the traffic network and to identify any traffic problems associated with
access from the site onto the existing roads. The study's purpose is also to delineate
solutions to potential problems and to present improvements to be incorporated into the
proposed development. Traffic impact reports shall be based on the following criteria:
General site description. The site description shall include the size, location, proposed
land uses, construction, staging and completion date or types of dwelling units. A brief
description of other major existing and proposed land developments within 1/2 mile of the
proposal which shall constitute the study area.
Traffic facilities description. The description shall contain a full documentation of the
proposed internal and existing highway system. The report shall describe the external
roadway system within the area. Major intersections in the area shall be identified and
diagrammed. All future highway improvements which are part of proposed surrounding
developments shall be noted and included in the calculations.
Existing traffic conditions. Existing traffic conditions shall be measured and documented
for all streets and intersections in the area. Existing traffic volumes for average daily
traffic, peak highway hour(s) traffic and peak development-generated hour(s) traffic shall
be recorded. Traffic counts at major intersections in the study area shall be included in
the report. A volume/capacity analysis based upon existing volumes shall be performed
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 156/301
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
during the peak highway hour(s) and the peak development-generated hour(s) for all
streets and major intersections in the study area. Levels of service shall be determined
for each major road segment and turning movement. Detailed traffic counts of existing
local streets are not required, unless the Borough Council would so require. A tabulation
of accident locations during the past five-year period shall be shown.
Traffic impact of the development. Estimation of vehicular trips to result from the proposal
shall be computed from the average daily peak highway hour(s). Vehicular trip generation
rates to be used for this calculation shall be obtained from the Trip Generation Manual
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. These development-generated
traffic volumes shall be provided for the inbound and outbound traffic movements, as
estimated, and the reference source(s) and methodology followed shall be documented.
All turning movements shall be calculated. These generated volumes shall be distributed
to the area and assigned to the existing streets and intersections throughout the area.
Documentation of all assumptions used in the distribution and assignment phase shall be
provided. Traffic volumes shall be assigned to individual access points. Any
characteristics of the site that will cause particular trip generation problems shall be
noted.
Analysis of traffic impact. The total future traffic demand shall be calculated. This demand
shall consist of the combination of the existing traffic expanded to the completion year
(straight line projections based on historical data), the development-generated traffic and
the traffic generated by other proposed development is anticipated; calculations for each
stage of completion shall be made. This analysis shall be performed during the peak
highway hour(s) for all roadways and major intersections in the study area.
Volume/capacity calculations shall be completed for all major intersections. All access
points shall be examined as to the necessity of installing traffic signals. This evaluation
shall compare the projected traffic to state warrant regulations for traffic signal
installation.
Conclusions and recommendations. Levels of service for all streets and intersections
shall be listed. All streets and/or intersections showing a level of service below C shall be
considered deficient, and specific recommendations for the elimination of these problems
shall be listed. This listing of recommended improvements shall include, but not be
limited to, the following elements: internal circulation design, site access location and
design, external roadway and intersection design and improvements, traffic signal
installation and operation including signal timing. All physical street improvements shall
be shown in sketches.
Costs of needed projects. Approximate costs for all needed transportation improvements
shall be developed within a defined impact area.
The project manager for any traffic impact report shall be a professional traffic engineer
or transportation planner, who should be a member of the Institute for Transportation
Engineering.
The Borough Council may combine contributions for traffic impact studies from more than
one applicant to accomplish one major coordinated traffic study.
Applicant's responsibilities. The applicant shall respond to the traffic impact report by
stating to what degree he/she is willing to assist in funding any off-site improvements that
are needed and to state what on-site improvements he/she proposes.
Future stages of development. The traffic study shall include not only an analysis of one
individual project proposed at one point in time, but also the overall projected impacts of
future development of all nearby lands owned by the applicant or that the applicant has
an option to purchase. The study shall include a projection of the traffic expected from
this development, using reasonable alternatives if no definite plans are available.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 157/301
(l)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
C.
(a)
(1)
D.
Other proposed development. The study should also take in account traffic that can be
expected as a result of other development which has been approved or is being reviewed
by the Commission and other development that might reasonably be expected to occur.
§ 195-14. Final plans.
The final plans shall conform to the standards and data requirements set forth for preliminary
plans in § 195-13A through E this chapter.
It shall not be necessary to resubmit supporting maps and data submitted with the preliminary
plan, as set forth in § 195-13F of this chapter, provided that no change has occurred.
The following additional data shall be illustrated on the final plan:
The latest source of title to the land as shown by the deed, page number and book of the
County Recorder of Deeds;
The total tract boundary lines of the area being subdivided with accurate distances to
hundredths of a foot and bearing to 15 seconds. These boundaries shall be determined by
accurate survey in the field, to an error of closure not to exceed one foot in 10,000 feet. The
tract boundary shall be subsequently closed and balanced. The boundary(s) adjoining
additional unplatted land of the subdivider (for example, between separately-submitted final
plan sections), however, are not required to be based upon field survey and may be
calculated. The location of all boundary line (perimeter) monuments shall be indicated, along
with a statement of the total area of the property being subdivided. In addition, the engineer or
surveyor shall certify to the accuracy of the survey, the drawn plan, and the placement of the
monuments;
All lot lines shall be completely dimensioned in feet, if straight, and by designating length of
arc and radius (in feet) and central angle (in degrees, minutes, and seconds), if curved. All
internal angles within the lots shall be designated to within 15 seconds;
The proposed building setback or the proposed placement of each building;
All easements or rights-of-way where provided for or owned by public services and any
limitations on such easements or rights-of-way. Rights-of-way shall be shown and accurately
identified on the plan. Easements shall either be shown or specifically described on the plan.
Easements should be located in cooperation with the appropriate public utilities;
Such private deed restrictions as may be imposed upon the property as a condition to sale,
together with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may affect the title to
the land being subdivided;
Space shall be left along the lower edge of the sheet, in order that the County Recorder of
Deeds may acknowledge receipt and recording of the plan when it is presented;
If the final plan requires more than one sheet, a key diagram showing the relative location of
the several sections shall be drawn on each sheet.
The final plan shall be accompanied by the following:
Plans showing:
Location, size and invert elevation of all sanitary sewer, water distribution and storm
drainage systems and the location of all manholes, inlets and culverts;
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 158/301
(b)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
Final profiles, cross sections, and specifications for proposed streets, sanitary sewers,
water distribution systems, and storm drainage systems shall each be shown on one or
more separate sheets.
Documentation from the Borough Sewage Enforcement Officer that each lot has been
approved for on-lot sewage systems (where applicable).
A copy of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection acceptance or approval
of the planning module (where applicable).
A copy of the permit granted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for
a private centralized sanitary sewer system, where applicable.
A copy of the highway occupancy permit for any road or driveway requiring access to a state
legislated route.
A copy of a permit granted by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection for a
private centralized water system (where applicable).
A completed and executed copy of the subdivision improvements agreement as agreed upon
by the developer and the Borough Council, public utility or municipal authority. The Borough
Council shall find, upon review of the executed improvements agreement, that the agreement
covers all public improvements specified on the subdivision plan and that the agreement is
enforceable. Should the improvements agreement not meet these criteria, this requirement
shall be considered to be unmet.
A performance guarantee in the amount of 110% of the cost of all required improvements, as
set forth in § 195-27, as estimated in accordance with the provisions set forth in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, in a form and with surety in
accordance with the provisions set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, and acceptable to the Borough Solicitor, guaranteeing the construction and
installation of all such improvements within a stated period which shall not be longer than one
year from the date of the final subdivision approval. Where the final plan is submitted in
stages or sections, the amount of the guarantee may also be provided in stages if acceptable
to the municipal governing body, public utility or municipal authority.
A maintenance guarantee in an amount of not less than 15% of the actual cost of the
installation of the improvements as set forth in § 195-27. This guarantee assures the
structural integrity of the improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final plat for a period not to
exceed 18 months after the acceptance of all such improvements by the Borough, public
utility, or municipal authority.
An erosion and sedimentation control plan developed in accordance with Part IV, paragraph
44 of the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual issued by the Department of
Environmental Protection.
A legal description of all areas offered for dedication.
A copy of an opinion of title from a title insurance company or an attorney which sets forth the
names of all owners of the property, and a list of all mortgages, judgments, liens, easements,
contracts and agreements of record as filed in the Lehigh County Recorder of Deeds Office
which affect the property being acted upon.
When an agency, authority or utility providing sewer or water service to the subdivision or
land development has approval authority under its own jurisdiction, a letter which indicates
that the plans meet the relevant agency, authority or utility specifications shall be submitted.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 159/301
E.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
In the case of a subdivision or land development proposed to be developed in stages or sections
over a period of years, final plan requirements as listed in § 195-14A through D shall apply only to
the stage or section for which final approval is being sought. However, the final plan presented for
the stage or section must be considered as it relates to information presented for the entire
subdivision or land development in the application for preliminary approval.
Article IV. Design Standards
§ 195-15. Application.
The design standards and requirements outlined in this section will be utilized by the Borough
Council in determining the adequacy of all plans for proposed subdivisions and land
developments.
Development shall be planned, reviewed and carried out in conformance with all municipal, state
and other applicable laws and regulations.
Whenever provisions of this chapter conflict with the provisions of other ordinances and
regulations, the most restrictive provisions shall apply.
§ 195-16. General standards.
Land shall be suited to the purpose for which it is to be subdivided. Land with unsafe or hazardous
conditions, such as open quarries, unconsolidated fill, steep slopes, or floodprone areas, shall not
be subdivided unless the subdivision plan provides for adequate safeguards which are approved
by the Coopersburg Borough Council.
Consideration shall be given to applicable provisions of the Borough Comprehensive Plan and the
LVPC's Comprehensive Plan for Lehigh and Northampton Counties, emphasizing future school
sites, recreation sites, water supply and sewage treatment systems, highway alignments, and
other public facilities. However, consideration must be given to the need for the facilities and
utilities mentioned above whether or not they are proposed as part of a comprehensive plan.
The development of the proposed subdivision shall be coordinated with adjacent existing
development so that the area, as a whole, may develop harmoniously.
These design standards and requirements may be altered by the Land and Subdivision
Committee for the purpose of achieving economy and ingenuity in design in accordance with
modern and evolving principles of site planning and development, upon presentation of evidence
that the intent of such standards shall be substantially achieved.
§ 195-17. Block and lot design standards.
Block layout. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
Provisions of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed;
Zoning requirements;
Topography;
Requirements for safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including the
reduction of intersections with arterial streets.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 160/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
(6)
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
F.
Block length.
Residential blocks shall ordinarily be no less than 500 feet in length and no more than 1,800
feet in length.
In the design of blocks longer than 1,000 feet, special consideration shall be given to the
requirements of satisfactory fire protection.
Where practicable, blocks along arterial and collector streets shall not be less than 1,000 feet
in length.
Block depth. Single-family residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers
of lots; except the Borough Council may approve a single tier of lots in the following cases:
Where reverse frontage lots are required; or
Where two tiers of lots are not possible due to the size, topographical conditions or other
inherent conditions of the property.
Commercial and industrial blocks. Blocks in commercial, industrial, multifamily and planned
residential developments may vary from the elements of design detailed above if required by the
nature of the use. In all cases, however, adequate provisions shall be made for traffic and
pedestrian circulation, off-street parking, and loading areas.
General lot design standards.
Within the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, the size, shape and orientation of lots shall
be appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated.
Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to
curved street lines.
Where feasible, lot lines shall follow municipal boundaries rather than cross them in order to
avoid jurisdictional problems.
Generally, the depth of single-family detached residential lots shall be not less than one nor
more than three times their width.
Depth and width of parcels intended for nonresidential uses shall be adequate for the use
proposed and sufficient to provide satisfactory space for on-site parking, loading and
unloading, setbacks and landscaping.
If after subdividing there exists remnants of land, they shall be either:
Incorporated in existing or proposed lots; or
Legally dedicated to public use, if acceptable to the municipality.
Lot access.
Direct access onto arterial roads and numbered traffic routes shall be minimized.
Direct access onto an arterial road or a numbered traffic route shall be prohibited where
adequate alternative access can be obtained from a collector road, local road or alley.
Access to two or more abutting residential properties shall be provided by a shared
driveway unless the applicant demonstrates that such access is impractical.
A maximum of one access point per property involving a left-hand turn exiting a
nonresidential property onto an arterial road or a numbered traffic route shall be
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 161/301
[1]
[2]
(d)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
(a)
(b)
(5)
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
(b)
(6)
(7)
permitted.
Parking lots and internal driveways for nonresidential development shall support access
management objectives along arterial roads and numbered traffic routes.
Shared parking lots and driveways connecting adjacent parking lots for
nonresidential uses shall be used whenever practical.
The distance between the intersection of the access road with the arterial road or a
numbered traffic route and the intersection of the access road with other internal
access roads shall be maximized to the extent possible.
Where access is permitted to a state road or highway, authorization from the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation must be proven by the display of a valid highway occupancy
permit. Driveways to single-family residences shall intersect streets at angles of no less than
60°. All other driveways or access roads shall intersect streets at right angles, where
practicable, and in no case less than 75°.
Widths of access roads or driveways shall be in accordance with the following standards:
Access roads for multifamily residential, mobile home parks and all nonresidential
subdivisions shall be no less than 24 feet in width, shall not exceed 30 feet in width at the
street line, and shall be clearly defined by use of curbing;
Driveways for single-family residential subdivisions shall be no less than 10 feet in width
but shall not exceed 20 feet in width at the street line.
To provide safe and convenient ingress and egress, access road and driveway entrances
shall be rounded at the following minimum radii, except when a curb depression is provided.
Access road entrances for multifamily residential developments, mobile home parks, and
all nonresidential subdivisions shall be rounded at a minimum radius of 10 feet;
Driveway entrances for single-family residences shall be rounded at a minimum radius of
five feet except along legislated routes where a ten-foot radius is required.
Access road grades or driveway grades shall not exceed the following grades:
Twelve percent between the future street right-of-way line and any other point within the
confines of the lot being served;
Five percent in a leveling area extending 40 feet from the intersection of the Access road
or driveway with the cartway of the street.
The center line of an access road or driveway at the point of access to a street shall not be
located closer to an intersection of street center lines than the following distances:
Fifty feet for single-family residential units.
For multifamily residential developments, mobile home parks, and all nonresidential
subdivisions:
One hundred fifty feet if either street is an arterial street;
One hundred feet if either street is a collector street;
Fifty feet if both streets are local streets.
Vehicular access shall be available to all lots directly from an ordained public street. This
requirement shall not apply to individual condominium units where such units are contained in
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 162/301
(a)
(b)
(8)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
G.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A.
an approved condominium development.
Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all intersections of driveways with streets, except
alleys. Within such triangles, no object greater than 2 1/2 feet in height and no other object
that would obscure the vision of the motorist shall exist or be placed. The triangles shall be
measured as follows:
Along the center line of the driveway from a point 10 feet from where the driveway meets
the cartway of the road, to points along the center line of the road 200 feet on each side
from the intersecting center lines of the driveway and road, if the road is classified as a
local road.
Along the center line of the driveway, from a point 10 feet from where the driveway meets
the cartway of the road, to points along the center line of the road 300 feet on each side
from the intersecting center lines of the driveway and road, if the road is classified as a
collector or arterial road.
Flag lots may be allowed in certain circumstances to minimize hardships in the use of land that
lacks adequate road frontage for an equitable use of the lot. Normally, this situation will be
deemed to exist when the lot lacks double the required road frontage for lots in that zoning district.
However, flag lots will not be permitted merely to increase the density of development nor to
minimize the amount of road improvements. The following requirements will apply:
No more than two flag lots will be permitted per original tract of land, even if lots are
subdivided from the tract at different times;
The access lane will have a minimum width of 25 feet, be contained entirely within the lot and
serve only one lot;
The access lane will have a maximum length of 500 feet measured from the right-of-way of
the public road to the perimeter of the rectangle defining the lot area;
The area in the access lane shall be excluded from the area required for meeting the
minimum lot size standards of the Zoning Ordinance;
No sharp turns (greater than 45°) shall be allowed within the access lane;
The location of the access lane shall be logically related to the body of the flag lot,
surrounding property configurations, woodlands, topography, watercourses and floodplains.
§ 195-18. Street design standards.
General requirements.
Proposed streets shall be properly related to the road and highway plans of the state, county
and municipality. Streets shall be designed to provide adequate vehicular access to all lots or
parcels and with regard for topographic conditions, project volumes of traffic, and further
subdivision possibilities in the area.
The street system of a proposed subdivision or land development shall be designed to create
a hierarchy of street functions which includes collector and local streets.
The street system of a proposed subdivision or land development shall be designed so as to
minimize street intersections and pedestrian-vehicular conflict points.
Proposed local streets shall be designed so as to discourage through traffic and excessive
speeds. However, the developer shall provide for the extension and continuation of arterial
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 163/301
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
C.
and collector streets into and from adjoining properties.
Where, in the opinion of the Borough Council, it is desirable to provide for street access to
adjoining property, streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property.
Distances between accesspoints to adjoining property shall be based on block length
standards set forth in § 195-17B.
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial traffic street, the
Borough Council may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage lots, or other such
treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number of
intersections with the arterial street, and separation of local and through traffic.
Private streets (streets not to be offered for dedication) may be approved by the Borough
Council only if they meet the street design and improvement standards set forth in this
chapter and when they are part of an approved condominium development.
If the lots in the development are large enough for resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is
not subdivided, suitable access and street openings for such an eventuality shall be provided.
Street right-of-way and cartway widths.
Street right-of-way and cartway widths in proposed subdivisions shall conform to the
standards on the following chart:
Street Design Standards
Street Classification
Local
(feet)
Collector
(feet)
Arterial
(feet)
Right-of-way width 50 60 80
Pavement width 34 36 24-48 *
Traffic lane width 9 10 12
Parking lane width 8 (when required)
Sidewalk width 5, as per § 195-26A(3)
Curbing Vertical curb, or grassed drainage swale with no curbing
*The width shall depend on whether two lanes or four lanes are provided for traffic.
The standards set forth in § 195-18B(1) may be modified by the Borough Council when an
analysis of proposed development densities, provisions for off-street parking, and projected
traffic volumes indicate a need for such modifications. The burden of proof shall be upon the
developer to justify the adequacy of rights-of-way or cartway widths which are less than those
set forth in § 195-18B(1).
Horizontal curves.
Whenever street center lines are deflected more than 5° within 500 feet, connection shall be
made by horizontal curves.
Horizontal curves shall be designed to produce the following minimum sight distances:
Local streets: 150 feet;
Collector streets: 300 feet;
Arterial streets: 600 feet.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 164/301
(3)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
E.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
F.
A minimum tangent of 100 feet shall be required between reverse curves on a street and
between a curve and a street intersection.
Street grades.
There shall be a minimum center line grade on all streets of 0.75%.
Unless approval is obtained from the Borough Council upon recommendation from the
Borough Engineer, center line grades shall not exceed the following:
Local streets: 11%;
Collector streets: 8%;
Arterial streets: 6%.
Intersections shall be approached on all sides by leveling areas. Such leveling areas shall
have a minimum length of 75 feet (measured from the edge of the cartway of the intersecting
road), within which no grade shall exceed a maximum of 4%.
Vertical curves.
Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding 1%. However, where the curve
would be a sag curve, vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding 2%.
Vertical curves shall be designed to meet minimum sight distances according to standards set
forth by the American Association of State Highway Officials.
Street intersections.
Streets shall intersect at right angles whenever practicable. When local streets intersect
collector or arterial streets, the angle of intersection at the street center lines shall in no case
be less than 75°. No two streets shall intersect with an angle of intersection at the center lines
of less than 60°.
Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two streets shall be prohibited.
Two streets intersecting a third street from opposite sides shall either intersect with a common
center line or their center lines shall be offset according to the following distances:
The two streets shall be separated by a distance of 150 feet between center lines
measured along the center line of the street being intersected when all three streets
involved are local streets;
The two streets shall be separated by a distance of 300 feet between center lines
measured along the center line of the street being intersected when one or more of the
streets involved is a collector street;
The two streets shall be separated by a distance of 500 feet between center lines
measured along the center line of the street being intersected when one or more of the
streets involved is an arterial street.
Street curb intersections shall be rounded by a tangential arc with a minimum radius of:
Twenty feet for intersections involving only local streets;
Thirty feet for all intersections involving a collector street;
Forty feet for all intersections involving an arterial street.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 165/301
(5)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
G.
Street right-of-way lines shall be parallel to (or concentric with) curb arcs at intersections.
Clear sight triangles shall be provided at all street intersections. Within such triangles, no
object greater than 2 1/2 feet in height and no other object that would obscure the vision of
the motorist shall exist or be placed. Such triangles shall be established as follows:
Seventy-five feet from the point of intersection of the center lines of the two streets, along
the center lines of all streets, where both streets are local streets and the intersection is
not controlled by a stop sign or a traffic light.
One hundred feet from the point of intersection of the center lines of the two streets,
along the center lines of all streets, where at least one road is collector road and the
intersection is not controlled by a stop sign or a traffic light.
One hundred fifty feet from the point of intersection of the center lines of the two streets,
along the center lines of all streets, where at least one road is an arterial street and the
intersection is not controlled by a stop sign or a traffic light.
Along the center line of the street where movement is controlled by a stop sign, from a
point 20 feet from where the cartways of the two roads meet, to points 200 feet on each
side from the point where the center lines of the two roads meet along the other road, if
both roads are classified as local roads.
Along the center line of the street whose movement is controlled by a stop sign from a
point 20 feet from where the cartways of the two roads meet, to points 300 feet on each
side from the point where the center lines of the two roads meet along the other road, if
at least one road is classified as a collector or arterial road.
Wherever a portion of the line of such triangles occurs within the proposed building setback
line, such portion shall be shown on the final plan of the subdivision and shall be considered a
building setback line.
Culs-de-sac.
Dead-end streets are prohibited unless designed as cul-de-sac streets or designed for future
access to adjoining properties.
Any dead-end street which is constructed for future access to an adjoining property or
because of authorized stage development, and which is open to traffic and exceeds 200 feet
in length, shall be provided with a temporary, all-weather turning circle or "T" type turnaround.
The turning circle or "T" type turnaround shall be completely within the boundaries of the
subdivision and the use of the turnaround shall be guaranteed to the public until such time as
the street is extended.
Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length and
shall not furnish access to more than 25 dwelling units. In the case of industrial parks, a culde-
sac shall not furnish access to more than 100 employees. Exemptions from these
requirements may be granted where necessary due to unique characteristics of the site.
All cul-de-sac streets, whether permanently or temporarily designed as such, shall be
provided at the closed end with a fully-paved turning circle. The turning circle may be offset to
the left, but turnarounds offset to the right shall be discouraged.
If parking will be prohibited on the turning circle, the minimum radius to the pavement
edge or curbline shall be 40 feet and the minimum radius of the right-of-way shall be 48
feet.
If parking will be permitted on the turning circle, the minimum radius to the pavement
edge or curbline shall be 50 feet and the minimum radius of the right-of-way line shall be
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 166/301
(5)
(1)
(2)
H.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
I.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
58 feet.
The center line grade on a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed 11%, and the grade of the
diameter of the turnaround shall not exceed 5%.
Half streets.
The dedication of new half streets at the perimeter of a new subdivision is prohibited.
The subdivider shall provide the entire required right-of-way, or as much thereof as is
possible, within his property, along all existing streets which traverse or abut the property.
Street names and street signs.
Proposed streets which are in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear
the name of the existing streets.
In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate an existing street name in the
Borough and in the postal district, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, road, avenue,
boulevard, driveway, place, court or lane.
All street names shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
Street signs shall be provided at the intersection of all streets. The type, height and design
shall be according to the provisions of § 195-26J.
§ 195-19. Sanitary sewage disposal.
The developer shall provide the most effective type of sanitary sewage disposal consistent with
the Borough's official plan for sewage facilities prepared in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537) and Chapter 71 of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Regulations.
Connection to a public sanitary sewer system shall be required where such a system is proposed
by the municipality's official plan for sewage facilities, can feasibly be provided to the proposed
subdivision tract, and where such a system can adequately fulfill the sewage disposal needs of the
subdivision or land development.
Where a public sanitary sewer system is not yet accessible to the site, but is planned for extension
within a five-year period, the developer shall install sanitary sewer lines within the subdivision
boundary to the point where the future connection to a public sewer system will be made. Lateral
connections shall be constructed for all lots. Connections shall be available in the structures so as
to allow the switch from the use of on-lot systems to the public system. Such sewer systems shall
be capped until ready for use. On-lot disposal facilities shall be provided for interim use.
In subdivision/land developments where connection to a public sewage system is not possible, onlot
sewage disposal systems shall be provided in accordance with the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act, Chapter 73 of DEP Regulations, and the requirements of the Borough Sewage
Enforcement Officer. Each lot shall be provided with a tested, approved primary and secondary
absorption area.
Sanitary sewerage systems shall be located and designed to minimize or eliminate flood damage,
infiltration of floodwaters into the system, and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
On-lot sewage disposal systems shall be located and designed to avoid impairment or
contamination from flooding.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 167/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
§ 195-20. Water supply and distribution systems.
The developer shall provide a water supply and distribution system to service the proposed subdivision
through one of the following methods:
Connection shall be made to the Coopersburg public water supply system. A distribution system
shall be designed to furnish an adequate supply of water to each lot.
Where a public water supply system is planned to serve the proposed subdivision area within 10
years, a centralized water system will be provided by the developer if the subdivision involves 20
or more dwelling units unless the average residential lot size is one acre or larger. Whenever such
a system is provided, the water distribution lines shall be dedicated to the Coopersburg Municipal
Authority, and the Authority will acquire other parts of the water supply system such as wells,
pumps and storage tanks that can be integrated into the public water system. This will take place
after the improvements are completed so that the system can be operated by the Authority. Also,
such a system shall be designed and constructed in a manner that will permit adequate
connection to a public water supply system in the future. The system shall meet the design and
construction standards for centralized water systems set forth by the Coopersburg Municipal
Authority.
Where a public water supply is not proposed in the area of the proposed subdivision within 10
years, the developer shall provide a centralized water system if the subdivision involves 20 or
more lots and the average residential lot size is less than one acre. The system shall meet the
design and construction standards for centralized water systems set forth by the Coopersburg
Municipal Authority.
All centralized water systems that remain privately owned shall be organized in a manner as to fall
within the jurisdiction of the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.
Water supply systems shall be located and designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters so as to meet Federal Insurance Administration provisions.
§ 195-21. Storm drainage systems.
Storm drainage systems shall be provided in order to:
Ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of streets;
Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals related to the extent and grade of the
area drained;
Provide positive drainage away from on-site sewage disposal systems;
Take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, lead water from springs, and avoid
excessive use of cross-gutters at street intersections and elsewhere;
Prevent overloading of downstream drainage systems and watercourses as a result of
increased rate of runoff caused by the proposed development. No stormwater runoff or
natural drainage shall be so diverted as to overload existing drainage systems, or create
flooding or the need for additional drainage structures on other private properties or public
lands, without approved provisions being made by the developer for properly handling such
conditions.
General requirements.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 168/301
(1)
[1]
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
A site drainage plan for the proposed subdivision tract shall be prepared which illustrates the
complete drainage systems for the subdivision. All existing drainage features which are to be
incorporated in the design shall be so identified. If the subdivision is to be developed in
stages, a general drainage plan for the entire subdivision shall be presented with the first
stage and appropriate development stages for the drainage system shall be indicated.
The site drainage plan for the proposed subdivision shall meet the requirements of the Act
167 Stormwater Management Ordinance as included in Appendix B.[1]
Editor's Notre: See also Ch. 187, Stormwater Management.
Drainage facilities that are located on state highway rights-of-way shall be approved by the
PennDOT and a letter indicating such approval shall be directed to the Coopersburg Borough
Council.
All streets shall be designed so as to provide for the eventual discharge of surface water
away from their rights-of-way.
Where detention facilities are included as part of the storm drainage system, the developer
shall demonstrate that such ponds are designed, protected and located to assure that public
safety is maximized and health problems are prevented;
Storm drainage systems shall be provided to permit unimpeded flow in natural watercourses
except as modified by stormwater detention facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
The existing points of concentrated drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall not be
altered without written approval of the affected property owner(s).
Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent property shall be managed such
that, at minimum, the peak diffused flow does not increase in the general direction of
discharge, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. If diffused flow is proposed to be
concentrated and discharged onto adjacent property, the developer must document that there
are adequate downstream conveyance facilities to safely transport the concentrated
discharge or otherwise prove that no harm will result from the concentrated discharge. Areas
of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any applicable release rate criteria
in the general direction of existing discharge whether they are proposed to be concentrated or
maintained as diffused drainage areas.
Where a site is traversed by watercourses other than those for which a one-hundred-year
floodplain is defined by the municipality, there shall be provided drainage easements
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourses. The width of any easement shall
be adequate to provide for unimpeded flow of storm runoff based on calculations made in
conformance with § 195-12D for the one-hundred-year return period runoff and to provide a
freeboard allowance of 0.5 foot above the design water surface level. The terms of the
easement shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations which
may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also, periodic
maintenance of the easement to ensure proper runoff conveyance shall be required.
Watercourses for which the one-code as amended,one-hundred-year floodplain is formally
defined are subject to the applicable municipal floodplain regulations.
When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural drainage swales on the site
cannot adequately provide for drainage, open channels may be constructed conforming
substantially to the line and grade of such natural drainage swales. Capacities of open
channels shall be calculated using the Manning equation.
Storm drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be so designed and provided as to
minimize erosion in watercourse channels and at all points of discharge.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 169/301
(12)
(1)
(2)
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
Consideration should be given to the design and use of volume controls for stormwater
management, where geology and soils permit. Areas of suitable geology for volume controls
shall be determined by the Borough Engineer. Documentation of the suitability of the soil for
volume controls shall be provided by the applicant. Volume controls shall be acceptable in
areas of suitable geology where the soils are designated as well drained in the County Soil
Survey. Other soils may be acceptable for use of volume controls based on site-specific soils
evaluations provided by the applicant.
Improvement specifications.
Inlets shall be designed and located to prevent hazardous conditions for vehicles, bicycles or
pedestrians.
The Borough Engineer will supply additional specifications which may be necessary for
spacing and type of inlets and manholes, minimum pipe sizes and materials and construction
methods.
Maintenance.
If the lands of the proposed subdivision or land development will remain in common
ownership, the developer will identify the proposed owner of the control facilities and provide
written assurances that the control facilities will be properly maintained. The maintenance
shall include, but not be limited to, grass mowing, sediment cleaning, repair of eroded areas,
and repair of damaged structures.
If the lands of the proposed subdivision or land development will be conveyed to two or more
separate owners, the developer shall either identify the proposed owner of the control
facilities and provide written assurances that the control facilities will be properly maintained
or shall dedicate the land on which the control facilities are located to the municipality which
shall then be responsible for maintaining the control facilities. The maintenance shall include,
but not be limited to, grass mowing, sediment cleaning, repair of eroded areas, and repair of
damaged structures.
§ 195-22. Underground utilities and utility easements.
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission Investigation Docket No. 99, as
amended from time to time, all electric utility distribution lines shall be installed underground in
subdivisions or land developments of five or more dwelling units. In addition, the following design
requirements shall be observed:
Established public utility and state and federal governmental agency design standards shall
be observed in preparing the utility plan;
Utility lines to be installed within street rights-of-way shall be located according to municipal or
municipal authority requirements;
Whenever practicable, telephone and cable TV utilities shall be installed underground in
connection with the installation of electric utility distribution lines;
Streetlighting, where required, shall be provided at each intersection of the development and
at intervals not to exceed 200 feet between intersections;
Utility lines shall be installed at the rough grade phase of construction. Utility lines shall be
installed according to their depth, with the utility line installed at the greatest depth being
installed first.
Utility easements.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 170/301
(1)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(1)
(2)
C.
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
Utility easements shall be provided for all utility lines servicing the abutting lots when such
utility lines are installed outside street rights-of-way. No structures or trees shall be placed
within such easements. The location of utility easements shall be acceptable to the
appropriate public utility or municipal authority.
Whenever practicable, all utility lines to be installed outside street rights-of-way shall share a
common utility easement.
Utility easements shall be located either:
Abutting the street right-of-way. In this case a minimum easement width of 10 feet shall
be required;
Along rear or side lot lines. In this case a minimum easement width of 20 feet, 10 feet on
each side of the lot line, shall be provided. Where the lot line coincides with the
subdivision boundary, a minimum easement width of 15 feet may be required by Borough
Council.
Petroleum and natural gas transmission lines.
No company intending to install any petroleum, petroleum product or natural gas transmission
line shall be allowed to construct the line on less than a fifty-foot right-of-way. Such lines are
to be installed in the center of the right-of-way, and shall comply with the applicable standards
imposed by state and federal laws and regulations.
There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet, measured from the right-of-way line, between
any proposed dwelling unit and any petroleum, petroleum products or natural gas
transmission line which traverses the subdivision.
Floodproofing. Facilities for gas, electric and communication utilities shall be elevated or
floodproofed to a level at least one foot above the one hundred-year flood elevation.
§ 195-23. Mobile home parks.
Applicable standards and requirements. The design and development of mobile home parks shall
conform to all the general standards and requirements set forth for subdivision and land
developments in this chapter in addition to the specific design standards set forth herein (§ 195-
23).
Permits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, or extend any mobile home park or any
of the facilities thereof within the limits of the municipality unless such action has been
approved by the Borough Council.
Mobile home park expansions, constructions and alterations shall be approved by the
Borough Council only after all requirements of this chapter are met.
Off-street parking areas.
Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks for the use of park
occupants and guests. A minimum of two off-street parking places for each mobile home unit
shall be required.
Required car parking spaces shall be so located as to provide convenient access to the
mobile home but shall not exceed a distance of 200 feet from the mobile home that they are
intended to serve.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 171/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
F.
(a)
[1]
[2]
(b)
(1)
G.
Pedestrian walkways.
All parks shall provide safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian access between individual
mobile homes, the park streets, and all community facilities provided for park residents.
Sudden changes in alignment and gradient shall be avoided.
Where a common walk system is provided and maintained between locations, and where
pedestrian traffic is concentrated, such common walks shall have a minimum width of 3 1/2
feet.
All mobile home stands shall be connected to common walks, streets, driveways or parking
spaces connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of
two feet.
Mobile home siting. Mobile home stand construction.
The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide an adequate foundation for
the placement of the mobile home.
The stand shall be constructed from either concrete, asphalt concrete or other material
sufficient to adequately support the mobile home and to prevent abnormal settling or heaving
under the weight of the home. The corners of the mobile home shall be anchored to prevent
wind overturn and rocking with tie-downs such as concrete "dead men," screw augers,
arrowhead anchors, or other devices suitable to withstand a tension of at least 2,800 pounds.
After a mobile home has been anchored to the mobile home stand, the hitch which is
employed for the transportation of the unit shall be removed, and there shall be a decorative
skirt installed around the base of the unit.
Common open space.
At least 20% of the usable site area of the mobile home park must be in common open space.
The usable site area is that area which is free of water surfaces, severe high water table,
quarries, or slopes over 20 percent.
Whenever possible, the common space shall be designed as a contiguous area with
pedestrian and visual accessibility to all residents of the mobile home park.
Recreation areas and facilities shall be provided to meet the anticipated needs of the
residents of the park. Not less than 10% of the usable site area shall be devoted to recreation.
Recreation areas shall be of a size, shape and relief that is conducive to active play.
Utilities.
Water supply.
All mobile home parks shall be connected to the public water supply and distribution
system upon construction or expansion. The availability of service shall be certified in
accordance with the provisions of § 195-20.
Individual water connections.
Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of the mobile
home stand at a point where the water connection will approximate a vertical
position, thereby insuring the shortest water connection possible and decreasing
susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
The water riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of 3/4 inch and terminate
at least four inches above the ground surface. The water outlet shall be provided
with a cap when the mobile home does not occupy the lot.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 172/301
[3]
[4]
(a)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(b)
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(a)
(4)
(a)
(5)
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and
riser pipe and to protect risers from heaving and thawing actions of ground during
freezing weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser
pipe.
A shut-off valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water riser pipe on
each mobile home lot. Underground stop-and-waste valves are prohibited unless the
type of manufacture and method of installation are approved by the Authority
Engineer.
Sewage disposal.
All mobile home parks shall be connected to the public sanitary sewage disposal system
upon construction or expansion. The availability of service shall be certified in
accordance with the provisions of § 195-19A.
Individual sewer connections.
Each mobile home stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch diameter sewer
riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the sewer
connection to the mobile home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
The sewer connection shall have a nominal inside diameter of not less than four
inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least 1/4 inch per foot. All
joints shall be watertight.
All materials used for sewer connections shall be semi-rigid, corrosion-resistant,
nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be smooth.
Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a mobile home does
not occupy the site. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim
of the riser pipe shall extend at least one-half (1/2) inch above ground elevation.
Individual electrical connections.
Each mobile home lot shall be provided with an approved disconnecting device and over
current protective equipment. The minimum service per outlet shall be 120/240 volts AC,
100 amperes.
The mobile home shall be connected to the outlet receptacle by an approved type of
flexible cable with connectors and a male attachment plug.
Where the calculated load of the mobile home is more than 100 amperes either a second
outlet receptacle shall be installed or electrical service shall be provided by means of
permanently installed conductors.
Required electrical grounding.
All exposed non-current-carrying metal parts of mobile homes and all other equipment
shall be grounded by means of an approved grounding conductor run with branch circuit
conductors and other approved methods of grounded metallic wiring. The neutral
conductor shall not be used as an equipment ground for mobile homes or other
equipment.
Natural gas systems.
Natural gas piping systems when installed in mobile home parks shall conform to the
rules and regulations of the American Gas Association.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 173/301
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(6)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(7)
(1)
(2)
H.
A.
Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an approved shutoff valve
installed upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be equipped with a cap to prevent
accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use.
Liquefied petroleum gas systems.
Liquefied petroleum systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings or other
structures shall be installed and maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of
the National Fire Prevention Association Standards NFPA Nos. 57 and 58.
Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive pressures and shall
be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a safe location.
Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off gas. Such means shall
be located outside the mobile home and shall be maintained in effective operating
condition.
All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside of the mobile homes shall be well supported
and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas shall not be
conveyed through piping equipment and systems in mobile homes.
Vessels of more than 12 and less than 60 U.S. gallons gross capacity may be installed
on a mobile home lot and shall be securely, but not permanently, fastened to prevent
accidental overturning.
No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any
storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other structure.
Fuel oil supply systems.
All fuel oil supply systems for mobile homes, service buildings, and other structures shall
be installed and maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the National
Fire Protection Association Standard NFPA No. 31.
All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes shall be securely,
but not permanently, fastened in place.
All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings, and other
structures shall have shutoff valves located within five feet from any mobile home exit.
All fuel storage tanks or cylinders shall be a minimum of five feet from any mobile home
exit.
Storage tanks located in areas subject to traffic shall be protected against physical
damage.
Roads. The private street system shall be designed and built to the specifications contained in the
Coopersburg Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
The roads shall meet the design standards for local roads contained in § 195-18.
The roads shall be built to the local road specifications set forth by the Borough Engineer.
§ 195-24. Environmental protection and open space
preservation.
Erosion and sedimentation control.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 174/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(1)
(a)
(b)
[1]
(c)
(d)
(e)
(2)
B.
All earthmoving activities shall be conducted in such a way as to prevent accelerated erosion
and the resulting sedimentation.
No earthmoving or soil disturbance may take place until an erosion and sedimentation control
plan has been developed in accordance with Chapter 102, Erosion Control, P.L. 1987. Such a
plan is to be maintained on the construction site until all disturbed areas are finally stabilized.
The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be developed in the form outlined in the Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
All erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted with the final plan as set forth
in § 195-14(10) of this chapter.
When it has been determined that an earthmoving permit is required, the application for such
a permit must be filed with the Lehigh County Conservation District.
Borough Council may require the submission of the erosion and sedimentation control plan to
the Lehigh County Conservation District for review and recommendations, whether a permit
for earthmoving is required or not.
All earthmoving shall be conducted in accordance with the current federal regulations relative
to the NPDES.
Natural feature preservation.
The design and development of all subdivisions and land developments shall preserve,
whenever possible, natural features which will aid in providing adequate open space for
recreation and conditions generally favorable to the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents. Some of these natural features are the natural terrain of the site, woodland areas,
large trees, natural watercourses and bodies of water, wetlands, rock outcroppings, and
scenic views. More detailed standards concerning the preservation of specific natural features
are set forth in the following sections.
Floodplain regulation.
The flood elevation map shall be based on the municipal flood insurance rate map
(FIRM). When not available, the map shall be based on estimated one hundred-year
flood elevations or estimated areas subject to flooding based on best available data.
No new buildings or structures shall be placed within the bounds of the one hundred-year
floodplain except as § 195-24B(2)(c) provides.
The substantial improvement of an existing building or the redevelopment of a vacant but
formerly developed parcel is permissible within the floodway fringe if said development is
in accordance with the floodplain provisions of the Borough Zoning Ordinance if one has
been enacted or with the Borough Floodplain Ordinance.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 230, Zoning, and Ch. 132, Floodplain Management, respectively.
When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself and the Borough
determines that additional controls are required to insure safe development, it may
require the developer to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed
restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and noted on every recorded plat.
The finished elevation of proposed streets shall not be more than the one foot below the
regulatory flood elevation. The Borough may require profiles and elevations of streets to
determine compliance with the requirements. Drainage openings shall be sufficient to
discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 175/301
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(4)
(5)
(1)
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
(a)
(2)
C.
All sanitary sewer systems, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed up to the
regulatory flood elevation.
The installation of sewage disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems shall be
prohibited within designated floodplain areas.
All water systems, whether public or private, shall be floodproofed up to the regulatory
flood elevation.
All other public and private utilities and facilities including gas and electric shall be
elevated or floodproofed up to the regulatory flood elevation.
Lake, stream and river frontage preservation.
Lake, stream and river frontage shall be preserved as open space whenever possible.
This area may be credited toward the open space requirement set forth in § 195-24C.
Access to the water and maintenance easement area shall be provided at intervals of not
more than 0.5 mile. These accesspoints shall not be less than 100 feet in width.
Topography.
The natural terrain of the proposed subdivision tract will be retained wherever possible
with cut and fill operations being kept to a minimum. Subdivisions and land developments
shall minimize the disturbance of steeply sloping areas, that is areas with slopes in
excess of 15%. Development shall be directed to the lesser sloping portions of the site to
the greatest degree possible.
Finished slopes on all cuts and fills shall not exceed 33%.
Topsoil protection. Topsoil shall not be removed from the development site or used as fill.
Topsoil shall be removed from the areas of construction and stored separately. The topsoil
shall be stabilized to minimize erosion during storage. Upon completion of the construction,
topsoil must be uniformly redistributed on the site.
Open space and recreation areas. Subject to the provisions and requirements of the Municipalities
Planning Code, the open space and recreation needs of subdivisions and land developments shall
be met as follows:
For subdivisions and land developments involving less than 60 lots or dwelling units, cash in
lieu of recreation space shall be provided as set forth in § 195-24C(3).
For subdivisions and land developments involving 60 or more lots or dwelling units, the
recreation needs shall be met as follows:
Land may be offered for dedication to the municipality, subject to approval by the
Borough. The land offered for dedication shall not: 1) be subject to flooding; 2) have
slopes in excess of 15%; 3) include stormwater management facilities; 4) include
wetlands; 5) include utility facilities or easements; or 6) include quarries and/or other
dangerous features. The Borough shall consider the offer relative to the following factors:
The suitability of the size, shape and landform of the tract for appropriate
recreational facilities;
Accessibility for future users;
Conformity with the recreation element of the Comprehensive Plan;
Availability of nearby recreation facilities for meeting the recreation needs; and
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 176/301
[5]
(b)
(a)
(b)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
The ability to provide adequate security.
Cash in lieu of open space may be provided as set forth in § 195-24C(3).
Cash in lieu of open space and recreation land dedication shall be provided to and used by
the Municipality as follows:
The cash in lieu shall be $500 per lot or dwelling unit.
The use of the monies shall be restricted to the purchase of lands for recreation and
open space areas, the improvement of said areas, or other capital purchases.
Carbonate geology area development. All buildings, structures, impervious surfaces, and utilities
shall be so situated, designed and constructed as to minimize the risk of structural damage from
existing or future sinkholes.
Buildings, structures, impervious surfaces, and utilities shall not be located within 100 feet of
the Karst features identified pursuant to § 195-13F(10)(b) unless: 1) a recognized
professional with competence in the field demonstrates that a minimal risk of structural
damage due to sinkholes will exist; or 2) mitigating measures are taken to minimize the risk of
structural damage. These mitigating measures shall be designed by a recognized
professional with competence in the field.
Stormwater management facilities, including but not limited to, detention basins, shall not be
located within 100 feet of the Karst features identified pursuant to § 195-13F(10)(b) unless: 1)
a recognized professional with competence in the field demonstrates that a minimal risk of
damage due to sinkholes will exist; or 2) mitigating measures are taken to minimize the risk of
structural damage. These mitigating measures shall be designed by a recognized
professional with competence in the field.
Stormwater shall not be redirected into a sinkhole or closed depression.
Article V. Improvement Specifications
§ 195-25. General requirements.
Physical improvements to the subdivision/land development tract shall be provided, constructed
and installed as shown on the record plan, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
As a condition to review of a final plan by the Borough Engineer, the developer shall agree with
the Borough Council, public utility or municipal authority as to installations of all improvements
shown on the plan and required by this chapter. Before the record plan may be endorsed by the
Borough Council, the developer shall submit a completed and executed original copy of the
subdivision improvements agreement and performance and maintenance guarantees in the
amount required by § 195-27.
All improvements installed by the developer shall be constructed in accordance with the design
specifications of the Borough Council, public utility or Municipal Authority.
Inspection of the installation of those improvements required by § 195-26, shall in all cases be the
responsibility of the Borough Council and Borough Engineer.
§ 195-26. Required improvements.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 177/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(5)
G.
Improvements shall be provided, constructed and installed by the developer as stated in the
improvements agreement, shown on the record plan, and in accordance with the design standards set
forth in Article IV of this chapter. The following improvements will be required in all applicable cases:
Street excavating, grading, subgrade preparation, base course paving and surface course paving
installed according to the Coopersburg Borough specifications.
Concrete curbing of the vertical type, or stabilized shoulder and drainage swale with no curbing
installed according to the Coopersburg Borough specifications.
Concrete sidewalks or interior walkways installed according to the Coopersburg Borough
specifications in connection with road construction pursuant to § 195-26A or when required
by§ 195-15B.
Sanitary sewer system improvements installed according to the specifications of the municipality,
public utility, the appropriate government authority and the Department of Environmental
Protection.
Water supply and distribution system improvements installed according to the specifications of the
municipality, public utility, the appropriate governmental authority, and the Department of
Environmental Protection.
Storm drainage system improvements installed according to the Coopersburg Borough
specifications.
Monuments shall be installed:
Permanent reference monuments shall be located at each intersection of rights-of-ways of
street(s) constructed by the developer, at the beginning and ending of all street curves, and at
exterior corners of the subdivision or land development unless an alternate arrangement is
approved that still permits a surveyor to stake out accurately any building lot shown on the
record plan.
Monuments shall be made of PennDOT Class "A" concrete, shall be four inches by four
inches square or four inches in diameter at the top, and shall taper from four inches at the top
to six inches at the bottom. All monuments shall be a minimum of 30 inches in length and
shall be marked with a round metal cap, rebar or drilled hole. All monuments in developed
areas shall be flush with finished grade and, in undeveloped areas, shall be set two inches to
three inches above existing grade.
All monuments shall be placed by a registered surveyor so that the scored point shall coincide
exactly with the point of intersection of the line being monumented.
Monuments shall be set with their top level with the finished grade of the surrounding ground,
except:
Monuments which are placed within the lines of existing or proposed sidewalks shall be
so located (preferably beneath the sidewalks) that their tops will not be affected by lateral
movement of the sidewalks; and
Where monuments are located beneath a sidewalk, proper access shall be provided for
their use.
Where sidewalks are existing, a stone point (a four-inch square chisel cut in the sidewalk
with a drill hole in center) may be substituted for a monument.
Lot corner markers shall be provided at all lot corners. Lot corner markers shall be
permanently located and shall be a No. 4 (1/2 inch) or No. 5 (5/8 inch) diameter rebar a
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 178/301
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
A.
B.
minimum length of 30 inches. Lot corner markers shall be located in the ground flush to
existing grade.
Fire hydrants installed according to the specifications of the Coopersburg Borough and the
appropriate authority.
Street signs installed according to municipal specifications.
Shade trees shall be of nursery-stock quality of a species grown under the same climatic condition
as exist in the municipality. The trees shall be of symmetrical growth, free of insect pests and
disease, suitable for street use, and durable under the maintenance contemplated.
§ 195-27. Improvements guarantee procedure.
Before the Borough Council approves any final plan and as a prerequisite for approval, the
developer shall deliver to the Council a performance guarantee in the amount of 110% of the cost
of all improvements required by this chapter, as determined in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, in a form and with a surety as determined
in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,
guaranteeing the construction and installation of all such improvements before the date fixed in
the formal action of approval or accompanying agreement for completion of the improvements.
Upon written application signed by both the obligor and surety of the performance guarantee in a
form approved by the Solicitor, the Borough Council, public utility or municipal authority may, at
their discretion, extend said period by not more than three additional years. If the party posting the
financial security requires more than one year from the date of posting of the financial security to
complete the required improvements, the amount of financial security may be increased by an
additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the first anniversary date from posting of financial
security or to an amount not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required improvements
as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year period by using the above
bidding procedure. In the event of default under a performance guarantee, the proceeds of the
performance guarantee received by the municipality, public utility or municipal authority shall be
used to construct and install the improvements.
Before the Borough Council approves any final plan and as a prerequisite for approval, the
developer shall deliver to the Borough Council, a maintenance guarantee in an amount of not less
than 15% of the actual cost of the installation of all improvements required by this chapter,
guaranteeing acceptance of all such improvements by the Borough Council.
§ 195-28. Approval of improvements and release of performance
guarantee by the Borough Council.
The approval of improvements and release of performance guarantee by the Borough Council and
the inspection of the improvements shall occur in conformance with the procedures prescribed by
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed as provided in
this chapter or in accord with the approved final plan, the Borough Council is hereby granted the
power to enforce any corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies. If proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or
making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the Borough
Council may, at its option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land
development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the monies
necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting
from the security or from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 179/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such security and not for any
other municipal purpose.
Article VI. Administration
§ 195-29. Amendments.
Amendments to the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall become effective only after a
public hearing held pursuant to public notice in the manner prescribed for enactment of a subdivision
and land development ordinance by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 195-30. Appeals.
The decisions of the Coopersburg Borough Council with respect to the approval or disapproval of
subdivision or land development plans may be appealed directly to court in the same manner and
within the same time limitations as is provided for zoning appeals in Article X of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 195-31. Enforcement remedies.
Violations and penalties. For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner, agent,
architect, contractor, engineer, or other person who commits a violation shall be liable on conviction to
pay a fine or penalty not to exceed $500 per day per violation and all court costs and Borough legal
expenses, which shall be paid to the Borough of Coopersburg.
Such fines and penalties may be collected by suit or summary proceedings brought in the name of
Lehigh County before any Magistrate.
Whenever any such person specified above shall have been notified by the Coopersburg Borough
Solicitor, in writing, that there is a violation of this chapter, such person shall commence correction
of all violations within five days after notice and correct all violations within 30 days of notice. If
corrections are not commenced within five days or completed within 30 days, each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense punishable by the like fine.
§ 195-32. Validity and conflicts.
Should any action or provisions of this chapter be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole, nor the validity of any other
section or provision of the Ordinance than the one so declared.
Whenever there is a conflict between minimum standards or requirements set forth in this chapter
and those contained in other municipal ordinances and regulations, or other applicable laws and
regulations, the most stringent standard or requirement shall apply.
§ 195-33. Fees.
The Borough Council shall set, by resolution, a schedule of fees to be paid by the developer at the
time of filing of the feasibility, preliminary and final plans.
The applicant shall pay the subdivision fees charged according to the adopted fee schedule. At
the time of the submission, the applicant shall deposit the amount of money specified by the fee
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 180/301
schedule with the Borough Manager. No application will be accepted for consideration unless
accompanied by the required deposit. Charges and expenses will be withdrawn from the account
as they are incurred by the Borough. If the charges and expenses attributable to the application
exceed the amount deposited, the applicant shall be notified so that additional funds as are
necessary to meet the charges and expenses are deposited with the Borough Manager. No plan
shall be approved unless all fees are paid in full. Any amounts which were deposited in excess of
the charges and expenses recorded shall be returned to the applicant following complete staff
action on the proposal.
§ 195-34. Repealer.
The Coopersburg Subdivision and Land Development Ord. No. 190, and all amendments thereto, are
hereby repealed. This chapter does not repeal other laws or ordinances except those specifically
repealed by this chapter.
§ 195-35. Modifications and exceptions.
The Coopersburg Borough Council and staff may grant a modification to the requirements of one or
more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the
public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is met. All requests for modifications shall
be in writing and shall accompany and be a part of the application for development. The requests shall
state, in full, the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which the request is based, the
provision or provisions of the ordinance involved and the minimum modification necessary.
§ 195-36. Effective date of ordinance.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon approval by Borough Council.
§ 195-37. Disclaimer.
Whereas the exact occurrence of sinkholes is not predictable, the administration of these regulations
shall create no liability on behalf of Coopersburg Borough as to damages which may be associated
with sinkhole formation. That is, compliance with these regulations represents no warranty, finding,
guarantee, or assurance that sinkholes will not occur on an approved property. Coopersburg Borough,
consultants and employees assume no liability for any financial or other damages which may result
from sinkhole activity.
§ 195-38. Entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of the municipality or its
agents may enter at reasonable times upon any property to investigate or ascertain the condition of the
subject property in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
Article VII. Definitions
§ 195-39. Word usage.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 181/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of these regulations, have
the meaning indicated:
Words in the singular include the plural and those in the plural include the singular.
Words in the present tense include the future tense.
The words "person", "developer", "subdivider", and "owner" include a corporation, unincorporated
association, a partnership, or other legal entity, as well as an individual.
The word "building" includes structure and shall be construed as if followed by the phrase "or part
thereof".
The words "should" and "may" are permissive; the words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and
directive.
§ 195-40. Definition of terms.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPLICANT
A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has filed an application for development
including his heirs, successors and assigns.
BLOCK
Property bounded on one side by a street, and the other three sides by a street, railroad right-ofway,
waterway, unsubdivided area, or other definite barrier.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY
A detached subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that
of the principal building, and which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal
building.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL
A structure enclosed within exterior walls or fire walls; built, erected, and framed of component
structural parts; designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure, and support of individuals, animals,
or property of any kind; main structure on a given lot.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE
The line parallel to the street line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of any yard setbacks
required for the district in which the lot is located.
CISTERN
An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE
An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a
given distance from the intersection of the street center lines.
CLOSED DEPRESSION
In a Karst area, a distinctive bowl-shaped depression in the land surface. It is characterized by
internal drainage, varying magnitude, and an unbroken ground surface.
COMMON OPEN SPACE
A parcel or parcels of land, an area of water, or a combination of land and water within a
development site designed and intended for the use of residents of the development, not including
streets, off-street parking area, private yard space, and areas set aside for nonresidential and
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 182/301
public facilities. Common open space shall be substantially free of structures, but may contain
such improvements as are appropriate for recreational use by the residents.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The maps, charts, and textual material adopted by the municipality in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and designated, as a whole and in its several parts, as
a comprehensive plan for the continuing development of the municipality.
CULVERT
A pipe, conduit or similar structure including appurtenant works which carries surface water.
CUT
An excavation. The difference between a point on the original ground and a designated point of
lower elevation on the final grade. Also, the material removed in excavation.
DEP
The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (formerly the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Resources).
DESIGN STORM
The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g.,
fifty-year storm) and duration (e.g., twenty-four-hour), and used in computing stormwater
management control systems.
DETENTION BASIN
A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER
Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with the permission of such landowner, who
makes or causes to be made, a subdivision of land or a land development.
DOUBLE OR REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT
A lot extending between and having frontage on two generally parallel streets with vehicular
access from only one street.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT
A right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater
management purposes.
DRAINAGE PLAN
The documentation of the proposed stormwater management controls, if any, to be used for a
given development site.
DWELLING UNIT
Any room or group of rooms located within a building and forming a single habitable unit, with
facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one
family.
EASEMENT
A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of private land and for a public or quasipublic
purpose, and within which the owner of the property shall not erect any permanent
structures, but shall have the right to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent with
the rights of the grantee.
ENGINEER
A professional engineer licensed as such in the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 183/301
EROSION
The removal of surface materials by the action of natural elements.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN
A plan designed to prevent on-site accelerated erosion and off-site sedimentation through the use
of vegetative or mechanical controls. Control measures must be designed to fit the topography,
soils, rainfall and land use of the area they are to protect. The plan includes as a minimum: a) a
map or maps describing the topography of the area, the proposed alteration to the area and the
specific erosion and sedimentation control measures and facilities; and b) a narrative report
describing the project and giving the purpose and the engineering assumptions and calculations
for control measures and facilities.
FLAG LOT
A lot with direct frontage on a public road which does not meet the required lot width at the
minimum required front yard setback line, which consists of an access lane with a minimum width
of 25 feet and a rectangular area, the dimensions of which exceed the minimum lot width
requirement as established in the municipal zoning ordinance, if any.
FLOOD FRINGE
That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOOD, ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR
The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
FLOODPLAIN
The area of normally dry land along a natural watercourse which is periodically inundated by water
therefrom.
FLOODWAY, REGULATORY
The channel of a watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the one-hundred-year flood. The regulatory floodway is designated on the flood
boundary and floodway map of the municipality's flood insurance study prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
FREEBOARD
The incremental depth in a stormwater management structure provided as a safety factor of
design above that required to convey the design runoff event.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE
Replenishment of existing natural underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
Surfaces which do not absorb water, moisture or rain and the term includes but is not limited to,
roofs, buildings, parking areas, driveways, streets, roads, and any areas covered by concrete or
asphalt and stormwater detention and retention ponds.
IMPROVEMENTS
Those physical additions and changes to the land that may be necessary to produce usable and
desirable lots.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURE
A structure designed to direct runoff into the ground, e.g., french drain, seepage pit or seepage
trench.
LAND DEVELOPMENT
Any of the following activities: (1) The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots,
tracts, or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or more residential or
nonresidential buildings, whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 184/301
building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants or tenure, or the division or
allocation of land or space, whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or more
existing or prospective occupants by means of, or the purpose of streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features; 2) a subdivision of land.
LANDOWNER
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including the holder of an option or contract to
purchase (whether or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee having a
remaining term of not less than 40 years, or other person having a proprietary interest in land,
shall be deemed to be a landowner for the purpose of this chapter.
LOCAL RUNOFF CONVEYANCE FACILITIES
Any natural channel or man-made conveyance system which has the purpose of transporting
runoff from the site to the mainstem.
LOT
A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law
and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA
The area contained within the property line of a lot (as shown on the plan), excluding space within
all streets and within all permanent drainage easements, but including the areas of all other
easements.
LOWEST FLOOR
The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built
so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this
chapter.
MAINSTEM (MAIN CHANNEL)
Any stream segment or other conveyance used as a reach in the hydrologic model.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE
Security in a form in accord with the provisions set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, which insures the structural integrity of the improvements as well as the functioning of
said improvements in accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final plat
for a period not to exceed 18 months after the acceptance of said improvements by the Borough
of Coopersburg.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA)
A method for calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. Open
channels may include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MARKER
A metal pipe No. 4 (1/2 inch) or No. 5 (5/8 inch) rebar at least 30 inches in length.
MOBILE HOME PARK
A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has been so designated and improved that it contains
two or more mobile home lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME STAND
That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home,
appurtant structures or additions.
MONUMENT
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 185/301
A tapered concrete marker at least four inches by four inches square or four inches in diameter
and at least 30 inches in length and marked with a round metal cap, rebar or drilled hole.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 1988-170, as amended.
NPDES REGULATIONS
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Regulations.
NRCS
Natural Resource Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. (Formerly, the Soil
Conservation Service.)
NUMBERED TRAFFIC ROUTE
A highway that has been assigned an interstate, United States, or Pennsylvania route number to
aid motorists in their travels.
OFFICIAL MAP
The municipal map adopted by ordinance showing exact locations of existing and proposed lines
for public streets, watercourses and public grounds, including widenings, narrowings, extensions,
diminutions, opening or closing of same for the entire municipality.
OFFICIAL PLAN FOR SEWAGE FACILITIES
A comprehensive plan for the provision of adequate sewage systems adopted by a municipality or
municipalities possessing authority or jurisdiction over the provision of such systems and
submitted to and approved by the State Department of Environmental Protection, as provided by
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, and Chapter 71, Rules and Regulations promulgated
thereunder.
PAVEMENT WIDTH (ROADWAY)
The portion of a street right-of-way, generally paved, intended for vehicular use.
PEAK DISCHARGE
The maximum rate of flow of stream runoff at a given location and time resulting from a specified
storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (PSRM)
The computer-based hydrologic modeling technique used in early Act 167 Plans. PSRM was also
updated to include water quality modeling capabilities and renamed PSRM-QUAL. The PSRM and
PSRM-QUAL calculation methodologies were used as the basis for writing the watershed model.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
Security in a form in accord with the provisions set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, to guarantee that the proper construction of improvements be made by the developer
as a condition for the approval of the plan.
PLAN, FEASIBILITY REVIEW
An initial submission, by the developer, of maps and other materials analyzing the natural features
of the site as they relate to its development potential. The proposed concept for development of
the tract is included in the submission.
PLAN, FINAL
A complete and exact plan prepared for official recording as required by this chapter to define
property rights, streets and other proposed improvements.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY
A tentative plan, in lesser detail than a final plan, showing proposed streets and lot layout and
such other information as required by this chapter.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 186/301
PLAN, RECORD
The copy of the final plan bearing the original endorsements of the Borough of Coopersburg,
which is intended to be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds.
PLANNING MODULE FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT
A document to be prepared by the developer or subdivider, accepted by the municipality, and
submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection to provide proposed
development data in order to supplement or revise the municipality's official plan for sewage
facilities.
RATIONAL METHOD
A method of peak runoff calculation using a standardized runoff coefficient (rational "c"), acreage
of tract and rainfall intensity determined by return period and by the time necessary for the entire
tract to contribute runoff. The rational formula is stated as follows: Q = ciA, where "Q" is the
calculated peak flow rate in cubic feet per second, "c" is the dimensionless runoff coefficient (see
Attachment C[1]), "i" is the rainfall intensity in inches per hour, and "A" is the area of the tract in
acres.
REACH
Any of the natural or man-made runoff conveyance channels used for modeling purposes to
connect the subareas and transport flows downstream.
REGISTERED SURVEYOR
A licensed surveyor registered by the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
RELEASE RATE
The percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of runoff for a development site to which the
postdevelopment peak rate of runoff must be controlled to avoid peak flow increases throughout
the watershed.
RESUBDIVISION
Any replatting or resubdivision of land, limited to changes in lot lines on approved final plans or
recorded plans as specified in this chapter. Other replattings shall be considered as constituting a
new subdivision of land. See also "subdivision."
RETURN PERIOD
The average interval in years over which an event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur.
For example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall or runoff event would be expected to recur
on the average once every twenty-five years.
RIGHT-OF-WAY
The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a street, sidewalk, or for other public or quasipublic
purposes.
RUNOFF
That part of precipitation which flows over land.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, CENTRALIZED
A sanitary sewage collection system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of
pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant, commonly called a "package treatment plant,"
generally serving a single land development, subdivision, or neighborhood, and operated by a
governmental agency, governmental authority, public utility company, or a developer.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, ON-LOT
Any structure designed to treat sanitary sewage within the boundaries of an individual lot.
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL, PUBLIC
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 187/301
A sanitary sewage collection system in which sewage is carried from individual lots by a system of
pipes to a central treatment and disposal plant, generally serving a major portion of a municipality
or municipalities, and operated by a governmental agency, governmental authority, or public utility
company.
SEDIMENTATION
The process by which mineral or organic matter is accumulated or deposited by moving wind,
water, or gravity. Once this matter is deposited (or remains suspended in water), it is usually
referred to as "sediment."
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH
An area of excavated earth filled with loose stone or similar material and into which surface water
is directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The municipal official who issues and reviews permit applications and conducts investigations and
inspections as are necessary to implement Act 537 and the rules and regulations thereunder.
SIGHT DISTANCE
The required length of roadway visible to the driver of a motor vehicle at any given point on the
roadway when the view is unobstructed by traffic. Sight distance measurements shall be made
from a point 3.75 feet above the center line of the road surface to a point 0.5 feet above the center
line of the road surface.
SLOPE
The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose surface makes an angle with the
plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference
in feet per 100 feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD
A method of runoff computation developed by NRCS which is based upon relating soil type and
land use/cover to a runoff parameter called a curve number.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD
A reservoir routing procedure based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
equals the change in storage for a given time interval) and based on outflow being a unique
function of storage volume.
STORM DRAINAGE PROBLEM AREAS
Areas which lack adequate stormwater collection and/or conveyance facilities and which present a
hazard to persons or property.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
All facilities and features, such as pipes, culverts, open channels, ditches, swales, and stormwater
detention facilities, used to transmit or temporarily store surface water runoff.
STORM SEWER
A system of pipes or other conduits which carries intercepted surface runoff, street water and
other wash waters, or drainage, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER DETENTION FACILITIES
Basins, ponds, ponding areas, depressions or other structures or features used to temporarily
store rainfall and release it at a controlled rate.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
The plan for managing stormwater runoff adopted by Coopersburg Borough, for each watershed,
as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as amended, and known as the
Stormwater Management Act.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 188/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
A.
STREAM
A watercourse.
STREET
A strip of land, including the entire right-of-way (i.e., not limited to the cartway) intended for use as
a means of vehicular and pedestrian circulation to provide access to more than one lot. The word
"street" includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, alley, viaduct, and
any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or
private. Streets are further classified according to the functions they perform:
ARTERIAL STREET
- A street serving a large volume of comparatively high-speed and long distance traffic,
including all facilities classified as main and secondary highways by the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
COLLECTOR STREET
- A street which, in addition to providing access to abutting properties, intercepts local streets
to provide a route giving access to community facilities and/or other collector and arterial
streets (streets in industrial and commercial subdivisions shall generally be considered
collector streets).
LOCAL STREET
- A street used primarily to provide access to abutting properties.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET
- A local street intersecting another street at one end, and terminating in a vehicular turnaround
at the other.
HALF (PARTIAL) STREET
- A street, generally parallel and adjacent to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width
than normally required for improvement and use of the street.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET
- A local street, parallel and adjacent to a major street (but separated from it by a reserve
strip) which provides access to abutting properties and control of intersections with the major
street.
ALLEY
- A minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more
properties. All streets with a right-of-way width of less than 30 feet are alleys.
STRUCTURE
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether
or not affixed to the land.
SUBAREA
The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for hydrologic modeling purposes for which the runoff
control criteria have been established in each stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION
The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts,
or parcels or other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of
ownership or building, or lot development; provided, however, that the division of land for
agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street, easement
of access, or residence, shall be exempted.
MINOR SUBDIVISION
- A residential subdivision which does not and will not in the future involve more than a total of
three lots, including the residue parcel, and does not involve the provision of any new street
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 189/301
[1]
or easement for access. Such subdivision applications shall be processed in accordance with
the provisions contained above.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT
Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement.
SWALE
A low-lying stretch of natural or man-made land which gathers or carries surface water runoff.
TESTING ON-LOT SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS
Soil tests and percolation tests conducted by the Municipal Sewage Enforcement Officer in
compliance with Chapter 73 of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Regulations
in order to determine whether a permit may be issued for installation of on-lot sewage disposal
systems.
TOPSOIL
Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile soils and soil material ordinarily
rich in organic matter or humus debris. Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called
the "A Horizon."
WATERCOURSE
Any channel or conveyance of surface water having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED
The computer-based hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the Little Lehigh Creek watershed
for the Act 167 Plan update. This model was written by Tarsi Software Laboratories and uses the
same algorithms found in the Penn State Runoff Quality Model (PSRM-QUAL). The model has
been calibrated to reflect actual flow values by adjusting key model input parameters.
WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, CENTRALIZED
A system for supplying and distributing water from a common source to two or more dwellings
and/or other buildings, generally serving a single land development, subdivision, or neighborhood,
and operated by a governmental agency, governmental authority, public utility company or a
developer.
WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, ON-LOT
A system for supplying and distributing water to a single dwelling or other building from a source
located on the same lot.
WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, PUBLIC
A system for supplying and distributing water from a common source to dwellings and other
buildings, generally serving a major portion of a municipality or municipalities, and operated by a
governmental agency, governmental authority, or a public utility company.
Editor's Note: See Appendix C of Ch. 187, Stormwater Management.
Chapter 198. Taxation
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. Earned Income Tax
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 190/301
[Adopted 12-10-1985 by Ord. No. 400 (Ch. 24, Part 2 of the 1996 Code); amended in its entirety 7-15-
2011 by Ord. No. 632]
§ 198-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ARTICLE XIII TAX OFFICER
The Tax Officer authorized by the Borough to collect income taxes levied prior to January 1, 2012.
BUSINESS
An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of an unincorporated nature conducted
for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit whether by a person, partnership, association or any
other entity.
BUSINESS ENTITY
A sole proprietorship, corporation, joint-stock association or company, partnership, limited
partnership, limited liability company, association, business trust, syndicate or other commercial or
professional activity organized under the laws of this Commonwealth or any other jurisdiction.
CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT or PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT
A certified public accountant, public accountant or firm, as provided for in the act of May 26, 1947
(P.L. 318, No. 140), known as the CPA Law.[1]
CLAIM
A written demand for payment made by a Tax Officer or Tax Collection District for income taxes
collected by another Tax Officer or Tax Collection District.
CORPORATION
A corporation or joint-stock association organized under the laws of the United States, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state, territory, foreign country or dependency. The
term shall include an entity which is classified as a corporation for Federal income tax purposes.
CURRENT YEAR
The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DEPARTMENT
The Department of Community and Economic Development of the Commonwealth.
DOMICILE
The place where a person lives and has a permanent home and to which the person has the
intention of returning whenever absent. Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is
the fixed place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than transitory.
Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person, not for a mere special or limited
purpose, but with the present intention of making a permanent home, until some event occurs to
induce the person to adopt some other permanent home. In the case of a business, domicile is
that place considered as the center of business affairs and the place where its functions are
discharged.
EARNED INCOME
The compensation as required to be reported to or as determined by the Department of Revenue
under Section 303 of the act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the Tax Reform Code of
1971,[2] and rules and regulations promulgated under that section. Employee business expenses
as reported to or determined by the Department of Revenue under Article III of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971 shall constitute allowable deductions in determining earned income. The term does
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 191/301
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
not include offsets for business losses. The amount of any housing allowance provided to a
member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX
The tax levied by the Borough on earned income and net profits.
EMPLOYER
A person, business entity or other entity, employing one or more persons for a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation. The term includes the Commonwealth, a political subdivision
and an instrumentality or public authority of either. For purposes of penalties under this article, the
term includes a corporate officer.
INCOME TAX
Except as set forth in section 511(b) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, Act 511 of 1965, as
amended (hereinafter the "LTEA"), 53 P.S. § 6924.511(b), an earned income and net profits tax,
personal income tax or other tax that is assessed on the income of a taxpayer levied by the
Borough under the authority of this act or any other act.
JOINT TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE
An entity formed by two or more Tax Collection Committees for the purpose of income tax
collection in more than one Tax Collection District.
LTEA
The Pennsylvania Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, Act 511 of 1965, as amended.
NET PROFITS
The net income from the operation of a business, other than a corporation, as required to be
reported to or as determined by the Department of Revenue under section 303 of the act of March
4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), 72 P.S. § 7303, known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971, and rules and
regulations promulgated under that section. The term does not include income under any of the
following subsections:
Income which:
Is not paid for services provided; and
Is in the nature of earnings from an investment.
Income which represents:
Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft, breeding or dairy
purposes; or
Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of a farm.
NONRESIDENT
A person or business domiciled outside the Borough levying the tax.
NONRESIDENT TAX
An income tax levied by the Borough on nonresidents.
OFFICIAL REGISTER
The part of the tax register that includes withholding tax rates as provided in Section 511(a)(3) of
the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.511(a)(3).
PERSON
A natural person.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 192/301
A.
PRECEDING YEAR
The calendar year before the current year.
PRIVATE AGENCY
A business entity or person appointed as a Tax Officer by a Tax Collection Committee.
PUBLIC AGENCY
Any and all public bodies, authorities, agencies, instrumentalities, political subdivisions,
intermediate units, councils, boards, commissions or similar governmental entities.
RESIDENT
A person or business domiciled in the Borough levying the tax.
RESIDENT TAX
An income tax levied by the Borough.
RESIDENT TAX OFFICER
The Tax Officer administering and collecting income taxes for the Tax Collection District in which a
taxpayer is domiciled.
SUCCEEDING YEAR
The calendar year following the current year.
TAX BUREAU
A public nonprofit entity established for the administration and collection of taxes.
TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE
The committee established to govern the Lehigh Tax Collection District for the purpose of income
tax collection. The term shall include a joint Tax Collection Committee.
TAX COLLECTION DISTRICT
The Lehigh Tax Collection District established under Section 504 of the LTEA.
TAX OFFICER
A political subdivision, public employee, tax bureau, county, except a county of the first class, or
private agency which administers and collects income taxes for one or more Tax Collection
Districts. Unless otherwise specifically provided, for purposes of the obligations of an employer,
the term shall mean the Tax Officer for the Tax Collection District within which the employer is
located, or, if an employer maintains workplaces in more than one district, the Tax Officer for each
such district with respect to employees principally employed therein.
TAX RECORDS
Tax returns, supporting schedules, correspondence with auditors or taxpayers, account books and
other documents, including electronic records, obtained or created by the Tax Officer to administer
or collect a tax under this article. The term includes documents required by Section 509(e) of the
LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.511(e). The term "electronic records" includes data and information
inscribed on a tangible medium or stored in an electronic or other medium and which is retrievable
in perceivable form.
TAX REGISTER
A database of all county, municipal and school tax rates available on the Internet as provided in
Section 511(a)(1) of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.511(a)(1).
TAXABLE INCOME
Includes:
In the case of an earned income and net profits tax, earned income and net profits.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 193/301
B.
[1]
[2]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
[1]
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
In the case of a personal income tax, income tax, income enumerated in Section 303 of the
Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the Tax Reform Code of 1971, 72 P.S. § 7303,
as reported to and determined by the Department of Revenue, subject to correction for fraud,
evasion or error, as finally determined by the Commonwealth.
TAXPAYER
A person or business required under this article to file a return of an income tax or to pay an
income tax.
WITHHOLDING TAX
An income tax levied by a political subdivision under the authority of this article or any other
ordinance, or any other tax levied by a municipality or school district for which employer
withholding may be required under this article.
Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 9.1 et seq.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 198-2. Imposition of tax.
The tax levied under this article is a continuation of a tax previously described in the abovereferenced
"Whereas" clauses.[1] The tax previously imposed and continued under this article is a
tax for general revenue purposes of 1%, hereby imposed on the following:
Earned income, as defined by this article, received by residents of the Borough, on or after
January 1, 2012;
Earned income, as defined by this article, received by nonresidents of the Borough for work
done or services performed or rendered in the Borough on or after January 1, 2012;
Net profits, as defined by this article, earned on or after January 1, 2012, of businesses,
professions, and other activities conducted by residents in the Borough; and
Net profits, as defined by this article, earned on or after January 1, 2012, of businesses,
professions, and other activities conducted by nonresidents in the Borough.
Editor's Note: Said clauses can be found in Ord. No. 632, which is on file in the Borough offices.
The tax levied under Subsection A(1) and (2) herein shall relate to and be imposed upon salaries,
wages, commissions, and other compensation paid by an employer or on its behalf to any person
who is employed by or renders services to him. The tax levied under Subsection A(3) and (4)
herein shall relate to and be imposed on the net profits of any business, profession, or enterprise
carried on by any person as owner or as proprietor, either individually or in association with some
other person or persons.
§ 198-3. Declaration and payment of tax.
Application.
Income taxes shall be applicable to taxable income earned or received based on the method
of accounting used by the taxpayer in the period beginning January 1 of the current year and
ending December 31 of the current year, and the tax shall continue in force on a calendaryear
or taxpayer-fiscal-year basis, without annual reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is
subsequently changed.
For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is not a calendar year, the Tax Officer shall establish
deadlines for filing, reporting and payment of taxes which provide time periods equivalent to
those provided for a calendar-year taxpayer.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 194/301
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(4)
Partial domicile. The taxable income subject to tax of a taxpayer who is domiciled in the
Borough for only a portion of the tax year shall be an amount equal to the taxpayer's taxable
income multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of calendar months
during the tax year that the individual is domiciled in the Borough and the denominator of
which is 12. A taxpayer shall include in the numerator any calendar month during which the
taxpayer is domiciled for more than half the calendar month. A day that a taxpayer's domicile
changes shall be included as a day the individual is in the new domicile and not the old
domicile. If the number of days in the calendar month in which the individual lived in the old
and new domiciles are equal, the calendar month shall be included in calculating the number
of months in the new domicile.
Declaration and payment. Except as provided in Subsection A(2), taxpayers shall declare and
pay income taxes as follows:
Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
resident Tax Officer a final return showing the amount of taxable income received during
the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the
current year, the total amount of tax due on the taxable income, the amount of tax paid,
the amount of tax that has been withheld under Section 512 of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.512, and the balance of tax due. All amounts reported shall be rounded to the
nearest whole dollar. At the time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the
resident Tax Officer the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for refund or credit
in the case of overpayment. Every taxpayer is required to file a final return showing the
amount of earned income received even if no payment is due and owing.
Every taxpayer making net profits shall, by April 15 of the current year, make and file with
the resident Tax Officer a declaration of the taxpayer's estimated net profits during the
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the current year, and shall pay to
the resident Tax Officer in four equal quarterly installments the tax due on the estimated
net profits. The first installment shall be paid at the time of filing the declaration, and the
other installments shall be paid on or before June 15 of the current year, September 15 of
the current year and January 15 of the succeeding year, respectively.
Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15 of the current year shall
make and file the declaration required on of before June 15 of the current year,
September 15 of the current year or December 31 of the current year, whichever date
next follows the date on which the taxpayer first anticipates such net profit, and shall pay
to the resident Tax Officer in equal installments the tax due on or before the quarterly
payment dates that remain after the filing of the declaration.
Every taxpayer shall, on of before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
resident Tax Officer a final return showing the amount of net profits earned or received
based on the method of accounting used by the taxpayer during the period beginning
January 1 of the current year, and ending December 31 of the current year, the total
amount of tax due on the net profits and the total amount of tax paid. At the time of filing
the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the resident Tax Officer the balance of tax due
or shall make demand for refund or credit in the case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may,
in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of the estimated tax, elect to make and
file with the resident Tax Officer on or before January 31 of the succeeding year, the final
return. Every taxpayer is required to file a return showing the amount of net profits
earned or received even if no payment is due and owing.
The Department, in consultation with the Department of Revenue, shall provide by
regulation for the filing of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits and for the
payments of the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has filed the declaration
required under this subsection anticipates additional net profits not previously declared or
has overestimated anticipated net profits.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 195/301
(f)
(g)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the current year shall,
within 30 days after the discontinuance of business, file a final return as required under
this subsection and pay the tax due.
Every taxpayer who receives any other taxable income not subject to withholding under
Section 512(3) of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.512(3), shall make and file with the resident
Tax Officer a quarterly return on or before April 15 of the current year, June 15 of the
current year, September 15 of the current year, and January 15 of the succeeding year,
setting forth the aggregate amount of taxable income not subject to withholding by the
taxpayer during the three-month periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of
the current year, September 30 of the current year, and December 31 of the current year,
respectively, and subject to income tax, together with such other information as the
Department may require. Every taxpayer filing a return shall, at the time of filing the
return, pay to the resident Tax Officer the amount of income tax due. In accordance with
criteria established by the Department, the Tax Officer may waive the quarterly return and
payment of the income tax and permit a taxpayer to file the receipt of taxable income on
the taxpayer's annual return and pay the income tax due on or before April 15 of the
succeeding year.
§ 198-4. Withholding and remittance.
For taxable years commencing on and after January 1, 2012, income taxes shall be withheld, remitted
and reported as follows:
Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse, or other place of
business within the Tax Collection District which employs one or more persons, other than
domestic servants, for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, who has not previously
registered, shall, within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the Tax Officer the
name and address of the employer and such other information as the Tax Officer may require.
An employer shall require each new employee to complete a certificate of residency form, which
shall be an addendum to the Federal Employee's Withholding Allowance Certificate (Form W-4).
An employer shall also require any employee who changes their address or domicile to complete
a certificate of residency form. The certificate of residency form shall provide information to help
identify the political subdivision where an employee lives and works. Forms of certificate of
residency may be obtained by an employer from the Department upon request by an employer.
Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse or other place of business
within a Tax Collection District that employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants,
for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation shall, at the time of payment, deduct from
the compensation due each employee employed at such place of business the greater of the
employee's resident tax or the employee's nonresident tax as released in the official register under
Section 511 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.511.
Except as set forth in Subsection E, within 30 days following the end of each calendar quarter,
every employer shall file a quarterly return and pay the amount of income taxes deducted during
the preceding calendar quarter to the Tax Officer for the place of employment of each employee.
The form shall show the name, address and Social Security number of each employee, the
compensation of the employee during the preceding three-month period, the income tax deducted
from the employee, the political subdivision imposing the income tax upon the employee, the total
compensation of all employees during the preceding calendar quarter, the total income tax
deducted from the employees and paid with the return and any other information prescribed by the
Department.
Notwithstanding Subsection D, the provisions of this subsection shall apply if an employer has
more than one place of employment in more than one Tax Collection District. Within 30 days
following the last day of each month, the employer may file the return required by Subsection D
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 196/301
F.
(1)
(2)
G.
H.
I.
(1)
(2)
A.
and pay the total amount of income taxes deducted from employees in all work locations during
the preceding month to the Tax Officer for either the Tax Collection District in which the employer's
payroll operations are located or as determined by the department. The return and income taxes
deducted shall be filed and paid electronically. The employer must file a notice of intention to file
combined returns and make combined payments with the Tax Officer for each place of
employment at least one month before filing its first combined return or making its first combined
payment. This subsection shall not be construed to change the location of an employee's place of
employment for purposes of nonresident tax liability.
Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods, has failed to deduct the proper
income tax, or any part of the income tax, or has failed to pay over the proper amount of income
tax as required by Subsection C to the Tax Collection District, may be required by the Tax Officer
to file returns and pay the income tax monthly. In such cases, payments of income tax shall be
made to the Tax Officer on or before the last day of the month succeeding the month for which the
income tax was withheld.
On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall file with the Tax Officer
where income taxes have been deducted and remitted pursuant to Subsection C:
An annual return showing, for the period beginning January 1 of the current year and ending
December 31 of the current year, the total amount of compensation paid, the total amount of
income tax deducted, the total amount of income tax paid to the Tax Officer and any other
information prescribed by the Department.
An individual withholding statement, which may be integrated with the Federal Wage and Tax
Statement (Form W-2), for each employee employed during all or any part of the period
beginning January 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the address and Social Security number, the amount of compensation paid to the
employee during the period, the amount of income tax deducted, the amount of income tax
paid to the Tax Officer, the numerical code prescribed by the Department representing the Tax
Collection District where the payments required by Subsections D and E were remitted and
any other information required by the Department. Every employer shall furnish one copy of
the individual withholding statement to the employee for whom it is filed.
Any employer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of the current year shall, within 30
days after the discontinuance of business, file returns and withholding statements required under
this section and pay the income tax due.
Except as otherwise provided in Section 511 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.511, an employer who
willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the deductions required by this subsection shall be
liable for payment of income taxes which the employer was required to withhold to the extent that
the income taxes have not been recovered from the employee. The failure or omission of any
employer to make the deductions required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the income tax or from complying with the requirements for filing of declaration and
returns.
§ 198-5. Powers and duties of Tax Officer.
Tax collection. In addition to any other power and duty conferred upon a Tax Officer in this article
or by law, it shall be the duty of the Tax Officer:
To collect, reconcile, administer and enforce income taxes imposed on residents and
nonresidents in the Borough included in the Tax Collection District.
To receive and distribute income taxes and to enforce withholding by employers located in the
Tax Collection District.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 197/301
(3)
(4)
(5)
(a)
(b)
[1]
(c)
(d)
(6)
(7)
B.
C.
(1)
D.
To receive income taxes distributed by Tax Officers for other Tax Collection Districts.
To distribute income taxes to the Borough as required by Section 513 of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.513.
To comply with all regulations adopted by the Borough under this article and all resolutions,
policies and procedures adopted by the Tax Collection Committee.
To invest all income taxes in the custody of the Tax Officer in authorized investments, subject
to the approval of the Tax Collection Committee. The Tax Officer shall observe the standard of
care that would be observed by a prudent person dealing with property of another. For the
purposes of this subsection, the term "authorized investment" shall include all of the following:
Short-term obligations of the United States government or its agencies or
instrumentanties which are backed by the full faith and credit of the United States or are
rated in the highest category by a nationally recognized statistical rating organization.
Deposits in savings accounts, time deposits, share accounts or certificates of deposit of
institutions, insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit
Union Share Insurance Fund, or their successor agencies, to the extent that the accounts
are insured and, for the amount above the insured maximum, that collateral, free from
other liens, for the amount is pledged by the depository institution.
Deposits in investment pools established by the State Treasurer or established by local
governments pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 23 Subchapter A (relating to
intergovernmental cooperation)[1] and related statutes, provided that the investment
pools are rated in the highest category by a nationally recognized statistical rating
organization.
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2305.
Repurchase agreements which are fully collateralized by obligations of the United States
government or its agencies or instrumentalities, which are free from other liens and
backed by the full faith and credit of the United States or are rated in the highest category
by a nationally recognized statistical rating organization.
To distribute income generated from investments authorized under Subsection A(6) as
determined by the Tax Collection Committee.
Monthly reports. The Tax Officer shall, within 20 days after the end of each month, provide a
written report, on forms prescribed by the Department, to the secretary of the Tax Collection
Committee and to the secretary of the Borough for which taxes were collected during the previous
month. The report shall include a breakdown of all income taxes, income generated from
investments under Subsection A(6) penalties, costs and other money received, collected,
expended and distributed for each political subdivision served by the Tax Officer and of all money
distributed to Tax Officers for other Tax Collection Districts.
Overpayments. A Tax Officer shall refund, under 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 8425 (relating to refunds of
overpayments) and 8426 (relating to interest on overpayment), on petition of and proof by the
taxpayer, income taxes paid in excess of income taxes rightfully due.
Bonds. Prior to initiating any official duties, each Tax Officer shall give and acknowledge a bond to
the appointing Tax Collection Committee as follows:
The Tax Collection Committee shall fix the amount of the bond in an amount equal to the
maximum amount of taxes that may be in the possession of the Tax Officer at any given time
or an amount sufficient, in combination with fiscal controls, insurance and other risk
management and loss prevention measures used by the Tax Collection District, to secure the
financial responsibility of the Tax Officer in accordance with guidelines adopted by the
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 198/301
(2)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
[2]
E.
F.
Department. The amount of the bond shall be revised annually by the Tax Collection
Committee based upon the annual examination required under Section 505(h) of the LTEA,
53 P.S. § 6924.515(h).
Each bond shall be joint and several, with one or more corporate sureties, which shall be
surety companies authorized to do business in this Commonwealth and licensed by the
Insurance Department.
Each bond shall be conditioned upon the completion of all of the following by the Tax Officer's
employees and appointees:
The faithful execution of all duties required of the Tax Officer.
The just and faithful accounting or payment over of all moneys and balances paid to,
received or held by the Tax Officer by virtue of the office in accordance with law.
The delivery of all tax records or other official items held in right as the Tax Officer to the
Tax Officer's successor in office.
Each bond shall be taken in the name of the Tax Collection District and shall be for the use of
the Tax Collection District appointing the Tax Officer, and for the use of any other political
subdivision or Tax Collection District for which income taxes shall be collected or distributed in
case of a breach of any conditions of the bond by the acts or neglect of the principal on the
bond.
The Tax Collection Committee or any political subdivision may sue upon the bond for the
payment or distribution of income taxes.
Each bond shall contain the name of the surety company bound on the bond.
The Tax Collection Committee may, upon cause shown and due notice to the Tax Officer and
the Tax Officer's sureties, require or allow the substitution or the addition of a surety company
acceptable to the Tax Collection Committee for the purpose of making the bond sufficient in
amount, without releasing the sureties first approved from any accrued liability or previous
action on the bond.
The Tax Collection Committee shall designate the custodian of the bond.
The Tax Officer shall file copies of all bonds in effect with the Borough/Township/City.
A copy of all bonds in effect shall be made available upon request and at no cost to the
Department or to a Tax Collection District or political subdivision seeking payment or
distribution of income taxes authorized by this article.
Records. It shall be the duty of the Tax Officer to keep a record showing the amount of income
taxes received from each taxpayer or other Tax Officer, the date of receipt, the amount and date of
all other moneys received or distributed and any other information required by the Department. All
tax records shall be the property of the Borough and the Tax Collection District in which the taxes
were collected. The Tax Collection District and Tax Officer shall retain all tax records as directed
by the Tax Collection Committee and, when applicable, in accordance with retention and
disposition schedules established by the Local Government Records Committee of the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission under 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 13 Subchapter F[2]
(relating to records). Tax records under this subsection may be retained electronically as permitted
by law.
Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 1381 et seq.
Employer and taxpayer audits.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 199/301
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
G.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
H.
In order to verify the accuracy of any income tax declaration or return or, if no declaration or
return was filed, to ascertain the income tax due, the Tax Officer and the Tax Officer's
designated employees may examine or audit the records pertaining to income taxes due of
any of the following:
An employer;
A taxpayer; and/or
A person whom the Tax Officer reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer.
The examination or audit conducted by the Tax Officer and the Tax Officer's designated
employees shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights,
53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq.
Every employer and taxpayer or other person whom the Tax Officer reasonably believes to be
an employer or taxpayer shall provide to the Tax Officer and the Tax Officer's designated
employees the means, facilities and opportunity for the examination and investigation
authorized under Subsection F(1).
For purposes of this subsection, the term "records" shall include any books, papers and
relevant federal or state tax returns and accompanying schedules, or supporting
documentation for any income taxable under this article.
Exchange of information.
The Tax Officer shall ensure that the Tax Collection District enters into an agreement with the
Department of Revenue for the exchange of information as necessary for the collection of
income taxes.
The Department of Revenue may enter into agreements with each Tax Collection District and
shall establish procedures under which tax collection, filing and other taxpayer and locality
information in its custody will be made available to Tax Officers for purposes of collection,
reconciliation and enforcement no later than one year after the deadline for filing returns for
the tax year in question.
Actions for collection of income taxes. The Tax Officer may file an action in the name of the
Borough for the recovery of income taxes due to the Borough and unpaid. Nothing in this
subsection shall affect the authority of the Borough to file an action in its own name for collection
of income taxes under this article. This subsection shall not be construed to limit a Tax Officer, a
Tax Collection District or the Borough from recovering delinquent income taxes by any other
means provided by this article or by law. Actions for collection of income taxes shall be subject to
the following:
Except as set forth in Subsection H(2) or (4), an action brought to recover income taxes must
be commenced within three years of the later of the date:
The income taxes are due;
The declaration or return has been filed; or
Of a redetermination of compensation or net profits by the Department of Revenue.
If there is substantial understatement of income tax liability of 25% or more and there is no
fraud, an action must be commenced within six years.
Except as set forth in Subsection H(4)(b), (c) or (d), an action by a Tax Officer for recovery of
an erroneous refund must be commenced as follows;
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 200/301
(a)
(b)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
I.
(1)
(2)
J.
Except as set forth in Subsection H(3)(b), within two years after making the refund.
If it appears that any part of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of
material fact, within five years after making the refund.
There is no limitation of action if any of the following apply:
A taxpayer fails to file a declaration or return required under this article.
An examination of a declaration or return or of other evidence in the possession of the
Tax Officer relating to the declaration or return reveals a fraudulent evasion of income
taxes.
An employer has deducted income taxes under Section 512 of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.512, and has failed to pay the amount deducted by the Tax Officer.
An employer has intentionally failed to make deductions required by this article.
Interest and penalties.
Except as provided in Subsection I(2), if the income tax is not paid when due, interest at the
rate the taxpayer is required to pay to the Commonwealth under Section 806 of the act of
April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176), known as The Fiscal Code, 72 P.S. § 806, on the amount of
the income tax, and an additional penalty of 1% of the amount of the unpaid income tax for
each month or fraction of a month during which the income tax remains unpaid shall be added
and collected but the amount shall not exceed 15% in the aggregate. Where an action is
brought for the recovery of the income tax, the taxpayer liable for the income tax shall, in
addition, be liable for the costs of collection, interest and penalties.
The Department may establish conditions under which a Tax Officer, with the concurrence of
the Tax Collection Committee, may abate interest or penalties that would otherwise be
imposed for the nonreporting or underreporting of income tax liabilities or for the nonpayment
of income taxes previously imposed and due if the taxpayer voluntarily files delinquent returns
and pays the income taxes in full.
The provisions of Subsection I(2) shall not affect or terminate any petitions, investigations,
prosecutions or other proceedings pending under this article, or prevent the commencement
or further prosecution of any proceedings by the proper authorities for violations of this article.
No proceedings shall, however, be commenced on the basis of delinquent returns filed
pursuant to Subsection H if the returns are determined to be substantially true and correct
and the income taxes are paid in full within the prescribed time.
Fines and penalties for violations.
Any taxpayer who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or return required by this
article; any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to register, keep or supply records or
returns required by Section 512 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.512, or to pay the income tax
deducted from employees, or fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or withhold the income tax
from employees; any taxpayer or employer who refuses to permit the Tax Officer appointed by
a Tax Collection Committee or an employee or agent of the Tax Officer to examine books,
records and papers; and any taxpayer or employer who knowingly makes any incomplete,
false or fraudulent return, or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of
the amount of income in order to avoid the payment of income taxes shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $2,500 for each offense and reasonable
costs, and in default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than six
months.
Any employer required under this article to collect, account for and distribute income taxes
who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for and distribute income taxes commits a
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 201/301
(3)
(4)
K.
L.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
(3)
M.
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $25,000
or to imprisonment not exceeding two years, or both.
The penalties imposed under this subsection shall be in addition to any other costs and
penalties imposed by this article.
The failure of any person to obtain forms required for making the declaration or returns
required by this article shall not excuse the person from making the declaration or return.
Costs. The Tax Officer shall be entitled to impose and collect the reasonable costs incurred to
provide notices of delinquency or to implement similar procedures utilized to collect delinquent
taxes from a taxpayer as approved by the Tax Collection Committee. Reasonable costs collected
may be retained by the Tax Officer. An itemized accounting of all costs collected shall be remitted
to the Tax Collection Committee on an annual basis.
Appeals and Tax Officer actions. A determination of the Tax Officer relating to the assessment,
collection, refund, withholding, remittance or distribution of income taxes may be appealed to the
appeals board established by the Tax Collection Committee by a taxpayer, employer, political
subdivision or another Tax Collection District pursuant to the provisions of Section 505(j) of Act 32,
53 P.S. § 6924.505(j). Pursuant to Section 505(k) of Act 32, 53 P.S. § 6924.515(k), any dispute
among the affected parties involving a 10% or greater deviation from taxes received in the
previous tax year shall be subject to mandatory mediation in accordance with regulations and
guidelines adopted by the Department. A dispute involving less than a 10% threshold may be the
subject of voluntary mediation in accordance with regulations and guidelines adopted by the
Department.
Confidentiality.
General rule. Any information gained by a Tax Officer or any employee or agent of a Tax
Officer or of the Tax Collection Committee as a result of any declarations, returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications shall be confidential tax information.
Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful, except for official purposes or as provided by law, for
the Commonwealth, the Borough, Tax Collection Committee member, Tax Officer or employee
or agent of a Tax Officer or Tax Collection Committee to do any of the following:
Divulge or make known confidential tax information.
Permit confidential tax information or a book containing an abstract or particulars of the
abstract to be seen or examined by any person.
Print, publish or otherwise make known any confidential tax information.
Penalties. A person who violates Subsection A(2) commits a misdemeanor of the third degree
and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $2,500 or to
imprisonment for not more than one year, or both. If the offender is a member of the Tax
Collection Committee, the member shall be removed from the Tax Collection Committee. If
the offender is an employee of a Tax Collection Committee or the Borough the employee shall
be discharged from employment. The offender shall pay the costs of prosecution.
§ 198-6. Compensation of Tax Officer.
The Tax Officer shall receive such compensation for his services and expenses as determined by the
Tax Collection Committee. At the discretion of the Tax Collection Committee, the Tax Officer may be
permitted to withhold the amount of the Tax Officer's compensation from income taxes collected if the
monthly reports required by Section 509(b) of the LTEA submitted by the Tax Officer include an
accounting for all compensation withheld.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 202/301
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 198-7. Applicability.
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply:
To any person as to whom it is beyond the legal power of the Borough/Township/City to
impose the tax herein provided under the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
To institutions or organizations operated for public, religious, educational, or charitable
purposes, to institutions or organizations not organized or operated for private profit, or to
trusts and foundations established for any of the said purposes.
This section shall not be construed to exempt any person who is an employer from the duty of
collecting the tax from his employees and paying the amount collected to the Tax Officer under the
provisions of § 198-4 of this article.
§ 198-8. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable. If any sentence, clause, or section of this article is for any
reason found to be unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionally, illegality, or invalidity
shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, or sections of this article.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough that this article would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, clause, or section not been included herein.
§ 198-9. Effective date; repealer; conflict.
The provisions of this article shall take effect on January 1, 2012, and shall apply to earned
income and net profits received or earned income and net profits earned or made by a taxpayer
during calendar year 2012 and each year thereafter without annual reenactment unless the rate of
tax is subsequently changed. Changes in the rate of tax shall become effective on the date
specified in the ordinance.
Nothing contained herein shall be considered to repeal by implication or otherwise the provisions
of any earned income and net profits tax ordinance(s) previously enacted as it may apply to
earned income and net profits of taxpayers prior to the effective date of this article, which shall
remain in full force and effect with respect to such earned income and net profits.
Subject to valid enactment of this article without appeal, all provisions of any prior ordinance or
parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby modified, amended, and repealed by the provisions
of this article, which shall thereafter govern the taxation of such earned income and net profits.
This article is enacted under authority of the LTEA, and all provisions thereof that relate to a tax on
earned income and net profits are incorporated into this article. Any future amendments to the
LTEA that are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will automatically
become part of this article upon the effective date of such amendment, without the need for formal
amendment of this article, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. See § 1937.
§ 198-10. (Reserved)
Article II. Realty Transfer Tax
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 203/301
[1]
[1]
[Adopted 10-13-1987 by Ord. No. 413 (Ch. 24, Part 1 of the 1996 Code); amended in its entirety 8-14-
2007 by Ord. No. 598]
§ 198-11. Imposition of tax.
The Borough of Coopersburg adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971[1]
and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized under that article subject to the rate limitation therein.
The tax imposed under this article shall be at the rate of 1%.
Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 198-12. Administration; collection; title.
The tax imposed under § 198-11 and all applicable interest and penalties shall be administered,
collected and enforced under the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known
as the "Local Tax Enabling Act"[1]; provided that if the correct amount of this tax is not paid by the last
date prescribed for timely payment, the Borough of Coopersburg, pursuant to § 1102-D of the Tax
Return Code of 1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and penalties.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 198-13. Interest.
Any tax imposed under § 198-11 that is not paid by the date the tax is due shall bear interest as
prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No.
153, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as
provided in § 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176, 72 P.S. § 806 et seq.), as amended,
known as the "Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and
Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 198-14. (Reserved)
§ 198-15. (Reserved)
§ 198-16. (Reserved)
§ 198-17. (Reserved)
§ 198-18. (Reserved)
§ 198-19. (Reserved)
§ 198-20. (Reserved)
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 204/301
§ 198-21. (Reserved)
§ 198-22. (Reserved)
§ 198-23. (Reserved)
§ 198-24. (Reserved)
§ 198-25. (Reserved)
§ 198-26. (Reserved)
§ 198-27. (Reserved)
§ 198-28. (Reserved)
§ 198-29. (Reserved)
Article III. Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 2-3-1959 by Ord. No. 199; amended in its entirety 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509 (Ch. 24, Part 3
of the 1996 Code)]
§ 198-30. Authority for enactment.
This article is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, No. 511, December 31,
1965, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. (1982) as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by
the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 198-31. "Resident" defined.
The word "resident" as used in this article shall mean every adult 18 years of age or older who lives
within the Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 198-32. Imposition of tax.
Every resident shall pay $5 for the present calendar year and each year hereafter.
§ 198-33. Collection.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 205/301
All taxes, interests, costs and penalties imposed by this article shall be collected by the Borough of
Coopersburg Tax Collector.
§ 198-34. Violations and penalties.
Any resident or inhabitant who fails or refuses to pay the tax or to render accurate information to an
assessor concerning his residence or age, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
not more than $600 and in default of payment, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
Article IV. Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-20-2005 by Ord. No. 584; amended 12-11-2007 by Ord. No. 601]
§ 198-35. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this article, except where the context or language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR
The person, public employee or private agency designated by the political subdivision to collect
and administer the tax herein imposed. The collector is hereby designated to be Southern Lehigh
Earned Income Tax Officer, 5550 Route 378, P.O. Box 130, Center Valley, Pennsylvania, 18034.
DCED
The Department of Community and Economic Development.
EARNED INCOME
Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating to earned income taxes) of the Local
Tax Enabling Act, the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as
amended.
EMPLOYER
An individual, partnership, association, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership,
corporation, governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a
salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM
Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL
Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation, trade or profession within the corporate
limits of the Borough.
NET PROFITS
The net income from the operation of a business, profession, or other activity, as this term is
defined in Section 13 (relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
December 31, 1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.
OCCUPATION
Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any type, kind or character, including services,
domestic or other, earned on or performed within the corporate limits of the Borough for which
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages, commission or fees for
services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 206/301
(1)
(2)
A.
(1)
B.
The area within the corporate limits of the Borough of Coopersburg (hereinafter the "Borough").
TAX
The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 198-36 hereunder.
TAX YEAR
The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a calendar year.
§ 198-36. Levy of tax.
[Amended 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 612]
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed, commencing January 1,
2008, upon the privilege of engaging in an occupation with a primary place of employment within the
Borough during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any length of time
during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in the amount of $52 assessed on a pro rata basis, in
accordance with the provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the following purposes as
the same may be allocated by the Borough from time to time: emergency services, which shall include
emergency medical services, police services and/or fire services; road construction and/or
maintenance; reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief through implementation of a homestead
and farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 85, Subdivision F (relating to homestead
property exclusion). The Borough shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the tax for
emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by
the Borough. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of
the number of political subdivisions within which a person may be employed.
§ 198-37. Exemption and refunds.
Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from all sources within the
Borough is less than $12,000 for any calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the
payment of the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are exempt from
payment of the tax:
Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which the United States was
engaged and is honorably discharged or released under honorable circumstances from active
service if, as a result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic, or a double or
quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability declared by the United States
Veterans Administration or its successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces and is
called to active duty at any time during the taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection,
"reserve component of the Armed Forces" shall mean the United States Army Reserve,
United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast
Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or
the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
Procedure to claim exemption.
A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax may annually file an
exemption certificate with the political subdivision and with the person's employer affirming
that the person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources
within the political subdivision of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate is filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that officer. The exemption
certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms
from employment within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year for which
the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax. Upon receipt of the exemption
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 207/301
(2)
(3)
(4)
C.
A.
B.
certificate and until otherwise instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the person during the calendar
year, or the remainder of the calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies.
Employers shall ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a form at the time of hiring.
The exemption certificate form shall be the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from the tax,
upon notification to an employer by the person or by the political subdivision that the person
has received earned income and net profits from all sources within the political subdivision
equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that the person is otherwise ineligible
for the tax exemption for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that
calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local services tax from the person under
Subsection B(3).
If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from the tax becomes subject
to the tax for the calendar year under Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for
the remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first
payroll period after receipt of the notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the
amount of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption claimed by the
person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll amount due for that first payroll period. The
amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that calendar
year shall be the same amount withheld for other employees. In the event the employment of
a person subject to withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in that
calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding balance of tax due, and the
political subdivision may pursue collection under this article.
Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this subsection that employers shall
not be responsible for investigating exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility
or exempting any employee from the local services tax.
Refunds. The Borough, in consultation with the collector and DCED, shall establish procedures for
the processing of refund claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal law relating to refunds of
overpayments and interest on overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or
75 days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of the
calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No refunds shall be made for
amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Borough or the collector shall
determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
§ 198-38. Duty of employers to collect.
Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those employers situated outside the
political subdivision but who engage in business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged
with the duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or performing for
him within the political subdivision and making a return and payment thereof to the collector.
Further, each employer is hereby authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her
employ, whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and whether or not all such
services are performed within the political subdivision.
A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro-rata share of the tax for each
payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation. The pro-rata share of the tax
assessed on the person for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods established by the employer for the
calendar year. For purposes of determining the pro-rata share, an employer shall round down the
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 208/301
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a dollar. Collection of the
tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of the tax levied by the school
district and the municipality.
No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by more than one political
subdivision during each payroll period.
In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from withholding the tax if the
employee provides a recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the name of the
employer, the length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a statement from
the employee that the pay statement is from the employee's principal employer and the employee
will notify other employers of a change in principal place of employment within two weeks of its
occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on the form approved by DCED.
The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the
number of political subdivisions within which a person may be employed. The political subdivision
shall provide a taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the payment of the withheld
tax money to the political subdivision if the failure to withhold the taxes arises from incorrect
information submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally employed. Further, an employer
shall not be liable for payment of the local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount
withheld by the employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B and remits
the amount so withheld in accordance with this article.
Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days after the end of each quarter
of a calendar year.
§ 198-39. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the tax on forms to be supplied
to the employer by the collector. If an employer fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not
the employer makes collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her to an
employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer shall be responsible for the
payment of the tax in full as though the tax had been originally levied against the employer.
§ 198-40. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to determine the number of
employees from whom such tax shall be deducted and paid over to the collector on or before the 30th
day following the end of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 198-41. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind or engages in any occupation
or profession within a primary place of employment within the political subdivision shall be required to
comply with this article and pay the pro-rata portion of the tax due to the collector on or before the 30th
day following the end of each quarter.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 209/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
§ 198-42. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the person becomes subject
to the tax during each payroll period. In the event a person is engaged in more than one
occupation, that is, concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person working in
more than one political subdivision during a payroll period, the priority of claim to collect the local
services tax shall be in the following order:
First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her principal office or is
principally employed;
Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and works if the tax is levied by
that political subdivision;
Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and which imposes the tax
nearest in miles to the person's home.
In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar year declaring that the
taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes prima facie certification of payment to all other
political subdivisions.
§ 198-43. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places of business outside of the
political subdivision but who perform services of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or
profession within the political subdivision do, by virtue hereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under this article with the same
force and effect as though they were residents of the political subdivision. Further, any individual
engaged in an occupation within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed person, and in the event
his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision shall have the option of proceeding against either the
employer or employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 198-44. Administration of tax.
The collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political subdivision. It shall be the duty of the
collector to accept and receive payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the
amount received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the
tax was received.
The collector is hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of this article and is
hereby charged and empowered, subject to municipal approval, to proscribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination of payroll records of any
employer, subject to this article, the examination and correction of any return made in compliance
with this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is
claimed or found to have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall
have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County as in other cases
provided.
The collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll records of any employer in
order to verify the accuracy of any return made by an employer or, if no return was made, to
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 210/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the collector the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
§ 198-45. Suits for collection.
In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30 days after the due dates
above set forth, the collector may sue for the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this
article, together with interest and penalty.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% on the amount of such tax
shall be calculated beginning with the due date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to
the flat rate of such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of this tax
or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable therefore shall, in addition, be
responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
§ 198-46. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by this article, or whoever
refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts in his or her custody and control setting forth the
number of employees subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or refuses
to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days. The action to enforce the
penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any
employer who shall have filed or who refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 198-47. Interpretation.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the political subdivision to levy and
collect the tax hereby imposed on any occupation not within the taxing power of the political
subdivision under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be held by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or of the laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not affect
or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of the tax so imposed on other
persons or individuals as herein provided.
Chapter 205. Vector Control
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 2-27-2001 by Ord. No.
545. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 205-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
A structure subordinate to the main building located on a lot, used for purposes customarily
incidental to those of the main building. Accessory structures include, but are not limited to,
buildings, private storage sheds and private swimming pools.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 211/301
BREEDING AREA
Any condition which provides the necessary environment for the birth or hatching of vectors.
COLLECTION OF WATER
Contained in ditches, pools, ponds, streams, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools,
privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs, urns, cans, boxes, bottles,
tubs, buckets, roof gutters, tanks of flush closets, reservoirs, vessels, receptacles of any kind or
other containers or devices which may hold water.
DILAPIDATED
Fallen into partial ruin or decay.
DISPOSAL
The storage, collection, disposal or handling of refuse.
EXTERMINATION
The control and elimination of vectors by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
fogging, larviciding, trapping or by any other recognized and legal vector control elimination
methods approved by the local or state authority having such administrative authority.
GARBAGE
The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the storage, handling, preparation and
consumption of food. It shall not include more than a minimal amount of free liquid(s).
HARBORAGE
Any place where vectors can live, nest or seek shelter.
OCCUPANT
Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or eating in, or actually having
possession of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit, except that in dwelling units a guest will not be
considered an occupant.
OWNER
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any improved property.
REFUSE
Garbage, ashes and rubbish.
RUBBISH
All waste materials not included in garbage or ashes, except rubbish from building construction or
reconstruction, grass clippings, street refuse, industrial refuse, abandoned large machinery or
vehicles, dead animals, infectious waste (as defined in 25 Pa. Code § 271.1) or such other waste
materials as are not commonly produced in homes, stores or institutions.
VECTOR
A rodent, anthropoid or insect capable of transmitting a disease or infection. Vectors shall include,
but not be limited to, rats, mosquitoes, cockroaches, flies, ticks, etc.
VECTOR PROOFING
A form of construction to prevent the ingress or egress of vectors to or from a given space or
building or gaining access to food, water or harborage. This term shall include, but not be limited
to, rat proofing, fly proofing, mosquito proofing, etc.
§ 205-2. Forbidden acts.
It shall be unlawful:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 212/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
C.
For any person, firm or corporation to deposit any refuse, offal, pomace, dead animals, decaying
matter or organic substance of any kind or upon any private lot, building, structure, accessory
structure, premises or in or upon any street, avenue, alley, parkway, ravine, ditch, gutter or into
any of the waters of the Commonwealth so that the same shall or may afford food, harborage or
breeding areas for rats, flies or other vectors and thereby create a public health threat.
For any person, firm or corporation to deposit or permit to accumulate in or upon any premises,
improved or vacant or on any open lot or alley, any lumber, boxes, barrels, bottles, cans, glass,
scrap iron, wire, metal articles, pipe, broken stone or cement, broken crockery, broken plaster, or
rubbish of any kind so that the same shall or may afford food, harborage or breeding areas for
rats, flies or other vectors and thereby create a public health threat; provided, however, that the
same may be kept in approved covered receptacles or placed on open racks that are elevated not
less than 18 inches above the ground and evenly piled or stacked, or disposed of as may be
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection.
To maintain a junkyard or place for the dumping or wrecking or dissembling of automobiles, trucks,
tractors or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of dilapidated, wrecked or
abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind, or of any of the parts thereof, or
for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by
other persons, which said places may afford harborage or breeding areas for rats or other vectors
and thereby create a public health threat.
To store refuse in containers other than plastic bags and containers which shall be made of
durable, watertight, rust-resistant material having a tight-fitting lid which must be kept on the
container when in use. These containers must be kept clean by thorough rinsing and draining as
often as necessary so as not to provide food or breeding areas for flies.
To dump, burn, bury, destroy or otherwise dispose of refuse except at an approved refuse disposal
site.
To collect, haul, transport or convey garbage in open, unenclosed non-leakproof vehicles.
To construct, maintain or use a sewage system, privy, urinal, cesspool or other receptacle for
human excrement, so that vectors may have access to the excrementious matter contained
therein.
To permit weeds or similar vegetation more than six inches high to remain standing in any vacant
lot, yard or other place except as may be approved by this Borough.
To have, keep, maintain, cause or permit any collection of standing or flowing water in which
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is treated or maintained so
as effectually to prevent such breeding.
§ 205-3. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
Owners and occupants shall have the following responsibilities:
Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that
part or those parts of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof that he occupies and
controls.
Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination of insects and/or rodents on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 213/301
A.
B.
C.
whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of
this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
rodentproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the
shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be
the responsibility of the owner.
§ 205-4. Vector proofing.
Any dwelling, building, structure, accessory structure, premise or any other place may be required to
be vector proofed when found to be providing harborage or breeding areas for rats, flies, mosquitoes,
or any other vectors. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, contractor, public utility company,
plumber or any other person to remove and fail to restore in like condition the vector proofing from any
building, structure or accessory structure, for any purpose.
§ 205-5. Vector control programs.
A program planned and specifications for private vector control programs may be required to be
submitted to this Borough as deemed necessary by the Vector Control Officer. Said program plan shall
be submitted by the owner or agent of the property on or in which said vector control program is or will
be conducted. The program plan shall state the type of vectors to be controlled, the name of the
company contracted to carry out the program, and any and all work to be conducted in an effort to
control said vectors. If, after review of the program plan by the Vector Control Officer, it is found to be
inadequate or incomplete, additional information may be required as well as additional control
methods.
§ 205-6. Inspections.
From and after the passage of this chapter, this Borough and/or a representative of the vector
control program is empowered to make inspections of the interior and exterior of all dwellings,
buildings, structures and accessory structures, premises, collections of water, or any other places
to determine full compliance with this chapter and any regulations adopted hereunder, and to
determine evidence of vector infestations and the need for vector proofing or additions or repairs
to existing vector proofing.
Whenever it shall be determined that any dwelling, building, structure, accessory structure,
premises, collection of water or any other place is in violation of this chapter, a notice shall be
issued setting forth the alleged violations and advising the owner, occupant, operator or agent that
such violations must be corrected. The time for the correction of said violations must be given as
well as the necessary methods to be employed in the correction.
Whenever said violations shall fail to be corrected within the time set forth and an extension of this
time is not deemed to be necessary, this Borough may proceed to abate the said violations in the
manner provided by law.
§ 205-7. Additional rules.
The Borough Council of this Borough, by resolution duly adopted, may establish rules and regulations
to carry out the provisions of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall become effective upon
adoption of the resolution, unless another effective date is specified in the resolution.
§ 205-8. Violations and penalties.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 214/301
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 210. Vehicles and Traffic
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 4-23-1996 by Ord. No.
509 (Ch. 15 of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
Article I. General Regulations
§ 210-1. Definitions and interpretation.
Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or articles to which different or
additional definitions apply, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act
of June 17, 1976, P.L. 162 No. 81), [1] as amended, except that, in this chapter, the word "street"
may be used interchangeably with the word "highway," and shall have the same meaning as the
word "highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code. Additionally, as used in this chapter, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
URBAN DISTRICT
The territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with structures devoted to
business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance
of a quarter of a mile or more.
[Added 7-9-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and include: New Year's Day,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the
masculine shall include the feminine.
Although the streets in the Borough of Coopersburg run generally in a northeast-southwest and a
northwest-southeast direction, for the purpose of this chapter, Main Street and the street running
parallel or generally parallel to Main Street shall be deemed to run in a north-south direction, and
Station Avenue and the streets parallel or generally parallel to Station Avenue shall be deemed to
run in an east-west direction.
§ 210-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as ordinances, as parts of
ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as amendments to this chapter, except where the law
specifically authorizes less formal action.
§ 210-3. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances and regulations in
force immediately before the enactment of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 215/301
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
A.
B.
ordinances and regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect any act
done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted under any of those
repealed or superseded ordinances or regulations.
§ 210-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time
of emergency:
In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish temporary traffic and/or
parking regulations; and
In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the conduct of parades,
processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for
periods of not more than 72 hours.
Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the Police Department in the
same manner as permanent regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor
in violation of any such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface any sign
or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of
such nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of prosecution.
§ 210-5. Experimental regulations.
The Borough Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate places upon and along the
highways in the Borough of Coopersburg where, for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic
and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate
such locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be
effective as if they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or
tractor in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove,
destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any person
who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty
set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and in case of a violation
for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more
than $25 together with costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for the test
and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes in the
ordinances of the Borough of Coopersburg relative to traffic and parking.
§ 210-6. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
The Borough Council shall have authority to close any street or specific part of a street to
vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police officers at each end of the closed portion,
while construction or maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted on the
closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion.
The Borough Council shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic area upon any street
where construction or maintenance work is under way and to station flagmen at each end of the
restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop, or is
signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 216/301
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and "procession" shall have the following
meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE
A gathering of people without vehicles, which interferes with the movement of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on any street;
PROCESSION
A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or objects moving along a street in a way that
interferes with the normal movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral
caravan or military convoy.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any assemblage unless the person
organizing or conducting the assemblage first obtains a permit from the Mayor, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in advance of the
day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in any case where a state-designated
highway is proposed to be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date when the assemblage is to be
held, the hour when the assemblage may convene and the hour by which it shall have been
completely dispersed. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place other than that authorized
by the permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any procession unless the person
organizing or conducting the procession first obtains a permit from the Mayor, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks in advance of the
day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in any case where a state-designated
highway is proposed to be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the procession is to be held, the route
to be followed by the procession, the hour when and place where participants may commence to
assemble and form before the procession is under way, the time when the procession may
commence to move along its route, and the time by which the end of the procession shall have
reached the end of the route of the procession and the procession shall have been disbanded. It
shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession unless the permit shall
have been granted, or under any conditions as to time or route or otherwise than those stated in
the permit.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-8. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough of Coopersburg are hereby authorized to direct traffic on the
highways of the Borough and at intersections thereof and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 210-9. Authorization for use of speed timing devices.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 217/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
The Borough of Coopersburg Police Department is hereby authorized to use all speed timing
devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are approved or will be approved by
the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with 75
Pa. C.S.A. § 3368.
This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within the Borough of
Coopersburg, be they Borough, county or state highways, and does also hereby elect to exercise
all powers granted to "local authorities" under the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 6101 et seq. (1977) as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
Article II. Traffic Regulations
§ 210-10. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets, as follows, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any part of a street where a maximum speed limit
applies at a higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
[Amended 11-14-2000 by Ord. No. 541; 4-23-2002 by Ord. No. 553]
Street Between
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph)
All streets within the Borough
except State highways
Entire length 25
Route 309 (Third Street)
[Added 7-9-2002 by Ord. No. 554]
Northbound from 30 feet south of
Cherry Street to Fairmount Street
southbound from Fairmount Street
to Cherry Street
35
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the
maximum speed limit.
§ 210-11. Maximum speed limits established on certain bridges
and elevated structures.
Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges and elevated structures, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure at a
higher speed than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated Structure Location
Maximum
(mph)
Cherry Street Bridge Saucon Creek tributary 35
E. State Street Bridge Saucon Creek tributary 25
Fairmount Street Bridge Saucon Creek tributary 20
Station Avenue Bridge Saucon Creek tributary 25
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 218/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the
maximum speed limit.
§ 210-12. Maximum speed limits established for certain vehicles
on hazardous grades.
The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such hazardous grade, no
person shall drive a vehicle having a gross weight in excess of that referred to for that grade in the
direction stated for that grade at a speed in excess of that established in this section for that
grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every such vehicle shall stop the
vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction of
Travel
Maximum
Gross Weight
Maximum
Speed Limit
Required to
Stop Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the maximum
speed limit.
§ 210-13. Maximum speed limits established in parks.
A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and roadways in the public parks
maintained and operated by the Borough of Coopersburg, except in the following locations, where
the lower maximums, as specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum Speed Limit
(mph)
(Reserved)
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over the
maximum speed limit.
§ 210-14. Traffic signals at certain locations.
At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected), and traffic at those locations shall be directed by those signals:
Intersection of Type of Signal
Fairmount Street and Route 309 Traffic control
Landis Street and Route 309 Traffic control
State Street and Main Street
[Added 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 533]
Traffic control
State Street and Route 309
[Added 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 533]
Traffic control
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 219/301
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
Intersection of Type of Signal
Station Avenue and Route 309 Traffic control
Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-15. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles headed in the direction or
directions indicated are prohibited from making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street
into another one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling On Facing
Fairmount Street and Route 309 Route 309 North
Landis Street and Route 309 Landis Street West
Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-16. One-way streets.
The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle on any one-way street other than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To Direction of Travel
Cherry Street
[Added 9-23-2003 by
Ord. No. 561]
Route 309 Fourth Street West
Fourth Street
[Amended 3-24-2010
by Ord. No. 610; 11-
23-2010 by Ord. No.
624]
Fairview Street Fairmount Street North
Horse Alley
[Added 6-8-2010 by
Ord. No. 622]
Station Avenue Thomas Street South, between 6:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Spruce Alley
[Amended 3-21-2009
by Ord. No. 611; 11-
23-2010 by Ord. No.
325; 3-8-2011 by Ord.
No. 630]
Route 309 Fourth Street West
West Oxford Street
Between the hours of
8:00 - 9:30 a.m. and
3:30 - 4:30 p.m. on
school days
[Added 5-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 555]
West end of Oxford
Street
North Liberty and West
Oxford Street
East to North Liberty
Street
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 220/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
§ 210-17. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each
case, to make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as indicated, at any time
when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction of
Travel
Not to
Make Into When
Type of Vehicle
Applicable to:
Route 309
[Added 5-12-
1998 by Ord.
No. 524]
North and
south
Turn Carpenter Alley
- on the east
Side of Route
309
All times All vehicles
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-18. Right turns only permitted at certain intersections.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the first-named street at any of the
following intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to make other than a
right turn, at any time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being prohibited:
Vehicles Traveling
On Direction of Travel Times
Not to Make Left Turn
Into or Travel Straight
Across
(Reserved)
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-19. U-Turns prohibited at certain locations.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon any of the following portions of
streets, in the direction or directions indicated for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-20. No-passing zones.
The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any
vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any nopassing
zone:
Street Direction of Travel Between
(Reserved)
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 221/301
B.
[1]
A.
B.
A.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-21. Through highways established.
The following highways are established as through highways, thus authorizing stop or yield signs
to be erected facing traffic approaching every intersection with the through highway except for
those intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as indicated below.
Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield sign authorized by this section shall stop the
vehicle or yield right-of-way as required by § 3323(b) or § 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code,[1] as the
case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway until he has followed all
applicable requirements of that section of the law:
Highway Between
Fairview Street Entire length
Landis Street Entire length
Main Street Entire length
Station Avenue Entire length
Third Street Entire length
W. State Street Main Street and S. Hillside Drive
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 3323(b) or (c).
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-22. Stop intersections established.
The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through highways established by
§ 210-21) are established as stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are
ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street (the intersecting or through street) on the first-named street (the stop street) in the direction
or directions indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection
on the first named or stop street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall stop the vehicle as
required by § 3323(b) of the Vehicle Code,[1] and shall not proceed into or across the secondnamed
or intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable requirements of that
section of the law.
Stop Street Intersection or Through Street Direction of Travel
Birch Terrace Butternut Road South
Birch Terrace Dogwood Lane North
Butternut Road Locust Street East
Butternut Road LR 39097 West
Carpenter Alley Horse Alley East
Carriage Drive Tilghman Street South
Charles Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
538]
Keewayden West
Charles Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
538]
Springfield Street East
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 222/301
[1]
B.
Stop Street Intersection or Through Street Direction of Travel
Dogwood Lane Locust Street East
Dogwood Lane LR 39097 West
Fairmount Street N. Liberty Street West and east
Fifth Street Fairmount Street North
Fifth Street Oxford Street South
Fourth Street Charles Street South and north
Fourth Street Cherry Street South
Fourth Street E. State Street North
Fourth Street Fairmount Street North
Fourth Street Oxford Street South
Liberty Circle N. Liberty Street East
Linden Street Cherry Street North
Locust Street Linden Street South
Locust Street Tilghman Street North and south
Maplewood Road Linden Street South
Maplewood Road Locust Street North
N. Eighth Street W. Oxford Street North
N. Liberty Street Fairmount Street North and south
Ninth Street Locust Street South
Oxford Street N. Second Street East
Poplar Street Linden Street East
Poplar Street LR 39097 West
Saucon Lane Fairmount Street South
Saucon Lane Willowbrook Road North
Spruce Alley Fourth Street West
Stopp Lane Saucon Lane Southwest
Stopp Lane Unnamed Street Northeast
Thomas Street Fourth Street West
Thomas Street N. Second Street East
Unnamed Street Fairmount Street East
W. Oxford Street N. Liberty Street West
W. State Street N. Second Street East
W. Station Avenue Ninth Street West
W. Station Avenue Young Avenue East
Willowbrook Road North Liberty Street West and east
Young Circle Ninth Street West
Young Circle Young Avenue East
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 3323(b).
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-23. Yield intersections established.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 223/301
[1]
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the through highways established by
§ 210-21) are established as yield intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are
ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the second-named
street (the through street) on the first-named street (the yield street) in the direction or directions
indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on the firstnamed
or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case, shall slow down or stop the vehicle
as required by § 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code,[1] and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 3323(c).
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-24. Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
No motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike shall be operated on any property
owned by the Borough of Coopersburg or any other public agency or instrumentality within the
Borough of Coopersburg without the permission of the property owner and a permit from the
Mayor of the Borough of Coopersburg.
Any person who violates an provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-25. Rotary traffic islands established.
The following locations are designated as rotary traffic islands, and every vehicle passing around
a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of the island:
(Reserved)
Any person who drives a vehicle otherwise than to the right of any rotary traffic island shall be
guilty of a violation of this section, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
and costs.
§ 210-26. Play highways established and authorized.
The following areas upon the streets in the Borough of Coopersburg are established as play
highways:
Street Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
The Mayor is authorized to designate as play highways, whenever he deems that action
advisable, and for whatever period of time directed by him, any part of any street in the Borough of
Coopersburg, where sledding and coasting shall be permitted. That play highway shall be set
apart for the purpose under the direction of the Mayor.
No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any time when that street shall
be designated as a play highway, except in case of emergency, with special permission of the
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 224/301
A.
[1]
(1)
[2]
[3]
(2)
B.
[1]
A.
[2]
B.
Mayor or of the police officer in charge, who shall first clear that play highway of all persons using
it for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any person who violates any provision of this
subsection shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-27. Snowmobile roads designated.
The following roads and streets within the Borough of Coopersburg are designated as special
snowmobile roads:
Street or Road Between
Used by Snowmobiles
Only When Closed to
Vehicular Traffic?
Shared with Vehicular
Traffic?
(Reserved)
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile on any highway, street or road in the
Borough of Coopersburg other than as provided above. Provided, nothing in this section shall
prohibit any person from operating a snowmobile on any other street in the Borough of
Coopersburg:
As authorized by § 7721 of the Vehicle Code[1] for emergency and bridge crossings and for
direct crossing of streets or two-lane highways; or
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 7721.
For special snowmobile events where authorized in advance and the street is blocked off as
provided in § 7723 of the Vehicle Code.[2] Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in § 7752(a) of the Vehicle Code.[3]
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 7723.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 7752(a).
Article III. Restrictions on Size, Weight and Type of Vehicle
and Load
§ 210-28. Vehicle weight limits established on certain streets and
bridges.
On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority granted by § 4902(a) of the
Vehicle Code,[1] it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination
having a gross weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or street or part
of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between Maximum Gross Weight
(Reserved)
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 4902(a).
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and
4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code,[2] and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150
plus $150 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the maximum
allowable weight, and costs.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1).
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 225/301
[1]
A.
[2]
B.
[1]
A.
[2]
B.
A.
§ 210-29. Restrictions on size of vehicles on certain streets and
bridges.
On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority granted by § 4902(a) of the
Vehicle Code,[1] it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation
of the size restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 4902(a).
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and
4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code,[2] and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75
and costs.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1).
§ 210-30. Restrictions as to weight and size of vehicles on
certain streets and bridges due to hazardous traffic conditions.
By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by authority granted by
§ 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code,[1] it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or
combination in violation of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street.
Street or Bridge Between Restrictions
(Reserved)
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 4902(b).
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be prosecuted under § 4902(b) and
4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code,[2] and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $25 and not more than $100 and costs.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g)(1).
§ 210-31. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
[Amended 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 511]
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a passenger car on any of the
following streets or parts of streets:
Street Between
Carpenter Alley Fourth Street to Route 309
Charles Street Main Street to Third Street (North side)
Charles Street Main Street to Third Street (South side)
Cherry Street Main Street to Third Street (North side)
Cherry Street Main Street to Third Street (South side)
E. State Street Main Street to Route 309
E. State Street Third Street to Second Street (North side)
E. State Street Third Street to Second Street (South side)
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 226/301
B.
Street Between
Fifth Street (formerly Linden Street) Thomas Street to Station Avenue
Horse Alley Charles to Cherry Street
Horse Alley Cherry Street to Linden Streets
Linden Street Main Street to Cherry Street
N. Second Street Corner with Landis Street (Both sides)
N. Second Street Corner with Station Avenue (Both sides)
Oxford Street Third Street to Second Street
Pine Alley Route 309 to Fourth Street
Poplar Street Linden Street to Gun Club (North side)
Poplar Street Linden Street to Gun Club (South side)
Spruce Alley Route 309 to Fourth Street
Provided: nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving an emergency vehicle on
any of those streets or parts of streets, or from driving on any of those streets or parts of streets
a truck or other commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from premises located
along that street or part of a street.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $25 and costs.
Article IV. General Parking Regulations
§ 210-32. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle
parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of
this article for any person to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 210-33. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
2nd Street
[Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No.
605]
East East Station and State Street
2nd Street
[Added 4-8-2008 by Ord. No.
605]
West East Station and Thomas Street
4th Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
Both From the northeast and northwest corners of the
intersection of Charles Street and 4th Street, a
distance of 45 feet to the north
4th Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
Both From the southeast and southwest corners of the
intersection of Charles Street and 4th Street, a
distance of 45 feet to the south
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 227/301
Street Side Between
4th Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
East From the southeast corner of the intersection
Fairview Street and 4th Street, a distance of 45 feet
to the south
4th Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
East From the southeast corner of the intersection of
Station Avenue and 4th Street, a distance of 45 feet
to the south
4th Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
East From the northeast corner of the intersection of
Cherry Street and 4th Street, a distance of 45 feet
to the north
5th Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
East From the northeast corner of the intersection of
Fairview Street and 5th Street, a distance of 50 feet
to the north
5th Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
East From the southeast corner of the intersection of
Fairview Street and 5th Street, a distance of 45 feet
to the south
5th Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
East From the south corner of the intersection of Station
Avenue and 5th Street, a distance of 45 feet to the
south
7th Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
West From the northwest corner of the intersection of
State Street and 7th Street, a distance of 50 feet to
the north
9th Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
West From the southwest corner of the intersection of
State Street and 9th Street, a distance of 60 feet to
the south
Charles Street
[Added 8-16-2016 by Ord. No.
655]
North From a point 204 feet from the intersection of State
Route 309 to a point 248 feet from the intersection
of State Route 309, for a distance of 44 feet to the
east
Charles Street
[Added 8-16-2016 by Ord. No.
655]
South From the intersection of State Route 309 for a
distance of 30 feet to the east
Charles Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
South From the southeast corner of the intersection of
Main Street and Charles Street, a distance of 60
feet to the east
Cherry Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
East From the southeast corner of the intersection of
Linden Street and Cherry Street, a distance of 45
feet to the south
Cherry Street North Corner of Main to Horse Alley
Cherry Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
South From the southeast corner of the intersection of
Main Street and Cherry Street, a distance of 60 feet
to the east
E. Fairmount Street South N. Fourth Street and Third Street
E. Fairmount Street South A point 130 feet west of the southwesterly point of
intersection of E. Fairmount Street with N. Fourth
Street and ending at said intersecting point
E. State Street North From bridge 210 feet west
E. State Street North Route 309 to Fourth Street
E. Station Avenue North 52 feet east from Third Street
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 228/301
Street Side Between
E. Station Avenue
[Added 1-13-1998 by Ord. No.
518]
South Beginning at a point 14 linear feet south of the
center line intersection of Pa. Route 309 and
Station Avenue proceeding 65 linear feet east to a
point thence 215 linear feet east to a point
Fairmount Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
North From the northwest corner of the intersection of
Main Street and Fairmount Street, a distance of 57
feet to the west
Fairview Street Fourth Street to Third Street
Fairview Street North 40 feet east on curb of North side of Fifth Street
Fairview Street North 40 feet from curbline on west side of Fifth Street
Fairview Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
North From the northeast corner of the intersection of
Main Street and Fairview Street, a distance of 75
feet to the east
Fairview Street South Main Street to Fifth Street
Fairview Street South Fifth Street to Fourth Street
Fifth Street East 25 feet north of the intersection of Fairview Street
Hickory Alley East Station Avenue to Borough line
Horse Alley Both South of Station Avenue a distance of 30 feet
Landis Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
North From the northeast corner of the intersection of
Main Street and Landis Street, a distance of 105
feet to the east
Landis Street North 30 feet east and west of Sage Alley
Landis Street North Fourth Street to Third Street
Landis Street South N. Main Street to Fifth Street
Landis Street South Fifth Street to Fourth Street
Liberty Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
Both From the northeast and northwest corners of State
Street and Liberty Street, a distance of 45 feet to
the north
Liberty Street
[Added 10-26-1999 by Ord. No.
533]
East Northeast intersection of Liberty Street and State
Street a distance of 30 feet to the north
Linden Street North S. Main Street to Borough line
Linden Street North South Main Street to Cherry Street
Linden Street South 65 feet east of Main Street
Linden Street South Northwest corner of Lot 1 of the Linden Street
Subdivision southwest 135 feet to the northeast
corner of Lot 3 of Linden Street Subdivision
Locust Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
South From the southwest corner of the intersection of
Main Street and Locust Street, a distance of 45 feet
to the west
Ninth Street East Station Avenue south 410 feet
N. Fifth Street West Fairmount Street to State Street
N. Fourth Street East Fairview Street to Oxford Street
N. Fourth Street East Fairview Street 40 feet north
N. Fourth Street West Fairview Street 40 feet north
N. Main Street East Oxford Street and E. State Street
N. Main Street East Oxford Street to Landis Street
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 229/301
Street Side Between
N. Main Street East Landis Street to Fairmount Street
N. Main Street
[Repealed 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 533]
N. Main Street
[Repealed 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 533]
N. Main Street
[Added 3-25-2003 by Ord. No.
560]
West Beginning at the northern curbline of the driveway
entrance of 36 North Main Street and extending 190
feet north from the beginning point
N. Main Street
[Added 4-23-2002 by Ord. No.
553]
West 124 North Main Street starting at the southern
curbline of the driveway entrance and ending 26
feet south and 485 feet north of the beginning point
N. Main Street
[Added 10-26-1999 by Ord. No.
533]
West West side of N. Main Street starting at the southern
curbline of the driveway entrance of 212 N. Main
Street and ending 116 feet to the south and 135 feet
to the north of the beginning point.
N. Third Street East State Street to Fairmount Street
N. Third Street West State Street to Fairmount Street
Oxford Street
[Added 11-14-2000 by Ord. No.
537]
North From the northeast corner of the intersection of
Main Street and Oxford Street, a distance of 55 feet
to the east
S. Main Street East Station Avenue to Linden Street
S. Main Street East Station Avenue to State Street
S. Main Street West 155 feet at intersection of Station Avenue
S. Main Street West 52 feet south of Thomas Street intersection
S. Third Street East Cherry Street to State Street
S. Third Street West Cherry Street to State Street
Sage Alley East Landis Street to Fairview Street
Sage Alley West Landis Street to Fairview Street
Sage Alley West Across from Pine Alley
Station Avenue North Hickory Alley to 40 feet both sides of intersection
Station Avenue North Main Street to Linden Street
Station Avenue South Hickory Alley to Borough line
Station Avenue
[Added 4-23-2002 by Ord. No.
553]
South 30 feet east and west of Horse Alley
Station Avenue South 48 feet east of Main Street
Thomas Street
[Added 6-8-2010 by Ord. No.
622]
North From its intersection with Horse Alley a distance of
25 feet east
Thomas Street
[Added 10-26-1999 by Ord. No.
533]
North From the northeast intersection at Main Street a
distance of 30 feet to the east
Thomas Street South Main Street to Linden Street
W. State Street North Hillside to Liberty Street
W. State Street North Liberty Street and N. Eighth Street
W. State Street North N. Eighth Street to N. Seventh Street
W. State Street North N. Seventh Street to N. Main Street
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 230/301
Street Side Between
Young Avenue West From W. State Street to S. Ninth Street
§ 210-34. Parking prohibited in certain locations certain days and
hours.
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days and between the hours
indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Fourth Street East Oxford and Landis
Streets
Monday — Saturday All
W. State Street South Young Avenue and
Liberty Street
Monday — Friday 8:30 a.m. to 9:30
a.m.
§ 210-35. Parking of trucks, buses and certain other vehicles
prohibited in certain locations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked, on any of the following streets
or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor
home or passenger car attached to a trailer of any kind):
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 210-36. Parking time limited in certain locations certain days
and hours.
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than the time indicated, in any of
the following locations, at any time on the days and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours Time Limit
Main Street West Oxford Street
and Thomas
Street
Everyday 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
2 hours
Oxford Street North Fifth Street and
Main Street
Everyday 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
2 hours
§ 210-37. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited.
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall be unlawful for any person
to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked, in any such zone, except as specifically provided for
that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized Purpose
or Vehicle
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 231/301
A.
B.
Street Side Location
Authorized Purpose
or Vehicle
E. State Street North Next to Municipal Building Official business
E. State Street North 500 block (Fire, Ambulance) Emergency vehicle
E. State Street North 500 block (fire truck lot) Emergency vehicle
E. State Street North Outside door of Town Hall Handicapped parking
E. State Street North — to — Reserved parking
E. State Street South From the PP&L pole located west
of the Fire Company Drive 75
feet west
Reserved parking area
for ambulance
personnel
E. State Street
[Added 8-16-2016 by
Ord. No. 655]
South Outside 236 E. State Street Handicapped parking
E. Station Avenue North Springfield Street to RR crossing Steep incline
E. Station Avenue North 100 block, 304 feet west of RR
crossing
E. Station Avenue Northwest At 90° angle to NW corner
N. Main Street West 00 block north
S. 2nd Street
[Added 8-20-2013 by
Ord. No. 642]
West Starting 30 feet north of the
existing stop sign on S. 2nd
Street at its intersection with E.
Station Avenue and extending 25
feet north therefrom
Handicapped parking
S. Main Street West 00 to 100 block
S. Ninth Street East 00 block
§ 210-38. Standing or parking on roadway for loading or
unloading.
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other than a pedalcycle) on the
roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of any street, except that standing
or parking for the purpose of loading or unloading persons or property shall be permitted on the
following named streets on Monday through Saturday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m.
and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for the loading or
unloading.
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 210-39. Angle parking required on portions of certain streets.
Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of streets:
Street Side Between
E. State Street North Main Street and Ambulance garage
On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at the angle shall be parked
with its front nearest the curb.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 232/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(a)
(3)
C.
§ 210-40. Residential permit parking.
Findings and purpose. The Borough of Coopersburg finds that:
Certain residential areas in the Borough are subjected to commuter vehicle parking, therefore,
depriving the residents of those areas of spaces in which to park their own vehicles;
Those residential streets are also subjected to a high degree of commuter traffic which
substantially reduces the quality of the ambient air level; and
The establishment of a parking permit program for certain affected areas should facilitate
efficient movement of traffic by providing for parking preference during certain hours of the
day and days of the week. Therefore, the Borough considers it to be in the interest of the
people of the Borough to provide for the establishment of a residential permit parking program
to insure primary access to available parking spaces by neighborhood residents and also to
provide a cleaner ambient air level.
Definitions. For the purpose of this section, words and terms listed in this subsection, as follows,
shall have the following meanings:
COMMUTER VEHICLE
A motor vehicle parked in a residential area by a person not a resident of that residential area.
PROPRIETOR
A person who owns or leases real estate within a residential area of which he is not a
resident, but who owns or manages a business enterprise or professional office maintained at
that address; for the purpose of this section, a proprietor shall be entitled to one parking
permit for that business or professional office address.
RESIDENT
A person who owns or leases real property within a residential area and who maintains either
a voting residence, or bona fide occupancy, or both, at that address.
RESIDENTIAL AREA
A contiguous area containing public highways or parts of public highways primarily abutted by
residential property or residential and nonbusiness property (such as schools, parks, places
of worship, hospitals and nursing homes).
Criteria. The residential areas designated in Subsection D of this section are those deemed
impacted and hence eligible for residential parking on the basis of the following criteria:
During any period between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday,
except legal holidays, the number of vehicles parked (or standing), legally or illegally, on the
streets in the area is equal to 70% or more of the legal, on-street parking capacity of the area.
For the purpose of this criterion, a legal parking space shall be 20 linear feet.
During the same period as specified in Subsection C(1), directly above, 10% or more of the
vehicles parked (or standing) on the streets in the area are not registered in the name of a
person residing in the area. For the purpose of this criterion, the latest available information
from the Bureau of Motor Vehicles and Licensing of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation regarding registration of motor vehicles shall be used.
Provided: in determining that a specific area identified as impacted and eligible for residential
permit parking is designated as a residential permit parking area, the following factors are
taken into consideration:
The local and metropolitan needs with respect to clean air and environment;
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 233/301
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(1)
(2)
D.
E.
F.
G.
(1)
H.
The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in the Borough of Coopersburg;
The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal parking and related health and
safety hazards;
The proximity of public transportation to the residential area;
The desire and need of the residents for residential permit parking and their willingness
to bear the administrative costs in connection with it; and
The need for parking in excess of the residential permit parking program in proximity to
establishments located in the residential permit parking area and used by the general
public for religious, health or educational purposes.
Designation of residential permit parking areas.
The following are designated as residential permit parking areas:
Area Bounded by and Including
(Reserved)
Signs shall be erected along the streets in each residential permit parking area, indicating the
days, hours, locations and conditions under which parking shall be by permit only.
Application for permit. Application for a residential parking permit shall be made to the Chief of
Police by the person desiring the permit, who shall be only the owner or the driver of a motor
vehicle who resides on or is a proprietor of property immediately adjacent to a street or other
location within a residential parking permit area. A separate application shall be required for each
motor vehicle, and each application shall be accompanied by a permit fee, set pursuant to a
resolution of the Borough Council, which shall be for the use of the Borough, to be applied to the
cost of administering the residential permit parking program. Each application shall contain the
following information: the name of the owner or the driver, as the case may be, of the motor
vehicle; the address of the resident or the proprietor, as the case may be; the make, model and
registration number of the motor vehicle; and the driver number as taken from the applicant's
current driver's license. At the discretion of the Chief of Police, the applicant shall be required, at
the time of making application, to present his driver's license and the vehicle registration card.
Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application and the permit fee, and determination by him
that the information upon the application shows that the applicant is entitled to a residential
parking permit, the Chief of Police shall issue to the applicant a residential parking permit, which
shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year. The permit shall display the serial and
registration numbers of the motor vehicles, the residential parking area number, and the expiration
date. The permit shall be renewable annually before the expiration date, upon making application
for renewal and payment of the permit fee. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for
any person to display other than the current and valid permit while standing or parking in a
residential permit parking area at any time when those permits are to be displayed.
Temporary and exemption parking permits. Temporary parking permits may be issued by the Chief
of Police, upon payment of a fee established pursuant to a resolution, to bona fide visitors of
residents of a designated residential permit parking area, and exemption parking permits may be
issued, without payment of a fee, to handicapped persons.
Responsibility of permit holder.
Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the holder of a residential
parking permit shall be permitted to stand or park a motor vehicle operated by him in any
designated residential parking area during those times when parking of motor vehicles is
permitted in that area. While a vehicle for which a residential parking permit has been issued
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 234/301
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
is so parked, that permit shall be displayed so as to be clearly visible through the windshield
of the vehicle. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder a
parking space within a designated residential permit parking area.
A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder to stand or park a motor vehicle in
any place where or at any time when stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles is
prohibited or set aside for other specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit exempt its
holder from the observance of any traffic or parking regulation other than residential permit
parking regulation or restriction.
No person other than the permit holder whose name appears on the permit shall use a
residential parking permit or display it on a vehicle operated; any such use or display by a
person other than the permit holder shall constitute a violation of this section by the permit
holder and by the person who so used or displayed the parking permit.
It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person falsely to represent himself as
eligible for a residential parking permit or to furnish false information in an application to the
Chief of Police in order to obtain a residential parking permit.
Revocation of permits. The Chief of Police shall have authority to revoke the residential
parking permit of any permit holder found to be in violation of any provision of this section.
Upon written notification to him of the revocation, the permit holder shall surrender the permit
to the Chief of Police. Failure to do so, when so requested, shall constitute a violation of this
section. Provided, any person receiving such a notice may, within 10 days after the date of
the notice, appeal to Borough Council for a hearing on the revocation, and the decision of
Borough Council shall be final.
§ 210-41. Storage and repair of vehicle, trailers and dumpsters.
[Amended 2-26-2002 by Ord. No. 552; 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. 651]
Storage of vehicles on streets prohibited. No vehicle shall be stored upon any street, alley, road,
highway or public thoroughfare within the Borough of Coopersburg. As used herein, "stored" shall
mean the parking of a vehicle in one place upon any street, alley or road continuously for more
than 72 hours.
Unlawful to park inoperative, uninspected, or unregistered vehicles. No person shall park or leave
on the streets, alleys, roads, highways, or public thoroughfares, or in the open on any other
property in the Borough of Coopersburg, any mechanically inoperable vehicles, vehicles without
current registration plates or vehicles without current inspection stickers.
Unlawful to repair vehicles on the street. No person shall perform any maintenance or repair to
any vehicle on any street, alley, road, highway or public thoroughfare within the Borough of
Coopersburg, except for repairs necessitated by an emergency when such repairs would
reasonably be expected to take no more than one hour to make the vehicle operable.
Parking of trailers, placement of dumpsters, and repair of vehicles on streets regulated.
Definitions. The following words or terms shall have the following meanings for this section:
DUMPSTER
A container used to temporarily store trash, refuse, construction refuse, or debris until
such material is removed for disposal by an authorized refuse hauler. This includes bag
systems (e.g., Bagster-Waste Management).
TRAILER
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 235/301
E.
F.
A.
B.
C.
D.
[1]
Any nonmotorized vehicle designed to carry property, goods, boats, recreational vehicles,
or merchandise and designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle or truck tractor.
Parking of trailers without attached motive power prohibited. No person shall park, or allow to
remain parked, on any street, alley, road, highway or public thoroughfare within the Borough of
Coopersburg a trailer without having attached thereto a means of mechanical traction and motor
power so constructed or designed for the purpose of pulling or drawing such trailer, except when
temporary parking is required for the loading and unloading for delivery of goods, merchandise, or
materials.
Permission required prior to placement of dumpsters on any street or public thoroughfare.
Dumpsters shall be placed on private property whenever possible and no person shall place or
caused to be placed a dumpster in any street, alley, road, highway, public thoroughfare or
sidewalk unless it is not possible to locate the dumpster on private property. If it is not possible to
place the dumpster on private property, a person shall obtain permission from the Borough Office
before placing or causing to place any dumpster on any street, alley, road, highway, public
thoroughfare or sidewalk. Permission requests must include date of removal and purpose of work
being completed. No dumpster will be allowed for a period longer than 60 days. All dumpsters
need to be marked with reflective material for visibility.
§ 210-41.1. Violations and penalties.
[Added 10-23-2007 by Ord. No. 600; amended 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. 651]
Any person who violates a provision of this article shall be, upon conviction, subject to the following:
First offense: a written warning or a fine of $10 plus costs;
Second offense: a fine of $50 plus costs;
Third offense: a fine of $100 plus costs: and
For each subsequent offense: a fine of $300 plus costs.
Article V. Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked
Vehicles
§ 210-42. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code,[1] and gives authority to
the Borough to remove and impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow away zone and in
violation of parking regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been abandoned (as defined by
the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner as to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to
others, may be towed under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22).
§ 210-43. Authority to remove and impound.
The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound, or to order the removal and impounding, of
any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were
within the conditions stated in § 210-42 of this article. Provided, no such vehicle shall be removed or
impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of this article, or the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 236/301
§ 210-44. Tow-away zones designated.
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established as tow-away zones. Signs
shall be posted to place the public on notice that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the
Borough parking regulations:
Street
Parking Lot Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 210-45. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done only by approved storage
garages that shall be designated from time to time by Borough Council. Every such garage shall
submit evidence to Borough Council that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount
satisfactory to Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or
damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of towing or
storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to Borough Council its schedule of charges for
towing and storage of vehicles under this article, and, when the schedule is approved by Borough
Council, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of
charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded
under this article by any approved storage garage. Borough Council shall delete from its list of
approved storage garages any garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any
vehicle removed or impounded under this article.
§ 210-46. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any vehicle from
liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision of this article for which the vehicle was
removed or impounded.
§ 210-47. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage costs, plus a $25 fee of which
$10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation by the garage to which the
vehicle was taken.
§ 210-48. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under this article and shall be
able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with
information as to the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 210-49. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle Code if, at the time of the
intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in charge of the vehicle is present and
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 237/301
[1]
A.
B.
expresses a willingness and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 210-50. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle
Code, 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 7301 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 210-51. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a report shall be filed with
PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle Code[1] by the person having legal custody of the
vehicle. If the vehicle has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a licensed
salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports and disposing of the vehicle in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa. C.S.A.
§ 7301 et seq., as amended).
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 7311.
Article VI. Snow and Ice Emergency
§ 210-52. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of snow and ice on the snow
emergency routes named in § 210-54 of this article, the Mayor, in his discretion, may declare a snow
and ice emergency (designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information on the existence of
a snow emergency shall be given by the Borough through radio, newspaper or other available media,
and information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 210-53. Parking prohibited, driving motor vehicles restricted, on
snow emergency routes during emergency.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time during the continuance of the
emergency, for any person:
To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked anywhere on any snow
emergency route designated in § 210-54 of this article; or
To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless that vehicle is equipped
with snow tires or chains.
§ 210-54. Snow emergency routes designated.
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Side Between
Main Street West Entire length
Station Avenue North Entire length
Station Avenue South Entire length
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 238/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
Street Side Between
W. State Street North Entire length
W. State Street South Entire length
§ 210-55. Violations and penalties.
If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under § 210-52 of this article, a person
shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow
emergency route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and, upon conviction, shall
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs.
If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under § 210-52 of this article, a person
shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow emergency route, without having that vehicle equipped
with snow tires or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
Article VII. Regulation of Pedalcycles and Nonmotorized
Vehicles
§ 210-56. Riding and parking of pedalcycles on sidewalks along
certain streets prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the sidewalk along the
following portions of the streets in the Borough:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $5 and costs.
§ 210-57. Restrictions on use of pushcarts.
The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle, including a pedalcycle,
propelled solely by human power, and used or intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or
sale of goods, wares or merchandise.
It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any sidewalk in any business district
except as necessary to move the pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded
or from which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under permit from
Borough Council as provided in Subsection C of this section.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk except for the purpose of
selling or dispensing from that pushcart goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit
from Borough Council. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making application for the
permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the use of the Borough, set by the Borough
Council pursuant to a resolution. The permit shall be granted to the applicant, upon payment of the
fee, and upon his signing an agreement with Borough Council that he shall be bound by the
conditions imposed by Borough Council and made a part of the permit, dealing with the following
matters:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 239/301
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
A.
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
A.
Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more stated locations upon the
sidewalk and to stated days and hours at each location;
Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the disposal of garbage and refuse
resulting from the operations carried on;
Requiring that there be no violation of any law, chapter or regulation pertaining to health,
sanitation and the handling of food or drink.
Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition of any permit granted
under this section, shall be guilty of a summary offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 210-58. Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy
vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in the Borough, or upon any
roadway unless that roadway is on a portion of a street blocked off for sledding by authority of
§ 210-5 of Article I or § 210-25 of Article II of this chapter. Provided: nothing in this subsection
shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating, skateboarding or to ride upon or
propel any coaster or other toy vehicle upon:
Any street except in order to cross the roadway; or
Any sidewalk located in a business district, except that nothing in this subsection shall prevent
a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a
sidewalk.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of $5 and costs.
Article VIII. Parking of Certain Commercial Vehicles
[Added 12-14-2004 by Ord. No. 574]
§ 210-59. Parking prohibited; exceptions.
Parking of certain commercial vehicles, motorbuses, tractors, trailers and truck tractors, as herein
defined, is prohibited on all streets within the Borough of Coopersburg, between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except when said vehicles are parked for the purpose and in the process of
delivery or picking up of property. From 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m., there will be a two-hour time limit on
the parking of commercial motor vehicles on all Borough streets.
§ 210-60. Definitions.
Words or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows:
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE
Any motor vehicle designed for carrying freight or merchandise which has more than four
wheels and tires, or a body, removable or otherwise, designed as a mobile home, for
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 240/301
(2)
(3)
[1]
B.
travel or camping. Trailers, irrespective of the number of wheels or the designed use, be
it for the transportation of personal property, recreational equipment (boats, snowmobiles,
motorcycles, etc.) shall be considered for this chapter as a "commercial motor vehicle."
Any motor vehicles of a bus type, designed for the mass transportation of persons,
including students of any and all educational institutions, or participants of Sunday
schools, church schools and church services, shall be considered for this article as a
"commercial motor vehicle."
A suburban motor vehicle, namely a station wagon and a four wheel van, shall not be
deemed to be a "commercial motor vehicle" for the purpose of this article
The terms "motor bus," "tractor," "trailer" and "truck tractor" shall have the same meanings and
definitions as those terms as defined by the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
Act of April 29, 1959, P.L. 58,[1] and the definitions as therein set forth and incorporated herein by
reference thereto.
Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 210-61. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the terms of this article shall upon summary
conviction be sentenced to pay a fine of $100 for the first violation and $200 for each subsequent
violation, plus costs of towing, storage and prosecution.
Chapter 220. Water
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg as indicated in article
histories. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Sewers — See Ch. 177.
Article I. Connections to Water System
[Adopted 8-14-1984 by Ord. No. 384 (Ch. 26, Part 1 of the 1996 Code)]
§ 220-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms used in this
article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY
The Municipal Authority of the Borough of Coopersburg, a Pennsylvania municipality authority.
BOROUGH
The Borough of Coopersburg, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, a political subdivision, acting by and
through its Council or, in appropriate cases, by and through its authorized representatives.
IMPROVED PROPERTY
Any property within this Borough upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous
or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings.
OWNER
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 241/301
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or partial, of any property located in this
Borough.
PERSON
Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, corporation or other group or entity.
WATER SYSTEM
The water distribution facilities, including all related facilities, owned by the Authority, including all
property, real, personal and mixed, rights, powers, licenses, easements, rights-of-way, privileges,
franchises, and other property or interest in property of whatsoever nature used or useful in
connection with such facilities, and together with all additions, extensions, alterations,
improvements and betterments thereof or thereto which may be made, installed or acquired, from
time to time, by or for the Authority.
§ 220-2. Use of public water system required.
Notice to connect. The owner of any improved property abutting upon any street in which there is
a water main of the water system shall connect such improved property to the water system in
such manner as this Borough and the Authority may require, within 90 days after notice to such
owner from this Borough to make such connection.
Form of notice. The notice by this Borough to make a connection to the water system, referred to
in Subsection A, shall consist of a copy of this article, including any amendments and/or
supplements at the time in effect, and a written or printed document requiring the connection in
accordance with the provisions of this article and specifying that such connection shall be made
within 90 days from the date such notice is given. Such notice may be given at any time after a
water main is in place which can supply water to the particular improved property. Such notice
shall be served upon the owner in accordance with law.
Failure to connect. If the owner of any improved property abutting upon any street in which there is
a water main of the water system, after 90 days' notice from this Borough in accordance with
Subsection A, shall fail to connect such improved property, as required, this Borough may make
such connection and may collect from such owner the costs and expenses thereof. In such case,
this Borough shall forthwith, upon completion of the work, send an itemized bill of the cost of the
construction of such connection to the owner of the improved property to which connection has
been so made, which bill shall be payable forthwith, In case of neglect or refusal by the owner of
such improved property to pay said bill, this Borough shall file a municipal lien for said construction
within six months of the date of the completion of the construction of said connection, the same to
be subject in all respects to the general law providing for the filing and recovery of municipal liens.
§ 220-3. Connection requirements.
Permit required. No person shall construct any connection to, uncover, connect with, make any
opening into or use, alter or disturb, in any manner, any water main constituting a part of the water
system, without first making application for and securing a permit, in writing, from the Authority.
Such application shall be made on a form to be provided by the Authority.
Connections to conform to regulations. All connections to the water mains and the installation of
any service line to an improved property shall be accomplished in conformance with the rules and
regulations of this Borough and the Authority.
Authorized from authority. Only persons properly authorized by the Authority shall be permitted to
make service line and service connection installations.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 242/301
D.
A.
B.
A.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
B.
C.
Additional rules. This Borough reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional rules and
regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to connections with the water system,
which additional rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be, and shall be construed
as, part of this article.
§ 220-4. Violations and penalties; collection.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 and costs and, in default of payment thereof,
shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Collection powers. Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this article shall be enforceable
and recoverable in the manner at the time provided by applicable law.
§ 220-5. Turning off water.
[Added 11-12-2002 by Ord. No. 556]
The Borough Council or its duly authorized representative reserves the right at all times, after 30
days' notice, to shut off the water for nonpayment of water bills, or for neglect or refusal to comply
with these rules and regulations, and to assess such charges as may be determined by Borough
Council for the resumption of service.
Service under an application may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:
Misrepresentation in application as to property or fixtures to be supplied or the use to be
made of the water supply.
Use of water for any property or purposes other than described in the application.
Waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures or otherwise.
Failure to maintain in good order, connection, service lines or fixtures beyond the curb and
owned by the applicant.
Molesting any service pipe, meter, curb stop or seal or any appurtenance of the water system
of the Borough of Coopersburg.
Vacancy of the premises.
Violation of any rules of the Borough of Coopersburg or the Municipal Authority of
Coopersburg.
Failure to make payments of any charges against the property.
Refusal of access to property for purpose of inspecting, reading, caring for or removing
meters.
The Borough Council, or its duly authorized representative, shall have the right to turn off the
water without notice in case of breakdowns or for other unavoidable causes, or for the purpose of
making necessary repairs, connections, etc. Reasonable notice will be given when practicable. In
no case shall the Borough be liable for any damage or inconvenience suffered therefrom.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 243/301
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
D.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
A.
If a property owner or landlord either fails to pay water-sewer bills for a residence or instructs the
Borough or utility company to shut off the service, property owner or landlord and tenant must be
notified by the utility company or Borough. The utility company or Borough will then explain the
rights and duties related to continuing service.
The utility company or Borough cannot terminate the service:
On a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, holiday or the day before a holiday.
For nonpayment of bills more than four years old.
For nonpayment of bills for either merchandise or service work.
For nonpayment of bills in someone else's name, unless they are found responsible by a
court or the PUC.
The utility company or Borough must follow these steps before shutting off service:
At least three days before service is shut off, the utility company or Borough must attempt
to contact them in person. If the company cannot reach them by phone or in person, it
must notify a third party if they have designated one or notify a community interest group
or the PUC.
At the time of shut off, the utility company or Borough must contact a responsible adult at
the residence. If no adult is home, the termination will be postponed for 48 hours and a
notice will be left at the residence stating this.
If service is shut off, the utility company or Borough must provide a final information notice to
the property owner or landlord and tenant.
Article II. Drought Emergencies
[Adopted 1-10-1989 by Ord. No. 431 (Ch. 26, Part 3 of the 1996 Code)]
§ 220-6. Purpose.
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania developed a three-stage approach to drought preparedness
and response which consists of:
A drought watch which is to alert the public and elected officials;
A drought warning which is to prepare and coordinate community response; and
A drought emergency which is a declaration by the Governor pursuant to the Emergency
Management Services Code.
The Borough of Coopersburg is, by statute and regulation, required to be responsive to the need
to conserve water at any of the foregoing stages of preparedness and even prior thereto in the
event local conditions are deemed to require more immediate action.
§ 220-7. Procedure.
The Council for the Borough of Coopersburg does hereby empower the Mayor to invoke the power
of this article to impose prohibitions upon certain uses of water within the Borough of Coopersburg
whenever in his or her judgment any of the three stages of drought preparedness are declared to
be in existence in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and in the Borough of Coopersburg.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 244/301
B.
A.
B.
C.
The Mayor, in the exercise of the action empowered by this article, shall consider the following
activities, in the sequence of listing below, as a series of prohibitions to be imposed either
sequentially or at random, individually or as a group:
P1 Washing of streets, roads, sidewalks, driveways, or any other outdoor paved surface,
except when necessary for repaving.
P2 Filling and topping off swimming pools.
P3 Car washing, except in car wash facilities that recycle water.
P4 Watering lawns and gardens except with the use of a hand held hose or container. (This
prohibition is not applicable to commercial nurseries.)
P5 Operation of outdoor fountains and circulating pools.
P6 Serving water in restaurants, except at the request of customers.
§ 220-8. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Failure of any person or persons to act in response to a prohibition imposed by the Mayor under the
terms of this article shall subject the responsible individual or individuals to the issuance of a citation by
the Borough Police Department and subsequent penalties to be imposed as follows:
Initial citation shall subject the party cited to a warning only.
A subsequent citation shall be punishable by a fine of $25 and costs of prosecution in the form of
a summary proceeding.
Any citation issued to a person or persons in excess of two previous citations shall, upon
conviction therefor, subject the party to a fine not exceeding $1,000 and costs and, in default of
payment thereof, shall subject the person or persons to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30
days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Article III. Water Conservation Performance Standards
[Adopted 5-12-1992 by Ord. No. 476 (Ch. 26, Part 3 of the 1996 Code)]
§ 220-9. General policy.
No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any residential, commercial, industrial,
agricultural, recreational, governmental or public building or structure of any kind which is constructed
or remodeled and which plumbing, water piping or water fixtures are to be installed, extended or
altered in any way and for which a construction permit is required to be obtained from the Borough of
Coopersburg (or would be required but for an exemption from permit requirements for public or
governmental agency) unless the new, extended or altered plumbing, water piping and other water
using fixtures thereon conform to the requirements and standards of § 220-10 of this article. The
provisions of this article shall be applied to any such building or structure for which such a building
permit is issued or otherwise be required to be issued but for such an exemption, on or after May 1,
1992.
§ 220-10. Water conservation performance standards for
plumbing fixtures and fittings.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 245/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
Water closets and associated flushing mechanisms. The water consumption of water closets shall
not exceed an average of 1.6 gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressure from 20 to 80
psi. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements of ANSI A112.19.2M and
ANSI A112.19.6M.
Urinals and associated flushing mechanisms. Urinal water consumption shall not exceed an
average of 1.5 gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressure from 20 to 80 psi. The fixtures
shall perform in accordance with the test requirements of ANSI A112.19.2M and ANSI
A112.19.6M.
Showerheads. Showerhead discharge rates shall not exceed three gallons of water per minute
over a range of test pressure from 20 to 80 psi. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the
test requirements of ANSI A112.18.1M.
Faucets. Sink and lavatory faucet discharge shall not exceed three gallons of water per minute
over a range of test pressure from 20 to 80 psi. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the
test requirements of ANSI A112.18.1M.
§ 220-11. Special provisions.
Special purpose equipment. The performance standards of § 220-10 shall not apply to fixtures and
fittings such as emergency showers, aspirator faucets and blowout fixtures that, in order to
perform a specialized function, cannot meet the specified standards.
Any person(s) may apply to the Borough of Coopersburg for an exemption to the terms of this
article, which may be granted by the Borough Council, upon proof that some other device, system
or procedure will save as much or more water as those set forth herein, or that those set forth
herein cannot be complied with, without undue hardship.
§ 220-12. Official review and modification.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, modify, add to or remove from the standards and
restrictions herein by resolution duly resolved at public meeting.
§ 220-13. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violation any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Chapter 225. Weed Control
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 8-12-1975 by Ord. No.
317 (Ch. 10, Part 1 of the 1996 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 225-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this
section:
PERSON
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 246/301
A.
B.
Includes individual, partnership, firm or corporation in the singular or plural.
WEEDS
Includes all rank vegetable growth, including but not limited to, grass, ragweed, dandelion and
such other vegetation commonly referred to as weeds or brush which may exude unpleasant
noxious odors or pollen, or which may conceal deposits of filth or serve as breading places for
mosquitoes, other insects or vermin.
§ 225-2. Nuisance declared.
No person owning, holding or in possession of any real estate shall allow or maintain on any lot or tract
of land within the boundary of the Borough of Coopersburg any growth of weeds to a height of over
one foot, and such growth of weeds is hereby declared to be a nuisance, injurious to the health,
cleanliness, comfort and safety of the residents of the Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 225-3. Notification of violation; remedy.
The Borough of Coopersburg shall notify any person in writing of the violation of this chapter. In the
event of the failure of the person so notified to cut and destroy or remove such weeds within five days
after having been so notified, the Borough may cut, destroy or remove or have such weeds cut,
destroyed or removed and bill such person with the cost thereof in accordance with further provisions
of this chapter. In the event of subsequent violations in the same calendar year, the Borough shall be
authorized to cut, destroy or remove or to have such weeds cut, destroyed or removed without further
notification to the person and bill such person for the costs thereof. In the case of neglect or refusal by
the person to pay such bill within 30 days, the bill shall be subject in all respects to the general law
provided for the filing and recovery of municipal liens.
§ 225-4. Cost of remedy.
The cost for weed violation remedy service of the Borough of Coopersburg shall be determined from
time to time by Borough Council by resolution. Such resolution shall establish a lump sum service
charge which shall compensate the Borough for both direct and indirect costs and expenses incurred
in weed removal together with an additional charge based on the time involved in such weed removal.
§ 225-5. Violations and penalties.
[Amended 4-23-1996 by Ord. No. 509]
It is declared to be the policy of the Borough of Coopersburg that, upon notification of a violation of
this chapter, the property owner shall proceed to abate the nuisance himself, or be subject to the
penalties imposed by this chapter. Borough action to abate the nuisance shall be taken only in the
interest of protecting residents of the Borough from the continued harm from the effects of neglect
or refusal to cut the weeds.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be
subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 230. Zoning
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 247/301
A.
[HISTORY: Adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg 10-25-2005 by Ord. No.
580. Amendments noted where applicable.]
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 108.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 132.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 187.
Article I. Preamble
§ 230-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
Coopersburg."
§ 230-2. Purposes.
This chapter is enacted to continue the basic elements for comprehensive planning begun by Borough
ordinance in 1961 and as later mandated by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 1968,
July 31, P.L. 805, Article I, § 101, as amended; 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., to promote the health, safety
and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough of Coopersburg by providing a comprehensive
plan for land use, thereby seeking ultimately to lessen congestion on streets, safeguard against fire,
panic, and the spread of disease; achieve adequate transportation, water, sewerage, school, and park
services and facilities, as well as to conserve the value of existing buildings and to encourage the use
of land within the Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 230-3. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all land and every building in the Borough
of Coopersburg shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Any existing structure or use
not in conformity with the regulations herein prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming. Such use
may be continued, extended, or changed, but only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 230-4. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum considerations for the promotion of
health, safety, and general welfare in the Borough of Coopersburg, subject to the limitations contained
in the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., which in cases of conflict shall be
deemed to govern.
§ 230-5. Construction requirements.
All construction or alterations subject to the regulations and provisions of this chapter shall be in
accordance with the following current ordinances of the Borough of Coopersburg:
Ordinance No. Title Codified as:
567 ICC Building Code Chapter 108, Article IV
567 ICC Plumbing Code Chapter 108, Article IV
281 (revised) ICC Fire Prevention Code Chapter 108, Article III
575 ICC Property Maintenance Code Chapter 108, Article V
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 248/301
B.
C.
Inspections which may be mandated by these codes will not necessarily be performed in all
circumstances. Further, neither (1) the granting of a building permit, nor (2) the satisfactory
completion of one or more inspections required under the permit, nor (3) the granting of an
occupancy permit shall be construed as certification of compliance with all aspects of all codes.
The responsibility for complying with the aforementioned codes rests solely with the
contractor/owner, and in no event shall the Borough be liable for the failure of the contractor/owner
to comply with said codes nor any consequential damages arising therefrom, irrespective of any
inspections which may have been performed.
§ 230-6. Severability.
If any part of this Zoning Chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision
shall not affect the remainder of the Zoning Chapter, which shall remain in effect. Borough Council
declares that it would have passed the Zoning Chapter and each section and subsection thereof,
except the part declared unconstitutional or invalid, if it had knowledge that such part would be
declared unconstitutional or invalid.
Article II. Definitions
§ 230-7. Definition of terms.
Unless the context of this chapter clearly shows otherwise, the following words and phrases shall
denote the meanings herein expressed. The singular shall include the plural, the present tense shall
include the future tense.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE
A detached structure subordinate to the main building located on a lot, used for purposes
customarily incidental to those of the main building. Accessory structures include, but are not
limited to, buildings, private storage sheds and private swimming pools. The total square footage
of all accessory structure roofs on a lot shall not exceed that of the main building roof.
ACCESSORY USE
A use subordinate to the main use of the land or the main building and customarily incidental
thereto. Accessory uses are permissible, subject to approval by the Zoning Hearing Board of a
special exception pursuant to the requirements of § 230-82 hereof.
ADDITION
An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
ADULT BOOKSTORE
An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade (for sale or
rental) books, magazines and other materials which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas," as defined by the State Crimes Code 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 5902, as amended.
ADULT BUSINESS USE
Any adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult theater or adult mini-motion-picture theater, as defined
herein, and which under the State Crimes Code 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 5902, as amended, must exclude
minors or may not knowingly disseminate to minors.
ADULT CABARET
A cabaret, tavern, theater or club which features strippers, male or female impersonators, or
similar entertainers who exhibit, display or engage in nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 249/301
abuse, as defined in the State Crimes Code 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 5902, as amended.
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER
Any premises in which individuals over the age of 18 that are suffering from some emotional,
physical or mental handicap are provided day care and none of whom are related to the operator
of the aforementioned day-care center. The hours of operation for this entity will not begin earlier
than 6:00 a.m. nor will it be open beyond 6:00 p.m. Each adult day-care center will have a
minimum of 200 square feet of regularly used habitable floor space for each occupant.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER
An enclosed building offering video presentations distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons and/or by use of token or coin-operated viewing booths and/or by
use of token or coin-operated projectors or other video machines as defined by the State Crimes
Code 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 5902, as amended.
ADULT THEATER
Any business, indoor or outdoor, which exhibits a motion picture show or other presentations
which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse, as defined in
the State Crimes Code 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 5902, as amended.
ALLEY
A public way or road having a right-of-way width no more than 20 feet.
ALTERATION
Any construction or renovation to an existing structure other than repair or addition.
APARTMENT
A separate and distinct dwelling unit within a building which contains other dwelling units or other
uses.
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD
A place where two or more motor driven vehicles, which do not bear a current state inspection
sticker and license plate, and their related parts are stored or dismantled.
BASEMENT
That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade plane.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST (TOURIST HOME)
A private residence which also includes up to five rooms designed for the temporary lodging of
transient, paying guests. Such an establishment shall furnish to the occupants customary services
such as maid service, and the furnishing and laundering of linen. Eating and drinking facilities may
also be provided.
BILLBOARDS
Off-premises advertising signs as defined in § 230-55.
BLOCK
A length of street between two intersecting streets.
BOARD
Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance or under this chapter to render final
adjudications.
BOARDING, LODGING AND ROOMING HOUSE
A dwelling, other than a hotel, tourist home, bed-and-breakfast, motel or motor inn, where more
than one room is available for people to be sheltered and/or fed for a fee on an extended rather
than overnight basis.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 250/301
BOTTLE CLUB
(Bring-your-own-bottle establishment) a place of assembly or any other use defined in this
chapter, other than a dwelling unit, including but not limited to restaurants, taverns, clubs and
social buildings, that is not licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, in which
nonintoxicating beverages are sold, but where patrons are permitted to bring intoxicating
beverages upon the premises for their own use and consumption only. Bottle clubs are prohibited
by public referendum in 1999 under state law.
BUILDING AREA
That portion of a lot, excluding required front, side and rear yard setback areas, upon which
buildings and structures can be erected.
BUILDING, ATTACHED
A structure with enclosing wall(s) as well as two party wall(s) in common with adjacent buildings.
(e.g., row house or apartment).
BUILDING, DETACHED
A structure with enclosing walls but no common or party wall.
BUILDING, SEMIDETACHED
A structure with enclosing walls and one party wall in common with an adjacent building (e.g.,
duplex or twin home).
BUILDING SETBACK LINE
The line parallel to the street line, at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of all yard setbacks
required for the district in which the lot is located.
CELLULAR TELEPHONE
A system providing portable telephone service to specific subscribers. A cellular telephone may
also be referred to as a wireless telephone.
CLUBHOUSE
A building to house a club or social organization which is not operated for profit and which is not
an adjunct to or operated by or in connection with a public tavern, cafe, or other public place.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA
Any device used for the transmission or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager,
commercial mobile radio service or any other wireless communications signals, including without
limitations, omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or panel antennas, owned or
operated by any person or entity licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to operate
such device. This definition shall not include private residence mounted satellite dishes or
television antennas or amateur radio equipment, including without limitation ham or citizen band
radio antennas. Commercial communications antennas are prohibited in R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, and
LI-1 Zoning Districts.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER
A structure other than a building, such as a monopole, self-supporting or guyed tower designed
and used to support commercial communications antennas. Commercial communications towers
are prohibited in R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, and LI-1 Zoning Districts.
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING
An unmanned building or cabinet containing communications equipment required for the operation
of communications antennas and covering an area on the ground not greater than 250 square
feet. Communications equipment buildings are prohibited in R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, and LI-1 Zoning
Districts.
COMMUNITY SHOPPING CENTER
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 251/301
A.
B.
C.
A commercial development comprised of two or more separate businesses under a common roof,
each business having a separate access to the exterior, without interior corridors. Maximum gross
floor area shall not exceed 75,000 square feet in total for all commercial activities.
CONDOMINIUM
Land and the building(s) erected thereon, characterized by an undivided ownership interest in the
total area (both land and buildings) and available for use by all owners, and separate divided
ownership interest in the subunits or sub areas. Example: A building with numerous dwelling units
wherein each unit would be a divided ownership interest, while hallways, lobby, surrounding
grounds, etc., would be an undivided ownership interest.
CONVENIENCE CENTER
A commercial development on contiguous land under single ownership or control, with all the
commercial activities carried out on the aforementioned property being under the control of one
particular individual or entity, with the maximum gross floor area not to exceed 5,000 square feet
in total for all commercial activities.
CORNER LOT
A lot having property lines on two intersecting streets.
COURT
An unoccupied open space partially or completely surrounded by a building or other enclosing
devices.
DAY CARE
Care in lieu of parental care given for part of the twenty-four-hour day to children under six years
of age away from their own homes, but does not include child day care furnished in places of
worship during religious services.
DAY-CARE CENTER
Any premises in which child day care is provided simultaneously for four or more children who are
not relatives of the operator. In addition, the center shall meet all state regulations, rules and
guidelines for this type of facility. Nursery schools are deemed to be day-care centers. The hours
of operation for this entity will begin not earlier than 6:00 a.m. nor will it be open beyond 6:00 p.m.
DAY-CARE HOME
Any premises in which child day care is provided simultaneously for three or less children who are
not relatives of the operator. In addition, the home shall meet all state regulations, rules and
guidelines for this type of facility. The hours of operation for this entity will not begin earlier than
6:00 a.m. nor will it be open beyond 6:00 p.m.
DECISION
Final adjudication of any board or other body granted jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or
this chapter to do so, either by reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals
from determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common Pleas of the
county and judicial district wherein the Borough of Coopersburg lies.
DETERMINATION
Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the administration of any land use
ordinance or applications there under, except the following:
The Borough Council;
The Zoning Hearing Board; or
The Planning Commission, only if and to the extent the Planning Commission is charged with
final decision on preliminary or final plans under the subdivision and land development or
planned residential development ordinances. Determinations shall be appealable only to the
boards designated as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 252/301
A.
B.
DWELLING
A building designed for residential purposes, excluding hotel, boarding and rooming house, tourist
home, institutional residential dwelling, clubhouse, motor inn, and the like.
DWELLING UNIT
Any room or group of rooms located within a building and forming a single habitable unit, with
facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating by one
family.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION
An assemblage of equipment for transforming or switching electric power, rather than for its
generation or utilization.
FALL ZONE
The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from the base of a commercial communications
tower. The fall zone is the area within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris or the
collapsing of the commercial communications tower. The fall zone shall be determined by the
applicant's engineer and reviewed by the municipal engineer.
FAMILY
Either of the following:
Any number of individuals living together on a nontransient basis as a single housekeeping
unit doing their cooking on the premises, when the individuals are related by blood, marriage,
or adoption, including any number of foster children, under the full-time care of resident
parents or resident persons acting in loco parentis; or
A maximum of four unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit doing
their cooking on the premises, without any additional boarders.
FENCE
An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal or other manufactured
material or combination of materials.
FRONT PROPERTY LINE
The street right-of-way line upon which lots are fronted.
GARAGE
A building or part thereof used for the storage, parking or servicing of one or more vehicles.
GARAGE, PARKING
A building or part thereof for the convenience of the general public for storage or parking of
vehicles for a fee, in which no servicing, repairs, washing, or reconditioning of motor vehicles is
carried on.
GARAGE, PRIVATE
An accessory building or area within a main building, maintained primarily for the storage or
parking of the vehicles of the occupant or occupants of the main building and in which no business
or other use for profit is carried on and no service is rendered to the general public.
GARAGE, SERVICE
Any garage other than a private garage or parking garage. A service garage may include
servicing, repairs, washing or reconditioning of motor vehicles, and fueling facilities.
GROUP HOME
Residential clients and attendant (24 hours or less), living together in a dwelling and functioning as
a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based upon an
intentionally structured relationship providing organization and stability. The resident clients of a
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 253/301
group home must be limited to persons who need specialized housing because of age, disability
or illness, and may include, but not be necessarily limited to drug and alcohol rehabilitation
facilities, or adult prerelease correctional facilities such as work release, halfway houses or similar
uses.
HEIGHT OF A COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER
The vertical distance measured from the ground level to the highest point on a commercial
communications tower, including antennas mounted on the tower.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING
The vertical distance measured from the average ground level at the sides of the structure to the
highest point of the roof, exclusive of chimneys and similar projections.
HOME OCCUPATION
Business activity in a residential district other than a no-impact home-based business.
HOTEL, MOTEL, MOTOR INN
A building containing guest rooms, or a group of such buildings, especially designed for the
temporary lodging of transient guests. Such establishment shall furnish to the occupants
customary hotel services such as maid service, and the furnishing and laundering of linen. Eating
and drinking facilities may be accessory to the establishment.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE
Surfaces which do not absorb water, moisture or rain and includes, but is not limited to, roofs,
buildings, parking areas, driveways, streets, roads and any areas covered by concrete or asphalt
and stormwater detention and retention ponds.
INSTITUTIONAL RESIDENTIAL DWELLING
A home used as a personal care, group or foster home, of not more than four bedrooms, with not
more than two people per bedroom. The home shall have one cooking facility and common
entrances. There shall be a minimum of 200 square feet of regularly used habitable floor space for
each occupant.
JUNKYARD
Any place where discarded materials or articles, including but not limited to scrap metal, scrapped
or abandoned or junked motor vehicles, machinery, equipment, paper, glass containers and
structures are stored, disposed of or accumulated.
LOT
A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law
and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
MANUFACTURED AND/OR MOBILE HOME
For the purpose of this chapter a manufactured or mobile home, trailer, and trailer cabin shall be
one and the same. A manufactured home is a single-family detached dwelling unit, manufactured
in one or two or more complete sections, designed for long-term occupancy and containing
sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a bathtub or shower, and kitchen facilities, with plumbing
and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems; and designed to be
transported after fabrication on its own wheels, or on flatbed or other trailers; arriving at the site
where it is to be occupied as a complete dwelling unit, which may include major appliances and
furniture, and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations. A manufactured home shall not be construed as a temporary structure and shall be
capable of being prepared for repeated transport. For the purposes of this chapter, sectional
homes (modular) and travel trailers are not considered manufactured homes. Manufactured
homes may only be located in a manufactured home court.
MANUFACTURED HOME COURT (PARK)
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 254/301
A lot, or group of lots, designed for placement of two or more manufactured homes within an area
designated to accommodate their location.
MANUFACTURED HOME LOT
A parcel of land in a manufactured home court, improved with the necessary utility connections
and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single manufactured home.
MASSAGE PARLOR
A place of business where a person or persons engage in or carry on any method of pressure on,
friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of any
part of the body with the hands or with the aid of mechanical apparatus. This particular use does
not include licensed physicians or members of the American Massage Therapist Association.
MOTOR VEHICLE FUELING FACILITY
A site where gasoline, diesel, or other fuels are dispensed or a retail business which dispenses
such fuels and which may also sell ancillary products for motor vehicles, motorist aids or
refreshments.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING
A building containing three or more dwelling units (e.g., apartment or row house).
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164),
known as the "Municipalities Authority Act of 1945."[1]
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESSES
A business of a resident who is self-employed or who may work for another employer or contract
or consult with another company or individual. The business shall not involve any visiting by
clients or patients and shall have no employees on the premises. The business activity shall not
use any equipment or process that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical
interference. The business activity shall not generate any solid waste or sewage discharge that is
not normally associated with residential use. Business occupation permitted under this section
shall be equivalent to not more than 25% of the net floor area contained in the operator's dwelling.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods, no stockpiling of inventory and no display of a
commercial or business identification sign.
NONCONFORMING LOT
A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter,
but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason
of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
A structure or part of a structure manifestly not designed to comply with the use or extent of use
provisions of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment or prior to the application of
this chapter or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures
include, but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE
A use, whether of land or of structure, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in
this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment, or prior to the application of this
chapter or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
NURSING HOMES
A building containing sleeping rooms used by persons who are lodged and furnished with meals
and are provided with needed support services, including the availability of basic nursing care.
Such a facility may or may not include skilled nursing or medical care. This definition shall be
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 255/301
A.
B.
C.
limited to facilities licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a nursing center or personal
care center.
OPEN PORCH
Exterior floor area attached to and part of a building that is open on one or more sides. With
replacement of such openings with partial or full-height walls, or with windows, it shall no longer be
considered an open porch, but an alteration. Installation of mesh screening only shall not be
considered an alteration.
PARKING SPACE
Any area not less than 200 square feet, which is practical and accessible for the parking of motor
vehicles.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT
A hall, arcade, or other place which has as its principal or ancillary business the playing of games
for a fee, including billiards, pool, pinball, video games, bowling, and other similar diversions.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE
An office occupied by a person or persons (together with related staff) who have received
professional training to include doctors, dentists, lawyers, engineers, accountants, veterinarians
and similar professions.
PUBLIC GROUNDS
Includes:
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other public areas;
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated
facilities; and
Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING
A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the Borough Council, Planning Commission, or
Zoning Hearing Board, intended to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in
accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING
A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the
"Sunshine Act," 65 Pa. C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
PUBLIC NOTICE
Notice published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Borough of Coopersburg. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven days prior to the date
of the hearing.
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER
A structure owned and operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead electricity transmission and
distribution lines.
REFLEXOLOGY
The practice of applying pressure using thumb, finger and hand techniques to the feet and hands
or other parts of the head or body; the practice of reflexology is restricted to the feet and hands
and shall not include the use of oils, lotions or creams.
REPORT
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 256/301
Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing made by any body, board, officer or
consultant other than a solicitor to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of
assisting the recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination. All reports
shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall not be binding upon the recipient,
board, officer, body or agency, nor shall any appeal lie therefrom.
RESTAURANT
Any structure intended for the sale and or consumption of food and/or beverages.
ROW HOUSES
Three or more attached buildings used as dwellings each fronting on the same street, separated
by unpierced party walls.
SERVICE GARAGE
A building, other than a private or storage garage, one or more stories in height, used solely for
commercial storage service or repair of motor vehicle.
SIGN
Any device designed to inform or attract attention, including any permanent or temporary structure
or part thereof, or any device attached, painted, or represented directly or indirectly on a structure
or other surface that shall display or include any letter(s), word(s), logo(s), insignia(s), flag(s),
banners(s), pennant(s) or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an advertisement,
announcement, visual communication, or direction; or is designed to attract the eye or bring the
subject to the attention of the public. Interior signs not visible from a public right-of-way or
adjoining property are excluded.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING
A building containing one dwelling unit.
SPA
Any location where any person, firm, association, company or corporation is engaged in or carries
on or permits to be engaged in any activity mentioned in this article, including without limitation
any of the following: massage, reflexology, bathing, treatment of any type of the head, body, skin,
or other parts of the body and which is not a medical or related health facility or hair or
cosmetology business subject to the jurisdiction, licensure and inspection of any state board or
commission.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION
A use permitted in a particular zoning district pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Articles
VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10601 et seq., 10901 et
seq.
STORY
That part of a building included between any aboveground floor and the floor or roof next above.
STREET
Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any
other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or
private.
STREET LINE
The line of contact between lot and street right-of-way. With respect to roads, highways, or other
public or private ways with undeterminable right-of-way, such line shall be coincident with the line
marking the outer portion of the traveled way or the outer portion of the berm, whichever shall
provide the maximum width for street purposes.
STRUCTURE
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 257/301
[1]
Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in land or water, whether
or not affixed to the land.
TATTOO PARLORS/BODY PIERCING STUDIO
An establishment whose principle business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to
the public, is the practice of one or more of the following: (1) placing of designs, letters, figures,
symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances that
result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments
designed to contact or puncture the skin; (2) creation of an opening in the body of a person for the
purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration.
THEATER
A structure or area intended for performance of the arts (not an adult theater).
TOWNHOUSE
For the purposes of this chapter, a townhouse and row house shall be one and the same.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING
A building containing two dwelling units (e.g., duplex or twin home).
VARIANCE
Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
YARD, FRONT
An unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, situated between the building (exclusive of
overhanging eaves, gutters, cornices, and steps) and the front property line of the lot, extending
from side lot line to side lot line.
YARD, SIDE
An unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, situated between a line created by the
nearest portion of the building (exclusive of overhanging eaves, gutters, cornices, and steps) and
the side lot line, extending from the front building line to the rear building line.
YARD, REAR
The unoccupied space on the same lot with a building, situated between the rear wall of the
building (exclusive of overhanging eaves, gutters, cornices and steps) and the rear line of the lot,
and unoccupied except for accessory structures and open porches.
Editor's Note: Repealed 6-19-2001 (P.L. 287, No. 22); see now 53 Pa. C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
Article III. Classification of Districts
§ 230-8. Districts created.
For the purpose of the administration of this chapter, the Borough of Coopersburg hereby adopts the
following classifications of districts:
R-1 Residence Districts
R-2 Residence Districts
R-3 Residence Districts
C-1 Commercial Districts (Business)
C-2 Commercial Districts (Highway Service)
C-3 Commercial Districts (Limited Highway Service)
I Industrial Districts
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 258/301
[1]
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
B.
LI-1 Light Industrial and Office Research District - 1
LI-2 Light Industrial and Office Research District - 2
§ 230-9. Zoning Map.
The geographical location and boundaries of the districts created in § 230-8 appear on a map attached
to this chapter, and made a part of this chapter by reference.[1] This map shall be known as the
"Zoning Map of the Borough of Coopersburg." Approval of this chapter by Borough Council shall
formally create and establish such districts and adopt said map.
Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is available at the Borough office.
§ 230-10. District boundaries.
The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either the center lines of streets or
railroad right-of-way or such lines extended to a point of intersection with another boundary line.
§ 230-11. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries between districts as indicated on the Zoning
Map, the following rules shall apply:
Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately coinciding with the center lines of streets
or railroad rights-of-way, such center lines shall be construed to be such boundary.
Where a district boundary is so indicated that it approximately coincides with the lot lines, such lot
lines shall be construed to be said boundary.
Where a district boundary is indicated that it is approximately parallel to a street or railroad rightsof-
way, such district boundary shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance
therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map.
Where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary shall be determined by the
use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map unless the boundary is indicated by dimensions.
Article IV. R-1 Residence District
§ 230-12. Purpose.
An R-1 Residence District is designed to allow single-family dwellings, in addition to such other uses
as set forth in §§ 230-13 and 230-16 hereof, or any amendments hereto.
§ 230-13. Use regulations.
A lot may be used or occupied for the following purposes only.
Single-family detached building used as a dwelling.
When authorized as a special exception, educational institutions, religious or philanthropic uses,
and day-care homes. This district excludes hospital, veterinary hospital, dormitories, residence
halls, and correctional or penal institutions.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 259/301
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(1)
(2)
A.
Municipal buildings and municipal uses when authorized as a special exception.
Noncommercial parks, playgrounds, or recreational areas.
Agriculture, but specifically prohibiting the housing, grazing, or commercial breeding of livestock,
birds or fowl, as well as the storage of farm machinery, crops or equipment. Domesticated animals
kept only as pets shall be excluded from the category of livestock, birds and fowl herein.
Signs when erected and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Article XII of this chapter.
Accessory structures.
No-impact home-based businesses are permitted by right and require a zoning permit.
§ 230-14. Area regulations.
Lot area and width. A lot area of not less than 12,000 square feet shall be provided for every
dwelling unit, in whole or in part, or other use permitted under §§ 230-13 and 230-16. The
minimum lot width at the building line shall be 100 feet.
Building and impervious area. Not more than 25% of the area of each lot may be covered by
buildings and not more than 30% of the area of each lot may be covered by impervious surfaces,
including buildings and accessory structures, driveways or other pavement, swimming pools, etc.
Front yard. There shall be a front yard on the street on which a lot abuts and the main building
faces which shall be not less than 25 feet in depth, except as provided in § 230-43 hereof.
Side yards. There shall be two side yards which shall have an aggregate width of not less than 20
feet, and neither of which shall be less than eight feet in width; except that for any corner lot, the
side yard which abuts the street shall not be less than 15 feet in width.
Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be not less than 25 feet in depth.
§ 230-15. Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
§ 230-16. Accessory uses.
The following accessory uses are permissible subject to approval of a special exception by the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to the requirements of § 230-82 hereof:
In a dwelling, the office or studio of an artist, musician, lawyer, engineer, architect, teacher, or
other professional person residing in the dwelling, provided that:
There shall be no display of goods visible from the street; and
Such occupation shall be conducted in the main building, by a person or persons residing
therein, without employees, and such occupation shall not occupy more than 1/4 of the
ground floor area thereof.
Article V. R-2 Residence District
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 260/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
(1)
A.
B.
C.
(1)
D.
§ 230-17. Purpose.
An R-2 Residence District is designed to allow multifamily as well as single-family dwellings, in addition
to such other uses as set forth in § 230-18 hereof, or any amendments hereto.
§ 230-18. Use regulations.
A lot may be used or occupied only for the following purposes:
Any use permitted in an R-1 Residence District.
Single-family semidetached dwelling, provided that the adjoining semidetached dwelling with
which it has a party wall in common is erected at the same time.
Two-family detached dwelling.
Two-family semidetached dwelling, provided that the adjoining semidetached dwelling with which it
has a party wall in common is erected at the same time.
Multifamily dwellings, of up to four dwelling units.
Clubhouses, or other structures used by social organizations not operated for profit and which are
not an adjunct to or operated by or in connection with a public tavern, cafe or other place of
business, provided such a use will not cause a nuisance in a residential neighborhood by reason
of noise or other objectionable characteristics, when authorized by a special exception.
Elderly housing for persons 55 years of age and older pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1988
and as amended.
Group homes, east of Route 309, when authorized by a special exception.
Nursing homes, east of Route 309, with four or less patients, when authorized by special
exception.
§ 230-19. Area regulations.
Lot area and width. A lot area of not less than 8,000 square feet shall be provided for every
dwelling unit, in whole or in part, or other use permitted under § 230-18. The minimum lot width at
the building line shall be 80 feet for detached dwellings, and 50 feet for semidetached dwellings.
For elderly housing a total lot area of not less than one acre shall be provided, with a lot area
of not less than 2,000 square feet for each dwelling unit. For elderly housing the minimum lot
width at the building line shall be 160 feet.
Building and impervious area. Not more than 35% of the area of each lot may be covered by
buildings and not more than 40% of the area of each lot may be covered by impervious surfaces,
including buildings and accessory structures, driveways or other pavement, swimming pools, etc.
Front yard. There shall be a front yard on the street on which a lot abuts and the main building
faces which shall be not less than 25 feet in depth, except as provided in § 230-43 hereof.
Side yards.
For every detached dwelling there shall be two side yards which shall have an aggregate
width of not less than 20 feet, and neither of which shall be less than eight feet in width,
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 261/301
(2)
(3)
(4)
E.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
except as otherwise provided in Subsection D(4) below.
For every semidetached dwelling there shall be one side yard, which shall be not less than 10
feet in width except as otherwise provided in Subsection D(4) below.
For every main building other than a dwelling, there shall be two side yards, neither of which
shall be less than 10 feet in width, except as otherwise provided in Subsection D(4) below.
For any corner lot, the side yard which abuts the street shall not be less than 15 feet in width.
Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be not less than 25 feet in depth.
§ 230-20. Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
Article VI. R-3 Residence District
§ 230-21. Purpose.
An R-3 Residence District is designed to allow multifamily as well as single-family dwellings in
accordance with the permissible uses set forth for R-2 Residence Districts in § 230-22 and
amendments thereto.
§ 230-22. Use regulations.
A lot may be used or occupied for any purpose set forth in an R-2 Residence District and any
amendments thereto, with the exception of elderly housing.
§ 230-23. Area regulations.
Lot area and width. A lot area of not less than 5,000 square feet shall be provided for every
dwelling unit, in whole or in part, or other use permitted under § 230-22. The minimum lot width at
the building line shall be 50 feet for detached dwelling, and 40 feet each for semidetached
dwelling.
Building and impervious area. Not more than 35% of the area of each lot may be covered by
buildings and not more than 40% of the area of each lot may be covered by impervious surfaces,
including buildings and accessory structures, driveways or other pavement, swimming pools, etc.
Front yard. There shall be a front yard on the street on which a lot abuts and the main building
faces which shall be not less than 25 feet in depth, except as provided in § 230-43 hereof.
Side yards.
For every detached dwelling, there shall be two side yards which shall have an aggregate
width of not less than 20 feet, and neither of which shall be less than eight feet in width,
except as otherwise provided in Subsection D(4) below.
For every semidetached dwelling there shall be one side yard, which shall be not less than
eight feet in width, except as otherwise provided in Subsection D(4) below.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 262/301
(3)
(4)
E.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
A.
For every main building other than a dwelling, there shall be two side yards, neither of which
shall be less than 10 feet in width, except as otherwise provided in Subsection D(4) below.
For any corner lot, the side yard which abuts the street shall not be less than 15 feet in width.
Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be not less than 25 feet in depth.
§ 230-24. Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
Article VII. C Commercial Districts
§ 230-25. Purpose.
Commercial Districts are designed primarily for commercial and wholesale business, and limited
manufacturing uses. Business activity is further divided into "primary business activity" and "highway
service business activity."
§ 230-26. Commercial C-1.
It is the purpose of this section to identify permissible uses in the major shopping and business areas
of the Borough. When a commercial lot abuts a residential district the permitted uses shall be permitted
by special exception only (see § 230-82).
Permitted uses:
Any use permitted in an R-3 Residence District.
Retail stores, when authorized as a special exception (see § 230-82).
Personal service shops such as tailors, barbers, beauty shops, dressmaking or shoe repair.
Restaurants or eating and drinking establishments, when authorized as a special exception
(see § 230-82).
Professional or business offices, agencies or studios, social clubs and lodges, when
authorized as a special exception (see § 230-82).
Confectionery or bakery shops having less than 2,000 square feet of building area when
authorized as a special exception (see § 230-82).
Theaters and other places of amusement, when authorized as a special exception (see
§ 230-82).
Funeral homes.
Banks or other financial institutions.
Job printing establishments having less than 2,000 square feet of building area.
Bed-and-breakfast (tourist home).
Boardinghouse and rooming houses but only when located on Third Street (Route 309).
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 263/301
(13)
(14)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(4)
(5)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
Day-care center and adult day care, when authorized as a special exception (see § 230-82).
Any use of the same general character as any of the above permitted uses, when authorized
as a special exception (see § 230-82).
Area regulations.
Lot area and width. The minimum lot area shall be 8,000 square feet, with a minimum lot
width of 50 feet at the building line, except that when used for multifamily or apartment
dwellings the minimum lot area shall be not less than 8,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
Building and impervious surface.
For every lot used exclusively for residence purposes, not more than 40% of the area of
each lot may be covered by impervious surfaces, including buildings and accessory
structures, driveways or other pavement, swimming pools, etc.
For every lot used in whole or in part for commercial purposes, not more than 60% of the
area of each lot may be occupied by buildings and accessory structures.
Front yard. There shall be a front yard on the street on which a lot abuts and the main building
faces which shall be not less than 25 feet in depth, except as provided in § 230-43 hereof.
Side yards.
For every detached building, there shall be two side yards which shall have an aggregate
width of not less than 20 feet, and neither of which shall be less than eight feet in width,
except as otherwise provided in Subsection B(4)(c) below.
For every semidetached building there shall be one side yard, which shall be not less
than eight feet in width, except as otherwise provided in Subsection B(4)(c) below.
For any corner lot, the side yard which abuts the street shall be not less than 15 feet in
width.
Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be not less than 20 feet in depth.
Height regulations. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
§ 230-27. Commercial C-2.
It is the purpose of this section to identify permissible uses and provide controls for business areas
situated along major highways within the Borough.
Permitted uses.
Service garages, public storage facilities, motor vehicle fueling facilities, car washes, motor
vehicle sales agencies, convenience center, and parking lots, provided that all facilities are
located, and all activities are conducted, within the confines of the lot. When a lot abuts a
residential district the permitted uses shall be permitted by special exception only. (see § 230-
82)
Hotel, motel, motor inn, rooming house, boardinghouse, when authorized as a special
exception (see § 230-82).
Commercial communications antennas mounted on an existing commercial communications
tower, public utility transmission tower, or placed on any structure other than a single-family
dwelling, duplex dwelling, townhouse dwelling or any residential structure, when authorized
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 264/301
(4)
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
as a special exception (see § 230-82). Commercial communications antennas and
communications equipment buildings are subject to the standards set forth in §§ 230-50 and
230-52 of this chapter.
Any other use permitted in a C-1 Commercial District.
Area regulations. Same as those in C-1 Commercial Districts.
Height regulations. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
§ 230-28. Commercial C-3.
It is the purpose of this section to identify permissible uses and provide controls for business areas
situated along a portion of the major highway within the Borough.
Permitted uses.
Community shopping center.
Hospital, veterinary hospital, dormitories, residence halls, correctional or penal institutions,
and institutional residential dwellings.
Any other use permitted in a C-2 Commercial District.
Area regulations. Same as those for C-1 Commercial Districts.
Height regulations. No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
Article VIII. I - Industrial District
§ 230-29. Purpose.
This district is designed to allow general industrial use and development. Uses and buildings and other
structures permitted herein include all those permitted in any other class district except dwellings and
those uses set forth in § 230-30. When a lot abuts a residential district the permitted uses shall be
allowed by special exception only (see § 230-82). Illustrative of permitted uses are the following:
Small parts manufacture and assembly of electronic or mechanical equipment.
Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as bakery
goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, toiletries and food
products, except the following: fish, sauerkraut, pickles, vinegar, yeast and the rendering of fats
and oils and similar activities.
Manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles of merchandise from the following
previously prepared materials: cellophane, canvas, cork, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather,
paper, wood, plastic, metal, stone, textiles and yarn.
Wholesale warehouse, storage and distribution facility.
Commercial communications towers and commercial communications antennas mounted on an
existing commercial communications tower, public utility transmission tower, or placed on any
structure other than a single-family dwelling, duplex dwelling, townhouse dwelling or any
residential structure, within that portion of the district south of Station Avenue only. Commercial
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 265/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
communications antennas and towers and communications equipment buildings are subject to the
standards set forth in §§ 230-50, 230-51 and 230-52 of this chapter.
§ 230-30. Prohibited uses.
Any process of assembly, manufacture or treatment of an unusually hazardous nature.
Any process of assembly, manufacture or treatment, or activity normally constituting a nuisance by
reason of smoke, odor, dust, light or noise.
§ 230-31. Area regulations.
Lot area and width. The minimum lot area shall be 8,000 square feet, with a minimum lot width of
50 feet at the building line.
Building and impervious area. Not more than 60% of the area of each lot may be occupied by
buildings and accessory structures.
Front yard. There shall be a front yard on the street on which a lot abuts and the main building
faces which shall be not less than 25 feet in depth, except as provided in § 230-35 hereof.
Side yards. There shall be two side yards which shall have an aggregate width of not less than 20
feet, and neither of which shall be less than eight feet in width; except that for any corner lot, the
side yard which abuts the street shall not be less than 15 feet in width.
Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be not less than 20 feet in depth.
§ 230-32. Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
Article IX. LI-1 Light Industrial and Office Research District
§ 230-33. Purpose.
Light Industrial and Office Research Districts are designed for uses that are harmonious with
surrounding uses and which do not constitute a hazard or nuisance and which can be carried on with a
minimum of noise, traffic and emissions. When a lot abuts a residential district the permitted uses shall
be allowed by special exception only (see § 230-82). Illustrative of permitted uses within district LI-1
are the following:
Research laboratories or similar experimental testing or scientific establishments.
Professional offices, including management, real estate, insurance, legal, engineering and other
professional endeavors, not including retail sales activities.
Publishing, printing, lithographing, bookbinding, and related activities.
Accessory structures.
Any use of the same general character as any of the above permitted uses, when authorized as a
special exception (see § 230-82).
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 266/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
§ 230-34. Prohibited uses.
All uses prohibited in § 230-30 shall be prohibited in this district.
Commercial communications antennas, communications equipment buildings and commercial
communications towers.
§ 230-35. Area regulations.
Lot area and width. The minimum lot area shall be one acre, with a minimum lot width of 100 feet
at the building line.
Building and impervious area. Not more than 40% of the area of each lot may be occupied by
buildings and accessory structures.
Front yard. There shall be a front yard on the street on which a lot abuts and the main building
faces, which shall be not less than 40 feet in depth.
Side yard. Side yards are not required, except that for any corner lot, the side yard which abuts
the street shall be not less than 15 feet in width.
Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall be not less than 40 feet in depth
unless the lot abuts a railroad to the rear in which case no rear yard shall be required.
§ 230-36. Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
Article X. LI-2 Light Industrial and Office Research District -
2
§ 230-37. Purpose.
Light Industrial and Office Research District - 2 is designed for uses which are harmonious with
surrounding uses and which do not constitute a hazard or nuisance and which can be carried on with a
minimum of noise, traffic and emissions. When a lot abuts a residential district the permitted uses shall
be allowed by special exception only (see § 230-82).
§ 230-38. Use regulations.
Any use permitted in the LI-1 District.
Any use of the same general character as any of the uses permitted in LI-1 when authorized as a
special exception (see § 230-82).
Manufactured home court (park) when authorized as a special exception (see § 230-82).
Billboards - as described in § 230-55.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 267/301
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
A.
B.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
D.
Commercial communications towers and commercial communications antennas mounted on an
existing commercial communications tower, public utility transmission tower, or placed on any
structure other than a single-family dwelling, duplex dwelling, townhouse dwelling or any
residential structure. Commercial communications antennas and towers and communications
equipment buildings are subject to the standards set forth in §§ 230-50, 230-51 and 230-52 of this
chapter.
Adult business use when authorized as a special exception.
Massage, reflexology and spa establishment, when authorized as a special exception.
Nursing homes, when authorized as a special exception.
Tattoo parlors and body piercing studios, when authorized as a special exception.
§ 230-39. Prohibited uses.
All uses prohibited in § 230-30 shall be prohibited in this district.
Any process of assembly, manufacture or treatment, or activity normally constituting a nuisance by
reason of smoke, odor, dust, light or noise.
§ 230-40. Area regulations.
For nonresidential uses, the same as LI-1 District.
The minimum lot area for a manufactured home court shall be two acres.
For each dwelling within a manufactured home court, the following area regulations apply:
Lot area and width. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 3,000 square feet, with a
minimum lot width of 30 feet at the building line.
Not more than 35% of the area of each lot may be occupied by buildings and accessory
structures.
Front yard. There shall be a front yard on the street on which a lot abuts and the main building
faces which shall be not less than 20 feet in depth.
Side yard. There shall be two side yards which shall have an aggregate width of not less than
20 feet, and neither of which shall be less than eight feet in width, except as otherwise
provided in Subsection C(6) below.
Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall not be less than 20 feet in depth
unless the lot abuts a property line of the court in which case the rear yard shall not be less
than 25 feet in depth.
Corner lot. For any corner lot, the side yard which abuts the street shall not be less than 15
feet in depth.
Height regulations. No residential building shall exceed 20 feet in height. All other uses shall not
exceed 35 feet.
Article XI. General Regulations
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 268/301
(1)
(2)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
§ 230-41. Nonconforming buildings and uses.
Abandonment.
If a nonconforming use of a building or land is discontinued, razed, removed, or abandoned
for 365 consecutive days, subsequent use of such building or land shall conform with the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
The act of abandonment and the intent to abandon shall be presumed to commence on the
date when customary efforts to continue the use (operation, lease, sale, etc.) cease.
Changes. A nonconforming use in a building or buildings may be changed to another
nonconforming use only upon determination of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board
that the proposed new use will be no more detrimental to its neighborhood and surroundings than
the use it is to replace. In determining relative "detriment," the Board shall take into consideration
among other things: traffic generated; parking availability; nuisance characteristics such as
emission of noise, dust and smoke; fire hazard; and hours and manner of operation.
Continuation. A nonconforming building or use existing upon the date of enactment of this chapter
may be continued, subject to the other provisions of this section.
Extension. No additions or extensions of a nonconforming building or use shall be made unless
authorized as a special exception.
Restoration. Except for residential structures as hereinafter provided, a nonconforming structure
which has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or the public enemy to the extent of more
than 50% of its reproduction value at the time of damage, shall not be restored except in
conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. When damaged by less than
50% of its reproduction value, a nonconforming structure may be repaired or reconstructed, and
used as before the time of damage, provided such repairs or reconstruction are completed within
one year of the date of such damage. For residential structures nonconforming only as to yard
spaces, in residential zones where most of the residential structures nearby are similarly
nonconforming, the structure may be rebuilt similar to the yard spaces of the adjoining lots in the
particular block front.
§ 230-42. Nonconforming lots.
In the case of a lot in a residential district with less than the required minimum width, existing at the
time of enactment of this chapter, it shall be permissible to build a single-family dwelling on the lot, with
side yard widths no less than those on the adjacent lots. The front yard of such proposed dwelling may
be decreased in depth to an average alignment in conformity to existing dwellings on either side of the
nonconforming lot or within a distance of 100 feet on each side of the proposed dwelling.
§ 230-43. Front yard exceptions.
No building or part of building other than steps, open porch, eaves and cornices and similar fixtures
shall extend nearer the front street line (right-of-way line) than the average distance of setback of the
nearest main buildings within 100 feet on each side of said building and fronting on the same side of
the street. When only one building exists on the same side of the street with the building to be erected
and within 100 feet thereof, the building setback from the street shall not be less than the average
between the setback of the existing building and the minimum front yard depth prescribed for the
zoning district in which the lot lies. When no building exists on the same side of the street and within
100 feet of the building to be erected, the setback at the front shall be no less than the front yard depth
specified for the zoning district in which the lot lies. This front yard exception shall not require placing a
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 269/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
A.
B.
building more than 10 feet further back than the front main wall of an existing, adjacent building within
100 feet thereof on the same side of the street.
§ 230-44. Private garages and other accessory structures.
No private garage as a detached accessory building, nor other accessory structure, shall be located
upon a lot unless it be within the rear yard and situated not less than five feet further distant from the
street line than the rearmost portion of the main building and not less than five feet from the side
property line and three feet from the rear property line. A garage or carport may be built as a structural
part of the dwelling. In such case, the same front and side yards shall be required as for the dwelling
and the yard shall be measured from the outer walls or roof lines of such garage or carport. A common
or joint garage may be constructed on two adjoining lots so long as the same shall be a detached
accessory building located partially upon both lots.
§ 230-45. Obstruction of vision.
No wall, fence or other structure, hedge, tree, shrub or billboard shall be erected or maintained on any
lot which shall obscure or interrupt the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle. In addition, no fence, wall
or shrub line existing between the street line and building line may exceed four feet in height.
§ 230-46. Obstruction of right-of-way.
No wall fence or other structure, hedge, tree, shrub or billboard shall be erected or maintained on any
lot which shall interrupt the access of a pedestrian to a sidewalk, easement, or right-of-way.
§ 230-47. General prohibited uses.
No lot or parcel of land shall be used for the following purposes in any district:
The use of a trailer, travel trailer, or camper as a dwelling.
The use of a garage, accessory structure or vehicle as a dwelling.
The use of more than one building as a dwelling.
Automobile graveyards and all junkyards (see Surman v. Borough of Coopersburg).
Garbage and refuse dumps (see Surman v. Borough of Coopersburg).
Bring your own bottle establishment (BYOB).
§ 230-48. Parking spaces.
Not less than two off-street spaces, with access from a street or alley, shall be provided on any lot on
which a dwelling is hereafter erected, and the following types of uses shall provide off-street parking
space, as indicated, which parking space(s) shall have access from a street or alley and shall be
located on or near the lot on which such use is situated.
Hotel, motel or bed-and-breakfast (tourist house): one space for each available unit.
Boardinghouse, rooming house: one for each guest.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 270/301
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Restaurants, diners, taverns and bars, or other sit-down food establishments: one space for each
50 square feet of floor space devoted to patron use.
Place of public assemblage, except churches: one space for every 50 square feet of floor area,
plus one space for every full-time employee.
Commercial building, including professional office, or recreational establishment, other than those
specified above: a minimum of one off-street parking space is required for each 200 square feet of
gross floor area, exclusive of storage areas, rest rooms, and mechanical rooms, plus one offstreet
parking space required for each employee working at the time the maximum number of
employees (full-time and/or part-time) are at the facility.
Industrial establishment: one space for each employee.
Multifamily dwellings, including apartment buildings, row houses, townhouses, twin houses and
duplexes: two spaces per dwelling unit.
Churches and educational institutions: to provide off-street parking for all vehicles.
Off-street parking facilities existing at the effective date of this chapter shall not subsequently be
reduced to an amount less than required under this chapter for a similar new building or new use.
Off-street parking facilities provided to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall not
subsequently be reduced below the requirements of this chapter.
Accessory use: the number of spaces will be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
Day-care center, day-care home, institutional residential dwelling and adult day-care center: one
parking space for every employee plus one additional off street parking space.
Elderly housing: one space for each dwelling unit.
§ 230-49. Loading and unloading space.
Off-street loading and unloading space, with proper access from a street or alley, shall be provided on
any lot on which a building is used for trade, business or industry.
§ 230-50. Standards for commercial communications antennas
and communications equipment buildings.
The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to
operate a communications antenna.
Building-mounted communications antennas shall be permitted to exceed the height limitations of
the applicable zoning district by no more than 20 feet.
Omnidirectional or whip communications antennas shall not exceed 20 feet in height and seven
inches in diameter.
Directional or panel communications antennas shall not exceed five feet in height and three feet in
width.
Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on a building or other structure
shall submit evidence from a Pennsylvania registered professional engineer certifying that the
proposed installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the building or other structure,
considering wind and other loads associated with the antenna location.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 271/301
[1]
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
D.
Any applicant proposing communication antennas to be mounted on a building or other structure
shall submit detailed construction and elevation drawings indicating how the antennas will be
mounted on the structure for review by the Code Enforcement Officer for compliance with the
Borough of Coopersburg's Building Code[1] and other applicable law.
Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Uniform Construction Codes.
Any applicant proposing communications antennas to be mounted on a building or other structure
shall submit evidence of agreements and/or easements necessary to provide access to the
building or structure on which the antennas are to be mounted so that installation and
maintenance of the antennas and communications equipment building can be accomplished.
Communications antennas shall comply with all applicable standards established by the Federal
Communications Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation and the
applicant shall provide supporting documentation to the Borough on an annual basis from the date
the facility becomes operational.
Property owners must show evidence that communications antennas shall not cause radio
frequency interference with other communications facilities located in the Borough of
Coopersburg.
A communications equipment building shall be subject to the height and setback requirements of
the applicable zoning district for an accessory structure.
§ 230-51. Standards for commercial communications towers.
The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission to
operate a communications tower, if applicable, and communications antennas, and that the FCC
has approved the same.
The applicant shall provide written documentation that the proposed communications tower
complies with all applicable standards established by the Federal Communications Commission
governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
Communications towers shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration,
Commonwealth Bureau of Aviation, and applicable airport zoning regulations.
Any applicant proposing construction of a new communications tower shall demonstrate that a
good faith effort has been made to obtain permission to mount the communications antennas on
an existing building, structure or communications tower. A good faith effort shall require that all
owners of potentially suitable structures within a 1/4 mile radius of the proposed communications
tower site be contacted and that one or more of the following reasons for not selecting such
structure apply:
The proposed antennas and related equipment would exceed the structural capacity of the
existing structure and its reinforcement cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
The proposed antennas and related equipment would cause radio frequency interference with
other existing equipment for that existing structure and the interference cannot be prevented
at a reasonable cost.
Such existing structures do not have adequate location, space, access or height to
accommodate the proposed equipment or to allow it to perform its intended function.
Addition of the proposed antennas and related equipment would result in electromagnetic
radiation from such structure exceeding applicable standards established by the Federal
Communications Commission governing human exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 272/301
(5)
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
(1)
(2)
M.
N.
O.
A commercially reasonable agreement could not be reached with the owners of such
structures.
A site plan shall be prepared and submitted for any proposed communications tower.
Access shall be provided to the communications tower and communications equipment building by
means of a public street or easement to a public street. The easement shall be a minimum of 20
feet in width and shall be improved to a width of at least 10 feet with a dust-free, all-weather
surface for its entire length.
A communications tower may be located on a lot occupied by other principal structures and may
occupy a leased parcel within a lot meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning
district.
Recording the plat of subdivision or land development shall be required for a leased parcel on
which a communications tower is proposed to be constructed.
The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the communications tower is the
minimum height necessary to perform its function.
In the Commercial C-2 and Commercial C-3 zoning districts the maximum height of any
communications tower shall be 150 feet; provided, however, that such height may be increased to
no more than 200 feet, provided the required setbacks from adjoining property lines (not lease
lines) are increased by one foot for each one foot of height in excess of 150 feet. In the Industrial
(I) and Light Industrial and Office Research (LI-2) zoning districts, the maximum height any
communications tower shall be 180 feet.
A communications tower attached to the ground shall be set back to the most restrictive of the
following: a minimum distance equal to one-half its height from the nearest property or lease lot
lines and existing street right-of-way lines, or the distance measured to the nearest property or
lease lot line equal to the commercial communications tower fall zone.
The site of a communications tower and communications equipment building shall be secured by
a fence with a minimum height of eight feet to limit accessibility by the general public and
unauthorized persons.
Landscaping shall be required to screen the fence surrounding the tower and any other groundlevel
features such as a building. Any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls,
decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping may be permitted, if they achieve the
same degree of screening as the required landscaping. If the antenna is mounted on an existing
structure, and other communications equipment is already housed inside that existing structure,
landscaping shall not be required.
An evergreen screen shall be required to surround the site. The screen can be either a hedge
(planted three feet on center maximum) or a row of evergreen trees (planted 10 feet on center
maximum). The evergreen screen shall be a minimum height of six feet at planting and shall
grow to a minimum of 15 feet at maturity.
Existing vegetation on and around the site shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided for a communications tower.
For any communications tower higher than 50 feet, the applicant shall provide certification from a
Pennsylvania registered professional engineer at the building permit stage that the
communications tower, its foundation, and its antennas meet the wind resistance requirements
stated in the latest version of the ICC National Building Code. The registered professional
engineer shall also certify to the overall structural integrity of the commercial communications
tower.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 273/301
P.
Q.
R.
S.
T.
A.
B.
C.
Documentation of Federal Aviation Administration approval for communications towers shall meet
the requirements of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 77.13(a), as amended. Documentation
of PADOT Bureau of Aviation approval shall meet the requirements of P.L. 837, No. 164 and Title
67 Pennsylvania Code, section 479.4, as amended.
The applicant for a proposed communications tower, located within a five-mile radius of an existing
airport, shall notify the airport of its intent to place such structure(s).
The applicant shall submit certification at the building permit stage from a Pennsylvania registered
professional engineer that the proposed communications tower will be designed and constructed
in accordance with the current Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna
Supporting Structures, published by the Electrical Industrial Association and Telecommunications
Industry Association, and applicable requirements of the Borough of Coopersburg's Building
Code.
All guy wires associated with guyed communications towers shall be clearly marked so as to be
visible at all times and shall be located within a fenced enclosure.
No signs or lights shall be mounted on a communications tower, except as may be required by the
Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, or other governmental
agency which has jurisdiction.
§ 230-52. General regulations for commercial antennas and
towers.
The applicant for a communications antenna or tower shall submit a copy of its current federal
license; the name, address and emergency telephone number for the operator of the
communications antenna or tower; and a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability
coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage in
the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the communications tower and
communications antenna.
If a commercial communications tower and/or antenna remains unused for a period of 12
consecutive months, the owner or operator shall dismantle and remove the tower and/or antenna
within six months of notice to do such by the Borough. Further, the owner or operator of the tower
and/or antenna shall post security at the time permit is issued in a form acceptable to the Borough
favoring the Borough in an amount to cover tower and/or antenna removal and site cleanup. The
security shall be utilized by the Borough in the event that the owner or operator of the tower and/or
antenna fails to remove the tower and/or antenna within six months of notification by the Borough.
The applicant shall agree to be responsible for any and all damages caused by the
communications tower and/or antenna should the tower and/or antenna malfunction, deteriorate,
or cause damage in any way to persons or property. The applicant shall further agree to be
responsible for all cleanup costs, police costs and any other costs should demolition of the tower
and/or antenna be required. In the event the Borough of Coopersburg incurs any costs to perform
remedial work at the site of the tower and/or antenna, the applicant shall reimburse all costs to the
Borough.
Article XII. Sign Regulations
§ 230-53. Purpose.
This article recognizes that signs perform an important function by identifying offices, businesses and
industry, but that minimum control of signs is necessary to promote the health, safety and general
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 274/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(a)
(b)
(2)
F.
welfare by lessening hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic, by preserving property values, by
preventing unsightly and detrimental development which has a blighting influence upon residential,
business and industrial uses, by preventing signs from reaching such excessive size that they obscure
one another to the detriment of all concerned, and by securing certain fundamentals of design for the
Borough.
§ 230-54. Location of signs.
On-premises sign. A lawful sign which directs attention to a person, business, profession, home
occupation or activity conducted on the same lot.
Off-premises sign. A lawful sign which directs attention to a person, business, profession, product,
home occupation or activity not conducted on the same lot. No more than one off-premise sign
shall be permitted for any use.
§ 230-55. Types of signs.
Freestanding sign. A self-supporting lawful sign resting on or supported by poles or standards on
the ground. The height of freestanding signs shall be measured from the curb level.
Parallel sign. A lawful sign mounted parallel to a wall or other vertical building surface. Parallel
signs shall not extend beyond the edge of any wall or other surface to which they are mounted,
nor project more than 18 inches from its surface.
Window sign. A temporary or permanent lawful sign which is oriented to the public right-of-way, is
legible to persons in vehicles, and is located on the outside or inside of a window to direct
attention to an activity conducted on the same lot.
Projecting sign. Any lawful sign mounted to a wall or other vertical building surface other than a
parallel sign. Projecting signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the wall or surface to
which they are mounted nor in any way interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic, nor
project over or encroach within any street line.
Roof sign. A lawful sign erected upon the roof or parapet of a building. No sign except such
directional devices as may be required by the federal and state aviation authorities shall be
placed, inscribed, or supported upon the roof or upon any structure which extends above the roof
or parapet of any building.
Billboards.
Size and location. Off-premises advertising signs (billboards) shall be:
Restricted to one panel which may provide only one display face.
Not to exceed 672 square feet of sign display area.
The display face shall be toward oncoming traffic in the lane of the roadway closest to the
sign.
Setbacks and spacing. Off-premises advertising signs (billboards) shall be:
Set back at least 30 feet from the street right-of-way measured from the closest point of
the sign.
Set back no more than 100 feet from the street right-of-way measured from the furthest
point of the sign.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 275/301
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
Set back at least 30 feet from adjoining property (i.e., side yard and rear yard setbacks)
to the nearest point of the sign.
Spaced no closer than 500 feet from another billboard measured between the closest
points of the sign.
Height of sign shall be no greater than 35 feet from the road grade, or from ground level,
to the top of the sign, whichever is less.
The bottom of any display area shall be a minimum of 10 feet above road grade.
To be located in such a manner as to not constitute a traffic hazard.
For the purpose of dimensional measurements in § 230-35 of this chapter, the perimeter of
the entire sign and all supporting structures shall be projected along a series of plumb lines to
ground level. All distances shall then be measured horizontally to these projected points.
Road grade to be measured at the point perpendicular to the right-of-way or if the right-of-way
is curved, along the line perpendicular to the tangent of the edge of the right-of-way.
Billboards shall be indirectly lighted, as defined in this article.
§ 230-56. Signs prohibited in all zones.
The following signs are prohibited:
Signs which in any way simulate official, functional, directional, or warning signs erected or
maintained by the United States Government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, county or
municipality thereof, or by any railroad or public utility or similar agency concerned with the
protection of public health or safety.
Banners, spinners, flags, pennants or any moving object used for commercial advertising
purposes whether containing a message or not, except as provided in § 230-61J.
Flashing, blinking, twinkling, animated, twirling or moving signs of any type, except those portions
of signs which indicate time and temperature changes, except as provided in § 230-61J.
No sign shall be erected containing information on it which states or implies that a property may
be used for any purpose not permitted under the provisions of this chapter in the zone in which the
property to which the sign relates is located.
On-site signs advertising a use no longer in existence or a product no longer available shall be
removed or changed to advertise the new use or product immediately after cessation of the
original use. Signs, once removed, shall be replaced only by signs in conformance with this
chapter.
No signs except those of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic signs and similar
regulatory notices shall be allowed within street lines unless specifically authorized by other
ordinances and regulations of the Borough, and in compliance with the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania regulations.
Vehicles to which a sign is affixed in such a manner that the carrying of such sign or signs no
longer is incidental to the vehicle's primary purpose but becomes a primary purpose in itself.
§ 230-57. Permit requirements for signs.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 276/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
A.
B.
C.
D.
All on-premises signs and all off-premises signs, including temporary signs, regardless of size
shall require the issuance of a zoning permit from the Zoning Officer before erection or
replacement. All signs must comply with all of the regulations contained herein, regardless of
whether a permit is required. However, no permit shall be required to repaint any sign provided
there are no changes or alterations whatsoever.
Permits for temporary signs shall be for a maximum period of 12 months. The permit for such
signs may be renewed at the end of each twelve-month period.
§ 230-58. Nonconforming signs.
Only lawful signs existing at the time of passage of this chapter and which do not conform to the
requirements of this chapter shall be considered nonconforming signs, and once removed shall be
replaced only with conforming signs; however, lawful, nonconforming signs may be repainted or
repaired provided such repainted or repaired sign does not exceed the dimensions of the existing
sign. Any sign or billboard destroyed, damaged or dismantled for any reason whatsoever may only
be replaced by a sign which is in strict conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is
located except as provided in § 230-41E.
Every lawful sign, billboard and other outdoor advertising media erected in the Borough prior to
the adoption of this chapter may continue to be maintained in spite of lack of conformity with all of
the provisions of this chapter. If abandoned, the owner of every such sign, at his own expense,
shall cause the same to be brought into strict conformity with all the requirements of this chapter.
The work of bringing such sign into conformity with such requirements shall constitute either
repair, alteration or relocation, and therefore, shall require the owner of such sign, to obtain a
permit.
All signs erected prior to the adoption of this chapter which do not have a zoning permit but do
conform to the provisions of this article shall be required to apply for a zoning permit within 60
days after the official adoption of this chapter.
§ 230-59. Area of signs.
The size of any sign shall be computed by multiplying its greatest height by its greatest length,
exclusive of supporting structures, unless such supporting structure is illuminated or is in the form
of a symbol or contains advertising copy. In the case of signs that have no definable edges, such
as raised letters attached to a building facade, the sign size shall be that area within a single
continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual message or copy area.
The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs
and symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are
displayed, but not including any supporting framework and bracing which are incidental to the
display itself.
Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surface,
building, wall or window, the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or other
shape which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
In computing square foot area of a double-face sign, only one side shall be considered provided
both faces are identical. If the interior angle formed by the two faces of the double-faced sign is
greater than 45°, then both sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the sign area, and
it shall be considered as a parallel sign.
§ 230-60. Illumination of signs.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 277/301
A.
B.
C.
(1)
(2)
D.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
Directly illuminated sign (internally illuminated sign). A sign designed to give forth artificial light
directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a source of light within such sign,
including but not limited to neon and exposed lamp signs. Signs may be illuminated by direct
lighting but shall have such lighting shielded so no direct light will shine on abutting properties or in
the normal line of vision of the public using the streets or sidewalks.
Indirectly illuminated sign (externally illuminated sign). A sign illuminated with a light so shielded
that no direct rays therefrom are visible elsewhere on the lot where said illumination occurs. If
such shielding device is defective, such sign shall be deemed to be a directly illuminated sign. No
flood or spot lights shall be mounted higher than 18 feet above ground level except for billboards.
Flashing and moving sign. A flashing or moving sign is an illuminated sign on which the artificial
light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. This
type of sign is prohibited in all districts except as specifically permitted under § 230-56C.
Festoon lighting is prohibited in all districts and is a directly illuminated sign comprised of either:
A group of incandescent light bulbs greater than 7.5 watts each, hung or strung overhead or
on a building or structure or tree or shrub; or
Light bulbs not hooded or otherwise screened to prevent the direct rays of the light from
shining on an adjacent property or right-of-way.
§ 230-61. General sign regulations.
The following requirements shall apply to all specifically designated signs:
All signs except temporary signs shall be constructed of durable material and kept in good
condition and repair. Electrical signs shall be subject to the performance criteria of the
Underwriters Laboratory, Incorporated, or to applicable Borough codes, whichever is more
stringent.
All sign provisions of this chapter shall apply to smoke stacks, water towers and other similar
structures.
No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes with traffic through glare, through blocking
of reasonable sight lines for streets, sidewalks, or driveways, through confusion with a traffic
control device (by reason of color, location, shape or other characteristic), or through any other
means. In no case shall any sign, other than an official governmental sign, be erected within the
official right-of-way of any street unless specifically authorized by other ordinances or regulations
of the Borough and in conformance with the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulations, where
appropriate. No sign shall violate § 230-45 of this chapter or the current regulations of PennDOT.
All signs, other than those traffic control signs permitted within the street right-of-way, shall be set
back from the street right-of-way line a minimum distance of two feet or as otherwise specified in
this chapter and in conformance with the minimum regulations outlined in the current regulations
of PennDOT.
No sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted,
sold, or offered only elsewhere than upon the premises where it is displayed shall be established
nearer than 100 feet to a residential district, unless the advertisement surface of such sign is not
visible therefrom and does not create a nuisance to adjacent property owners, in which instance
they shall be no closer than 50 feet to a residential district.
All freestanding signs shall be set back at least 10 feet from the front lot line. No freestanding sign
in other than a residential district shall extend within 50 feet of any residential district boundary
line.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 278/301
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
A.
Temporary signs may be permitted within the property lines, advertising the prospective or
completed sale or rental of the premises upon which it is located, not exceeding four square feet in
area within any residential district and C-1 Commercial District property not fronting on Third
Street (Route 309), and not exceeding 16 square feet in area within all other commercial and
industrial districts; provided that it shall be maintained and removed within seven days after
consummation of a lease or sale transaction.
Temporary signs may be permitted on new construction sites, such signs not to exceed 16 square
feet in total area and provided they shall be removed within seven days after completion of the
construction work, and not more than one sign shall be allowed. Signs shall be single-faced, and
shall be positioned parallel to the street line.
Temporary signs announcing or advertising any political, educational, charitable, civic,
professional, religious or like campaign or event may be permitted on nonresidential properties
only for a total period not to exceed 16 days in any calendar year (except for political signs),
providing they do not exceed 32 square feet in area and are removed promptly after the
conclusion of the campaign or event.
Special promotional devices, temporary portable signs used for any purpose whatever, or displays
such as floodlights, flags, banners, pennants, "A" type (sandwich type) sidewalk or curb signs and
related devices shall only be permitted for a new business and an existing business for special
occasions, not more than six times a year, in commercial districts or industrial districts, only, for a
period of not more than 15 days for each of the six permitted uses. Such signs are not to exceed
12 square feet total in area, including both sides. At no other time shall such devices be permitted.
At least 30 days shall lapse between each fifteen-day period of use. Such signs and devices are
not to interfere with pedestrian traffic.
No portion of any freestanding sign in a residential district shall be more than 44 inches above
curb level.
There shall be no more than one permanent sign intended to be viewed from each street on which
the lot abuts.
§ 230-62. Signs permitted in residential districts.
The following signs are permitted, provided that no directly illuminated signs shall be allowed.
On-premises signs.
Official traffic signs and other official federal, state, county and Borough governmental signs.
Signs displaying only the name and address of the occupant of the premises, provided that
the area of any such sign shall not exceed one square foot and not more than one such sign
shall be erected for each occupant of a premises, unless such property fronts on more than
one street, in which case one such sign may be erected on each street frontage.
Signs for bulletin or announcement boards or for identification of permitted nonresidential
buildings or uses, provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed 10 square feet.
Signs advertising the sale, lease or rental of property, provided that the area of any such sign
shall not exceed four square feet, and not more than one such sign shall be placed on
property held in single and separate ownership unless such property fronts on more than one
street, in which case one such sign shall be allowed for each frontage. All such signs are to
be removed within seven days after an agreement of sale or rental has been entered into.
Professional, accessory use and announcement signs, trespassing signs, signs indicating the
private nature of a road, driveway, or premises, provided that the area of any such sign shall
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 279/301
(6)
(7)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(1)
(2)
B.
C.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
A.
not exceed two square feet.
Temporary signs erected in connection with the development or proposed development of the
premises by a builder, contractor, developer or other persons interested in such sale or
development, provided that the aggregate area of the sign shall not exceed 16 square feet.
Not more than one such sign shall be allowed. Signs shall be single-faced, and shall be
positioned parallel to the street line. Such signs shall be removed within seven days after the
last structure has been initially occupied.
Temporary signs announcing a campaign, drive, or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational,
or religious organization, or sporting event. Such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in
area and shall be removed immediately upon completion of the campaign, drive or event.
Off-premises signs.
Signs directing patrons, members, or audiences to temporary exhibits, shows, or events
located in the Borough and signs erected in conjunction with a political election are subject to
the following requirements:
The total area of any such sign shall not exceed 20 square feet.
Signs shall be removed within one week after the date of the exhibit, show, event or
election.
No such sign shall be posted earlier than three weeks before the occurrence of the event
to which it relates, with the exception of political signs which shall be posted not earlier
than one month prior to an election.
Signs necessary for the direction, regulation and control of traffic, street name signs, legal
notices, warning at railroad crossings, and other official signs which are similarly authorized or
erected by a duly constituted governmental body.
Permanent off-premises signs are prohibited except as provided in § 230-55F.
§ 230-63. Signs permitted on properties located in the
commercial districts fronting on Third Street (Route 309).
No sign shall be permitted except as follows:
On-premises signs.
All signs permitted in § 230-62 at the standards prescribed therein except as otherwise
provided in this section.
Parallel and projecting signs, provided that:
Signs attached to a main wall of a principal building shall not project more than 18 inches
therefrom, and no portion shall be less than 10 feet above the basic grade and no more
than 15 feet above the basic grade. If not projecting more than three inches from a wall of
a building, the sign may be placed lower than the ten-foot height limits.
The total area of all such signs shall not exceed 20% of the area of the building face
(including window and door area and cornices) to which they are attached. In no case,
however, shall the total area of all such signs exceed 50 square feet.
Permanent window signs shall be considered parallel signs and included in this
computation but shall nevertheless not exceed 40% of the total window area on each
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 280/301
(d)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(3)
(4)
B.
(1)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(2)
A.
street.
In the case of a group of stores, offices, or other business uses on a lot held in single and
separate ownership, the provisions of this section relating to the total area of signs
permitted on a premise shall apply with respect to each building, separate store, or
similar use.
Freestanding signs.
Shall be limited to one for each lot.
No portion of any such sign shall be less than 10 nor more than 18 feet above curb level.
The area of any face of a freestanding sign, except such signs as described below, shall
not exceed one square foot for each two feet of lineal lot frontage, or 50 square feet,
whichever is smaller.
In the case of a group of business uses held in single and separate ownership, a single,
freestanding sign, including individual signs identifying different establishments shall be
erected on a common backing, provided that the total area of one side of the sign does
not exceed 50 square feet. The structural backing for all such signs shall be uniform, and
no sign may extend, in any direction, beyond the outside edge of the backing. No portion
of any such backing shall be less than 10 feet nor more than 18 feet above curb level,
and may not be placed or extend within any existing or future road right-of-way.
No sign shall be located beyond the rear wall of the main building except nonilluminated signs
that convey noncommercial information such as parking, entrances, exits, and other traffic
flow information. The area on one side of any such sign shall not exceed four square feet.
Off-premises signs. All signs permitted in § 230-62B at the standards prescribed therein except as
otherwise provided in this section.
§ 230-64. Signs permitted on commercial district properties not
fronting on Third Street (Route 309).
All signs in this district which are illuminated shall be indirectly illuminated as defined in § 230-60B. No
sign shall be permitted except as follows:
On-premises signs.
All signs permitted in § 230-62 at the standards prescribed therein except as otherwise
provided in this section.
Parallel signs, provided that:
Signs attached to a main wall of a principal building shall not project more than four
inches therefrom, and no portion shall be more than 15 feet above the existing grade.
The total area of all such signs shall not exceed 20% of the area of the building face
(including window and door area and cornices) to which they are attached. In no case,
however, shall the total area of all such signs exceed 10 square feet.
Permanent window signs shall be considered parallel signs and included in this
computation but shall nevertheless not exceed 40% of the total window area on each
street.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 281/301
(d)
(3)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
C.
A.
B.
In the case of a group of stores, offices, or other business uses on a lot held in single and
separate ownership, the provisions of this section relating to the total area of signs
permitted on a premises shall apply with respect to each building, separate store, or
similar use.
Projecting signs are not permitted.
Freestanding signs:
Shall be limited to one for each separate and distinct business establishment.
No portion of any such sign shall be more than four feet above curb level.
The area of any face of a freestanding sign, except such signs as described below, shall
not exceed 10 square feet.
No sign shall be located beyond the rear wall of the main building when the rear property
line upon which it is situated abuts a residential district except signs that convey
information such as parking, entrances and traffic flow directions. The area on one side
of any such sign shall not exceed four square feet.
In the case of a group of business uses held in single and separate ownership, a single
freestanding sign, including individual signs identifying different establishments may be
erected on a common backing, provided that the total area of one side of the sign does
not exceed 20 square feet. The structural backing for all such signs shall be uniform, and
no sign may extend, in any direction, beyond the outside edge of the backing. No portion
of any such backing shall be more than five feet above the ground, and may not be
placed or extend within any existing or future road right-of-way.
Number of signs. Only one sign (e.g., a parallel sign or a freestanding sign) shall be permitted
for each business establishment or use in these districts.
Off-premises signs. All signs permitted in § 230-62B at the standards prescribed therein except as
otherwise provided in this section.
Temporary banners.
Temporary banners spanning state highways are permitted in this district announcing a
nonprofit campaign, drive, or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational, religious
organization, or sporting event.
Banners are only permitted across state roads and require a permit through the Borough
office, from PennDOT and the affected public utilities. Size of signs will be regulated by
PennDOT and the affected public utilities.
§ 230-65. Signs permitted in Industrial and LI-2 Light Industrial
Districts.
All signs in this district which are illuminated shall be indirectly illuminated as defined in § 230-60B. No
sign shall be permitted except as follows:
On-premises signs as permitted in § 230-63.
Off-premises signs as permitted in § 230-62B.
§ 230-66. Signs permitted in LI-1 Light Industrial Districts.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 282/301
A.
B.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
All signs in this district which are illuminated shall be indirectly illuminated as defined in § 230-60B. No
sign shall be permitted except as follows:
On-premises signs as permitted in § 230-64, except that the area of parallel and freestanding
signs shall not exceed 30 square feet, and the topmost part of any freestanding sign shall not be
more than 10 feet above curb level.
Off-premises signs as permitted in § 230-62B at the standards prescribed therein except as
otherwise provided in this section.
Article XIII. Administration and Enforcement
§ 230-67. Appointment and powers of Zoning Officer.
For the administration of this chapter, a Zoning Officer, who shall not hold any elective office in the
Borough of Coopersburg, shall be appointed.
The Zoning Officer shall meet the qualifications established by the Borough and shall be able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough a working knowledge of municipal zoning.
The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms, and shall not
have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of use which does not conform to
this chapter.
The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of
enforcement when acting within the scope of his employment.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to receive all requests and applications for building
permits and zoning permits; to issue building permits and zoning permits in such cases where the
applicant has demonstrated conformity to the requirements of this and all other ordinances of the
Borough of Coopersburg and seeks no discretionary action or approval by way of his request; and
to keep a record of all applications for permits and a record of all permits issued, with notation of
all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all plans submitted and the
same shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be available for the use of the Borough
Council and other officials of the Borough of Coopersburg.
§ 230-68. Zoning permits.
Zoning permits shall hereafter be secured from the Zoning Officer prior to construction, erection or
alteration of any building or part of building. Fees for such permits shall be as determined by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Coopersburg. All requests for zoning permits shall be made in
writing by the owner or his authorized agent, on a form to be supplied by the Zoning Officer, and
shall include a statement of the use or intended use of the building or land, and may be required to
be accompanied by a plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed building in its exact relation to
all property lines and to street or road lines, and by a written statement from a qualified engineer,
or other satisfactory evidence, to the effect that the line of the bounding street or road has been
accurately located and staked on the ground. One permit, to be termed either "zoning permit" or
"building permit" as may be determined by the Borough Council, shall satisfy the requirements of
both this chapter and other Borough ordinances relating to building codes now or hereafter
existing.
The action authorized by zoning permits, variances and special exceptions shall commence within
one year from the date of issue. Time limitations on such permits, variances and special
exceptions, following issuance, may be renewed within the year of its issuance, with approval of
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 283/301
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
C.
the Zoning Officer without the payment of additional fees. Such renewal shall not be for an
aggregate period in excess of two years.
§ 230-69. Occupancy permits.
No building hereafter constructed, erected or altered under a zoning permit shall be occupied or used
in whole or in part for any use whatsoever, and no change in any use in any building or part of building
shall hereafter be made, until an occupancy permit has been issued by the Zoning Officer or Code
Enforcement Officer indicating that the building or use complies with the terms of the zoning permit and
the provisions of this chapter. Any occupancy permit shall be granted or denied within 14 days of the
date of written application therefore, except as provided for in 35 P.S. § 7210.502.
§ 230-70. Temporary permits.
A temporary permit may be authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board for a nonconforming structure or
use which it deems beneficial to the public health or general welfare or which it deems necessary to
promote the proper development of the community. Such a permit shall be issued for a specified period
of time not exceeding one year.
§ 230-71. Enforcement notice.
If it appears to the Borough of Coopersburg that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the
Borough shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement notice as provided in
this section.
The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation
has occurred, to any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement notices
regarding that parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
The name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the Borough of
Coopersburg intends to take action.
The location of the property in violation.
The specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not been met, citing in
each instance the applicable provisions of this chapter.
The date before which the steps for compliance must be commenced and the date before
which the steps must be completed.
That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board within a
period of 10 days.
That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
§ 230-72. Causes of action.
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter, the Borough Council
or, with the approval of the Borough Council, an officer of the Borough of Coopersburg, or any
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 284/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
[1]
B.
C.
aggrieved owner or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person will be substantially
affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to
prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation. When
any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the
Borough at least 30 days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the
Borough Council. No such action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
§ 230-73. Violations and penalties; enforcement remedies.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or permitted the violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefore in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough of Coopersburg, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No
judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District Justice
determining that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no
such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the
fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter
each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and
reasonable attorney fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the
Borough of Coopersburg.
The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay, upon cause shown, tolling
the per diem fine pending a final adjudication of the violation and judgment.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or entity
other than the Borough of Coopersburg the right to commence any action for enforcement
pursuant to this section.
Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings brought under this
section.
§ 230-74. Enactment of zoning amendments.
The Borough Council may from time to time amend, supplement, or repeal any of the regulations
and provisions of this chapter. The procedure for the preparation of a proposed zoning ordinance
as set forth in § 607 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10607, is hereby
declared optional, because at this time, there is no Planning Commission in the Borough of
Coopersburg and those duties are assumed by the Borough Council.
Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Borough Council shall hold a public hearing
thereon, pursuant to public notice. In addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map
change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the Borough at points
deemed sufficient by the Borough in accordance with the MPC Section 609 (1)(2)[1] to notify
potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week prior to
the date of the hearing.
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609 (b)(1) and (2).
If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed amendment is changed
substantially, or is revised, to include land previously not affected by it, the Borough Council shall
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 285/301
D.
E.
A.
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the
amendment.
At least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by the Borough Council, the
Borough of Coopersburg shall submit the proposed amendment to the county planning agency for
recommendations.
Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this chapter shall be forwarded to the
county planning agency.
§ 230-75. Procedure for landowner curative amendments.
A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity of this chapter or the
Zoning Map or any provision thereof, which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in
which he has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the Borough Council with a written
request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard and decided as provided in § 916.1
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S. § 10916.1. The
Borough Council shall commence a hearing thereon within 60 days of the request as provided in
§ 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to the county planning agency as
provided in § 609 and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as provided in §§ 610 and
916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609, 10610 and 10916.1.
The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with § 908 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10908, and all
references therein to the Zoning Hearing Board shall, for purposes of this section be references to
the Borough Council; provided, however, that the provisions of § 908 (1.2) and (9) shall not apply
and the provisions of § 916.1 shall control. If the Borough does not accept a landowner's curative
amendment brought in accordance with this subsection and a court subsequently rules that the
challenge has merit, the court's decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for this entire
chapter and Zoning Map, but only for those provisions which specifically relate to the landowner's
curative amendment and challenge.
The Borough Council, if it determines that a validity challenge has merit, may accept a
landowner's curative amendment, with or without revision, or may adopt an alternative
amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The Borough Council shall consider the
curative amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also
consider:
The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water supplies, schools and other
public service facilities;
If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal upon regional housing needs
and the effectiveness of the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually available to
and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by the challenged
provisions of this chapter or Zoning Map;
The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources and other natural features;
The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains,
natural resources and natural features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed,
the tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse environmental impacts; and
The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and other land uses which are
essential to public health and welfare.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 286/301
[1]
[2]
[3]
(a)
(b)
(1)
A.
B.
C.
D.
A.
§ 230-76. Procedure for Borough curative amendments.
If the Borough of Coopersburg determines that this chapter, or any portion hereof, is substantially
invalid, it shall take the following actions:
The Borough of Coopersburg shall declare by formal action, this chapter or portions hereof
substantially invalid and propose to prepare a curative amendment to overcome such
invalidity. Within 30 days following such declaration and proposal the Borough Council shall:
By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared invalidity of this chapter
which may include:
References to specific uses which are either not permitted or not permitted in
sufficient quantity;
Reference to a class of use or uses which requires revision; or
Reference to this entire chapter which requires revisions.
Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this chapter to correct the
declared invalidity.
Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the Borough of Coopersburg shall
enact a curative amendment to validate, or reaffirm the validity of, this chapter pursuant to the
provisions of § 609 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S.
§ 10609, in order to cure the declared invalidity of this chapter.
Upon the initiation of the procedures as set forth in Subsection A, the Borough Council shall not
be required to entertain or consider any landowner's curative amendment filed under § 609.1 of
the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10609.1, nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report
requested under §§ 909.1 or 916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10909.1, 10916.1, subsequent to the
declaration and proposal based upon the grounds identical or substantially similar to those
specified by the resolution required by Subsection A(1). Upon completion of the procedures set
forth in Subsections A and B, no rights to a cure pursuant to the provisions of §§ 609.1 and 916.1
of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1, shall, from the date of the declaration and proposal,
accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive invalidity of this chapter for which there
has been a curative amendment pursuant to this section.
The Borough, having utilized the procedures set forth in this section, may not again utilize said
procedure for a period of 36 months following the date of enactment of a curative amendment, or
reaffirmation of the validity of this chapter; provided, however, if after the date of declaration and
proposal there is a substantially new duty imposed upon the Borough by virtue of a change in
statute or by virtue of a Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the Borough may utilize the
provisions of this section to propose a curative amendment to this chapter to fulfill said duty or
obligation.
Article XIV. Zoning Hearing Board
§ 230-77. Membership; procedures; compensation.
There is hereby created for the Borough of Coopersburg a Zoning Hearing Board in accordance
with the provisions of Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (MPC), 53 P.S.
§ 10901 et seq.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 287/301
B.
[1]
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
The membership of the Board shall consist of three residents of the Borough of Coopersburg
appointed by resolution by the Borough Council. The terms of office shall be for three years and
shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member shall expire each year. The Board shall
promptly notify the Borough Council of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies
shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold no other
elected or appointed office in the Borough nor shall any member be an employee of the Borough.
The Borough Council may appoint by resolution at least one but not more than three residents of
the Borough to serve as alternate members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate
member shall be three years. When seated pursuant to the provisions of the MPC, an alternate
shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same and full
extent as provided by law for Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a
voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers and duties set forth in this
chapter and as otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other elected or appointed
office in the Borough, including service as a member of the Planning Commission or as a Zoning
Officer, nor shall any alternate be an employee of the Borough. Any alternate may participate in
any proceeding or discussion of the Board but not be entitled to vote as a member of the Board
nor be compensated pursuant to § 907 of the MPC unless designated as a voting member
pursuant to § 906 of the MPC.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10907 and 10906.
Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for
other just cause by a majority vote of the Borough Council which appointed the member, taken
after the member has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A
hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such
and may succeed themselves. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action a
quorum shall be not less than a majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board may
appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf and the
parties may waive further action by the Board as provided in this chapter.
The Chairman of the Board may designate alternate members of the Board to replace any absent
or disqualified member, and if, by reason or absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is
not reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate members of the Board
to sit on the Board as may be needed to reach a quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall
continue to serve on the Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the
alternate was initially appointed until the Board has made a final decision on the matter or case.
Designation of an alternate pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with
ordinances of the Borough and laws of the Commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public
records of its business, which records shall be the property of the Borough of Coopersburg, and
shall submit a report of its activities to the Borough Council as requested by the Borough Council.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Borough Council, the Board may employ or contract
for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical services.
Members of the Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as may be
fixed by the Borough Council, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized to
be paid to the members of the Borough Council.
§ 230-78. Hearings.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with the following
requirements:
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 288/301
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning Officer
and to any person who has made timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at
such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the Board. In addition to the
written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the
affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
The initial hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the applicant's request, unless the
applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint any member as a hearing
officer. The decision, or, where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made by the Board,
however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Borough, may, prior
to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the Board and accept the decision or
findings of the hearing officer as final.
The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough of Coopersburg, any person affected by the
application who has made timely appearance of record before the Board, and any other person,
including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall
have power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter appearances in
writing on forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer presiding shall have power
to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested by
the parties.
The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity
to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all
relevant issues.
Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence
may be excluded.
The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and
the Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the transcript is ordered
by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by the person appealing from the decision of the
Board if such appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by the
person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the party requesting the original transcript
shall bear the cost thereof.
The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his
representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties to participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or
other materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to
contest the material so noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless all parties are given an
opportunity to be present.
The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a written decision or, when no
decision is called for, make written findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing
before the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or denied, each decision
shall be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon together with the reasons
therefore. Conclusions based on any provisions of this chapter or of any law, ordinance, rule or
regulation shall contain a reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion
is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing
officer, and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Board shall
make his report and recommendations available to the parties within 45 days and the parties shall
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 289/301
K.
L.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
A.
be entitled to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final decision or entry of
findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the report of the
hearing officer. Where the Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this
subsection, or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request for a hearing, the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time. When
a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Board to meet
or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the Board shall give public notice of the said
decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same
manner as provided in Subsection A of this section. If the Board shall fail to provide such notice,
the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing
the application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to
the applicant personally or mailed to him not later than the day following its date. To all other
persons who have filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day of the
hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or findings and a
statement of the place at which the full decision or findings may be examined.
The Borough Council shall establish, by resolution, reasonable fees with respect to hearings
before the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 230-79. Jurisdiction.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications
in the following matters:
Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except those brought before
the Borough Council pursuant to §§ 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1.
Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural questions or alleged
defects in the process of enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said ordinance.
Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not limited to, the granting
or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefore, the issuance of any
cease and desist order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use,
structure or lot.
Appeals from a determination by the Borough Engineer or the Zoning Officer with reference to
the administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land
use ordinance.
Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood hazard ordinance or such
provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to § 910.2 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or floodplain or flood hazard ordinance
or such provisions within a land use ordinance, pursuant to § 912.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
§ 10912.1.
Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged with the administration of
any transfers of development rights or performance density provisions of this chapter.
Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under § 916.2 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
§ 10916.2.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 290/301
(9)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
[1]
(7)
B.
(1)
(2)
A.
Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough Engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation
and erosion control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to development
not involving applications under Article V or VII of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10501 et seq. and
10701 et seq.
The Borough Council shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and render final adjudications in the
following matters:
All applications for approvals of planned residential developments under Article VII of the
MPC pursuant to the provisions of § 702 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10702.
All applications pursuant to § 508 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10508, for approval of subdivisions or
land developments under Article V of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
Applications for conditional use.
Applications for curative amendment to this chapter or pursuant to §§ 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2)
of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1(a).
All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to the procedures set forth in
§§ 609 and 909.1(b)(5) of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10609.
Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the Borough Engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation
and erosion control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to applications
for land development under Articles V and VII of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10501 et seq. and
10701 et seq. Where such determination relates only to development not involving an Article
V or VII application, the appeal from such determination of the Zoning Officer or the Borough
Engineer shall be to the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to this section. Where the applicable
land use ordinance vests jurisdiction for final administration of subdivision and land
development applications in the Borough Council, all appeals from determinations under this
subsection shall be to the Borough Council and all appeals from the decision of the Borough
Council shall be to court.
Applications for a special encroachment permit, pursuant to § 405 of the MPC and
applications pursuant to § 406 of the MPC.[1]
Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10405 and 10406.
§ 230-80. Variances.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the provisions
of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe
the form of application and shall require preliminary application to the Zoning Officer. The Board
may grant a variance, provided that all of the following findings are made where relevant in a given
case:
That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness,
or shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions
and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the
property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 291/301
(3)
(4)
(5)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A.
That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the applicant.
That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood or
district in which the property is located, nor substantially or permanently impair the
appropriate use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance that will afford relief and
will represent the least modification possible of the regulation in issue.
In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 230-81. Special exceptions.
Where the Borough Council, in this chapter, has stated special exceptions to be granted or denied by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to express standards and criteria, the Board shall hear and decide
requests for such special exceptions in accordance with such standards and criteria. In granting a
special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter
and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 230-82. Requirements for special exceptions.
The following standards have been established to guide the Zoning Hearing Board in its review of site
plans and the hearing of requests for special exceptions. The standards are not absolute requirements,
but any site plan should generally conform to their provisions. The Zoning Hearing Board may require
any or all of the appropriate conditions, and/or may invoke such additional conditions and provisions as
it deems necessary, to be met prior to approval. All special exception applications require site plans.
The following information shall be included:
General requirements.
A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land.
A site layout drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet showing the location,
dimensions, and height of proposed buildings, structures, or uses and any existing building in
relation to property and street lines. If the application relates to property which is scheduled to
be developed in successive stages, such plans shall show the relationship of the portion
scheduled for initial development to the proposed layout of the entire property.
Location, dimensions, and arrangements of all open spaces in yards and buffer yards,
including methods and materials to be employed for screening.
The location, size, arrangement, and capacity of all areas to be used for motor vehicle
access, off-street parking, off-street loading and unloading, and provisions to be made for
lighting such areas.
The dimensions, location, and methods of illumination for signs, if applicable.
The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other areas to be devoted to pedestrian
use.
Provisions to be made for treatment and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes, water
supply, and stormwater management.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 292/301
(8)
(9)
(10)
(1)
(2)
(3)
B.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
C.
(1)
(2)
(3)
D.
The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used, or intended to be used, for dwelling
purposes, including the proposed density in terms of number of dwelling units per acre of
land.
A description of any proposed industrial or commercial operations in sufficient detail to
indicate the effects of those operations in producing noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution,
electrical interference, radiation, fire hazards, traffic congestion, traffic hazards, and all other
potential safety hazards.
Description of methods to be employed in controlling noise, air pollution, smoke, fumes, water
pollution, fire hazards, and other safety hazards.
Additional requirements for special exceptions.
Purpose. To provide additional standards for specific uses that are permitted in specified
districts. Such standards are intended to be applied by the Zoning Officer in the event a use is
permitted by right or by the Zoning Hearing Board in the event a use is permitted by special
exception.
Procedures for permitted by right uses with additional requirements. See requirements in
§ 230-82A for submittal and review of a site plan. The Zoning Officer shall obtain the review
comments of other Borough agencies as may be necessary.
Additional requirements for specific uses. The following additional requirements shall apply for
each of the following specific uses. An applicant shall provide evidence that a use will meet
the requirements of this § 230-82.
Adult day-care center.
The applicant shall submit a narrative describing the particulars of the operation, including
number of staff persons, licensed capacity, and hours of operation; and a site plan indicating
at a minimum the location and dimensions of the building, dropoff/loading area, parking and
waste storage area.
The adult day-care center shall have a valid license issued by the Pennsylvania Department
of Aging, as applicable, prior to occupancy.
The Board may require a fence or buffer strip if necessary, to prevent the use from being
detrimental to surrounding property.
Adult day-care centers are not permitted within dwellings.
An adult day-care center with more than 12 clients shall not be physically attached to any
structure containing one or more dwelling units.
Adult use (adult business use, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult mini-motion-picture theater,
adult theater)
All such uses shall comply with all state laws which regulate adult live entertainment,
obscenity and adult-oriented establishments and all other current and/or future applicable
state laws which may hereinafter be enacted which regulate and/or prohibit live sex acts.
Districts. It shall be unlawful to establish any adult use within: any residential district; any
district where the use is not specifically permitted by this chapter.
Separation required. It shall be unlawful to establish an adult use within 1,000 linear feet of
any existing adult use.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 293/301
(4)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
E.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(a)
(2)
F.
Setback. It shall be unlawful to establish an adult use within 500 feet of any primary or
secondary school, dwelling, child care facility, place of worship or residential district.
Allowance as a special exception. The Zoning Hearing Board shall only authorize the
establishment of an adult use if the applicant provides evidence that allows the Board to make
the following findings:
That the proposed use will not adversely affect the desirability of existing dwellings in the
vicinity for residential purposes, and will not be detrimental to the general character of the
area.
That the establishment of the proposed use will be compatible with any program of
neighborhood revitalization.
That the conditions set forth in this article pertaining to special exceptions will be met.
Ownership. As part of any application for an adult use, a notarized written statement shall be
submitted that lists the legal names and addresses of all individual persons with any
ownership interest in the use or in any corporation or company that owns the use, together
with the legal name, address and daytime phone number of an on-site manager responsible
to make sure that the use complies with state and Borough regulations on a daily basis. Any
future changes in such persons shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer within seven calendar
days after the change.
Lot area. A minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet shall be required.
Displays. No pornographic material, signs or displays shall be viewable by persons who are
outside of the establishment.
Hours. Any adult use approved after the adoption date of this chapter shall be limited in its
hours of operation to between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight.
Car wash. Where the facility is located adjacent to or across the street from a residential zone, the
facility shall not be open to the public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Day care (day-care center, day-care home).
Day-care homes:
The day-care home shall be registered by the State Department of Public Welfare prior to
occupancy.
The day-care home shall be indistinguishable from the exterior of other residential
dwellings in the immediate neighborhood. However, improvements required by permitting
or licensing agencies shall not be deemed incompatible merely because surrounding
buildings lack such facilities.
The operator-caregiver shall be a permanent resident of the dwelling unit.
A day-care home shall not employ persons who are not permanent residents of the
home, except as occasional substitutes.
Only one sign which must be nonilluminated may identify the day-care home, which shall
not exceed two square feet.
Day-care center:
A narrative setting forth the particulars of the operation, including number of staff
persons, licensed capacity and hours of operation; and a site plan indicating as a
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 294/301
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
G.
(1)
(2)
H.
minimum the location and dimensions of the day-care center structure, outdoor play area,
dropoff/loading area, parking, and waste storage area shall be submitted with the
application.
The day-care center shall be licensed by the State Department of Public Welfare prior to
occupancy.
The Board may require a fence or buffer strip, if necessary, to prevent the use from being
detrimental to surrounding property.
A day-care center may not be physically attached to any structure containing one or more
dwelling units.
The day-care center shall be indistinguishable from the exterior of other residential
dwellings in the immediate neighborhood. However, improvements required by permitting
or licensing agencies shall not be deemed incompatible merely because surrounding
buildings lack such facilities.
Motor vehicle fueling facility (gasoline stations, service garages and auto body shops).
All fuel tanks shall conform with state regulations.
Borough-approved curbing shall be constructed and maintained in a good and safe condition
along all street property lines, except at crossovers.
The entire area of the gasoline station or repair garage traversed by motor vehicles shall be
hard surfaced.
No building space used for repairs shall have an opening in roof or walls within 15 feet of any
lot line of a residential district. No repair garage or gasoline station vehicle entrance or fuel
pump shall be located within 200 feet of a primary or secondary school, nor within 50 feet of a
primarily residential use.
All gasoline stations shall be so arranged and all fuel pumps shall be so placed, as to permit
all servicing on the premises and outside the public right-of-way. No fuel pump shall be placed
closer to a property line or street line than 12 feet.
All lots shall be kept free of paper and rubbish. No abandoned junk vehicles shall be stored
on the premises for more than 10 days within view of a public street.
For auto body shops, areas used for the storage of vehicles awaiting repair shall be screened.
Any new or expanded auto body shops shall be surrounded by primarily evergreen plantings
with an initial height of five feet. Such plantings shall involve species and numbers so as to
result in a complete year-round visual screen by at least eight feet in height within four years
after planting. The use shall be surrounded by a secure security fence with a minimum height
of eight feet. Any fencing or perimeter walls shall be placed on the inside of required buffer
landscaping.
Group homes (drug and alcohol rehabilitation facilities, halfway houses).
A written narrative shall be submitted describing the purpose and general operation of the
proposed facility, including the number of residents, staff, level of supervision, and parking
needs.
A proposed facility shall be indistinguishable from the exterior of other residential dwellings in
the immediate neighborhood. However, improvements required by code for access or exit
from the building shall not be deemed incompatible merely because surrounding building
lacks such facilities.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 295/301
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
[1]
(11)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
I.
Any counseling or other services provided shall solely for the benefit of residents of the
facility.
The facility shall receive the license or permit of any applicable state, county or Borough
agencies prior to the commencement of operations.
The facility shall not generate traffic greater in volume or different in nature than would
normally occur in the neighborhood in which it is proposed to be located.
No identification signs shall be permitted, except as required by law.
The facility shall be located no closer to another group home than 1,000 feet measured on a
straight line radius from the property line so used, to the property line to be used.
One off-street parking space shall be provided for each staff person using the largest daily
shift per week as a base.
For the facilities where clients may drive and own vehicles, the Board, after hearing the
testimony for the special exception approval, shall stipulate the total number of off-street
parking spaces. The required number of parking spaces shall include, but not be limited to,
one space per driver/vehicle owner.
The parking requirement established herein shall be a continuing requirement which shall be
met at all times during the life of the permit.
All group homes shall conform to the Borough's Building Property Maintenance and Fire
Codes.[1]
Editor's Note: See Ch. 108, Uniform Construction Codes.
Accessory uses in a residential district.
Any home occupation activities shall only be conducted within the principal building.
The only persons who may work in a home occupation on the site shall be residents of the
dwelling.
A maximum of one commercial vehicle shall be based at the dwelling.
The total floor area used for the home occupation shall not exceed 25% of the habitable floor
area of the principle building.
A home occupation shall not require exterior alterations or additions of a building that would
reduce its residential appearance. The exterior design of new additions shall reflect the
principle residential use of the structure.
No on-site retail sales, warehousing or storage of equipment shall be permitted, and no bulk
manufacturing shall be permitted other than custom crafts.
In general, a home occupation shall not be of a type that routinely attracts more traffic for
business purpose than would be typical for a dwelling in a residential district. Any home
occupation providing a service or instruction must be limited to appointment only and shall be
limited to serving one person at a time, and not more frequently than one such appointment
per hour.
A use shall not be permitted as a home occupation in a residential district if it will routinely
require deliveries or pickups by tractor-trailer trucks.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 296/301
(9)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
J.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
K.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
L.
The use shall not produce noise, odors, vibration or electrical interference that are routinely
detectable from another dwelling.
Manufactured (mobile) home parks.
Each newly placed manufactured/mobile home shall comply with 1976 or later construction
standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Each manufactured/mobile home shall be securely anchored to the ground to resist damage
from high winds.
The maximum density of the manufactured/mobile home park shall not exceed five dwelling
units per acre.
The area from the base of each manufactured/mobile home to the ground shall be
surrounded by an enclosure that has the appearance of a foundation of a site-built home.
For any new or expanded area of a manufactured home park, a landscaped area with a
minimum width of 25 feet shall be maintained around the perimeter, which shall only be
interrupted at approximately perpendicular vehicle or utility crossings. Such landscaped area
shall not include any buildings.
For any new or expanded manufactured home park, each mobile/manufactured home shall
be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any other mobile/manufactured home and at least 35
feet from any exterior lot line.
Interior roads and required parking spaces shall be paved in asphalt with a stone subsurface,
concrete or other material approved by the Borough Engineer.
Membership clubs (clubhouses).
A statement setting forth full particulars on the operation of the use and a copy of the bylaws
or articles of incorporation (if incorporated) shall be filed with the Zoning Officer.
The proposed use must be a not-for-profit organization operated primarily for the recreation
and enjoyment of the members of such organization and their occasional guests.
The proposed use shall not adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of properties
in the neighborhood, and the design of any structures erected in connection with such use
shall be in keeping with the general character of the area.
Buffer strips as required by the Zoning Hearing Board shall be provided.
The use shall not meet the definition of an adult use.
The use shall not involve the sale of alcoholic beverages in a residential district.
Nursing home (personal care homes).
A statement setting forth full particulars on the operation to be conducted shall be filed with
the Zoning Hearing Board by the applicant.
No building shall be erected nearer than 30 feet to any lot line within a residential district.
Buffer strips as required by the Zoning Hearing Board shall be provided with adjoining
properties.
The use shall acquire and maintain any and all applicable licenses required by state and/or
local agencies as a condition of approval and prior to issuance of a zoning permit.
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 297/301
A.
B.
A.
§ 230-83. Applications for special exceptions.
All applicants shall submit four sets of the site plan together with four copies of any relevant documents
to the Zoning Officer when making application for a special exception. The procedure for the Zoning
Hearing Board reviewing the application shall be as set forth in Article XIV of this chapter.
§ 230-84. Parties appellant before the Board.
Appeals raising the substantive validity of any land use ordinance (except those to be brought before
the Borough Council pursuant to the Pennsylvania Municipalities Code, procedural questions or
alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption of a land use ordinance); or from the
determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or
failure to act on the application therefore, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the registration
or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot; or from a determination by the Borough
Engineer or the Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood hazard
ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance; or from the determination of any officer or
agency charged with the administration of any transfers of development rights or performance density
provisions of this chapter; or from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough Engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and
erosion control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to development not involving
subdivision and land development or planned residential development may be filed with the Zoning
Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Borough of
Coopersburg, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance and for special exception may be filed
with the Board by any landowner or any tenant with the written permission of such landowner.
§ 230-85. Time limitations.
No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning Hearing Board later than 30
days after an application for development, preliminary or final, has been approved by the Borough
of Coopersburg if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any
manner unless such person alleges and proves that he had no notice, knowledge or reason to
believe that such approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest after such
approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest. The failure of anyone
other than the landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on a tentative plan or from an
adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of this chapter or an
amendment hereto or map or an amendment thereto shall preclude an appeal from a final
approval except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates from the approved
tentative approval.
All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed by the landowner within 30
days after notice of the determination is issued.
§ 230-86. Stay of proceedings.
Upon filing of any appeal proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board and during its pendency
before the Board, all land development pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of
the Zoning Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall be stayed
unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts
indicating that such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the
development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may
be granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after
notice to the Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an application for
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 298/301
B.
C.
D.
development, preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse
or limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant, the applicant may
petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a
condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to determine if the filing of the appeal
is frivolous. At the hearing, evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After consideration of all
evidence presented, if the court determines that the appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition
for a bond. The right to petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived by
the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is taken from a final decision of
the court.
The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the amount of the bond shall be
within the sound discretion of the court. An order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory.
An order directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an order of the court
dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond and the appellate court sustains the order of
the court below to post a bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, shall be liable for all
reasonable costs, expenses and attorney fees incurred by the petitioner.
Disposition List
Chapter DL. Disposition List
The following is a chronological listing of legislation of the Borough of Coopersburg adopted since the
publication of the Code, indicating its inclusion in the Code or the reason for its exclusion. [Enabling
legislation which is not general and permanent in nature is considered to be non-Code material
(NCM).] The last legislation reviewed for the publication of the Code was Ord. No. 584 adopted 12-20-
2005.
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
585 9-26-2006 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
586 9-12-2006 Pine Alley ordained NCM
587 Number not used
588 5-9-2007 Subdivision and land
development
Ch. 195
589 12-12-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
590 12-12-2006 2007 budget NCM
591 12-12-2006 2007 tax rate NCM
592 12-12-2006 Salaries amendment Ch. 74
593 12-12-2006 Nuisances Ch. 147
594 4-24-2007 Cable television franchise: RCN
Telecom
NCM
595 4-24-2007 Stormwater management Ch. 187
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 299/301
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
596 7-17-2007 General obligation note NCM
597 7-10-2007 Pennsylvania municipal health
insurance cooperative
agreement
NCM
598 8-14-2007 Realty transfer tax Ch. 198, Art. II
599 10-23-2007 Uniform billing procedures
amendment; waste restrictions
and charges for sewer usage
amendment; solid waste:
collection procedures
amendment
Chs. 12; 177, Art. III; 182, Art. I
600 10-23-2007 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 210
601 12-11-2007 Local services tax Ch. 198, Art. IV
602 12-11-2007 2008 budget NCM
603 12-11-2007 2008 tax rate NCM
604 12-11-2007 Salaries Ch. 74
605 4-8-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 210
606 12-12-2008 Open records policy Ch. 70, Art. I
607 12-23-2008 2009 tax rate NCM
608 12-23-2008 Salaries Ch. 74
609 12-23-2008 2009 budget NCM
610 3-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 210
611 3-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 201
612 7-14-2009 Local services tax amendment Ch. 198, Art. IV
613 7-14-2009 Withdrawal of police pension
from municipal retirement
system
NCM
614 8-11-2009 Withdrawal of nonuniformed
employees pension from
municipal retirement system
NCM
615 9-22-2009 Municipal retirement system
repealer
Ch. 54, footnote only
616 11-24-2009 Acquisition of property by
eminent domain
NCM
617 12-8-2009 Salaries Ch. 74
618 12-8-2009 2010 budget NCM
619 2-23-2010 Fire prevention Ch. 125
620 Not adopted
621 4-13-2010 Loan NCM
622 6-8-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 210
623 7-13-2010 Street location and alignment NCM
624 11-23-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 210
625 11-23-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 210
626 12-7-2010 2011 budget NCM
627 12-7-2010 Salaries Ch. 74
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 300/301
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
628 1-25-2011 Nonuniformed employees
pension plan
See Ch. 54
629 1-25-2011 Police pension plan See Ch. 54
630 3-8-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 210
631 7-12-2011 Sewers: Sewage Flow
Equalization amendment
Ch. 177, Art. IV
632 7-15-2011 Taxation: Earned Income Tax
amendment
Ch. 198, Art, I
633 8-9-2011 Street Widening NCM
634 12-29-2011 Salaries and Compensation
amendment
Ch. 74
635 12-29-2011 2012 Budget NCM
636 3-20-2012 Street Vacation NCM
637 12-18-2012 2013 Budget NCM
638 12-18-2012 Salaries and Compensation
amendment
Ch. 74
639 12-18-2012 2013 Tax Rate NCM
640 7-16-2013 Street Vacation NCM
641 7-16-2013 Street Vacation NCM
642 8-20-2013 Vehicles and Traffic amendment Ch. 210
643 12-17-2013 2014 Budget NCM
644 12-17-2013 Salaries and Compensation
amendment
Ch. 74
645 12-17-2013 2014 Tax Rate NCM
646 12-16-2014 2015 Budget NCM
647 12-16-2014 Salaries and Compensation
amendment
Ch. 74
648 12-16-2014 2015 Tax Rate NCM
649 12-16-2014 Cable Franchise Extension NCM
650 9-15-2015 Residential Rental Property
amendment
Ch. 169
651 9-15-2015 Vehicles and Traffic amendment Ch. 210
652 12-15-2015 2016 Budget NCM
653 12-15-2015 Salaries and Compensation
amendment
Ch. 74
654 12-15-2015 2016 Tax Rate NCM
655 8-16-2016 Vehicles and Traffic amendment Ch. 210
656 12-20-2016 2017 Budget NCM
657 12-20-2016 Salaries and Compensation
amendment
Ch. 74
658 12-20-2016 2017 Tax Rate NCM
659 3-21-2017 Street and Sidewalks: Sidewalk
and Curb Construction
amendment
Ch. 191, Art. I
660 12-19-2017 2018 Budget NCM
8/12/2020 Borough of Coopersburg, PA Ecode360
https://ecode360.com/print/CO2518?guid=CO2518&children=true 301/301
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
661 12-19-2017 Salaries and Compensation
amendment
Ch. 74
662 12-19-2017 2018 Tax Rate NCM