Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Terminology; General Penalty
[Adopted 8-7-1985 by Ord. No. 332 as Part 1, Ch. 1, §§ 1-1002 and
1-1008, of the 1985 Code of Ordinances]
§ 1-1. Rules of construction.
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances, the following rules
shall be observed, unless that construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the Borough.
A. Borough. The words "the Borough" or "this Borough" shall mean the
Borough of Collegeville, Pennsylvania.
B. Commonwealth. The words "the commonwealth" shall be construed to
mean the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Council. Whenever the word "Council" is used, it shall mean the Council
of the Borough of Collegeville.
D. County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean
Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
E. Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as
well as to males.
F. Individual. The word "individual" shall mean a natural person, male or
female.
G. Limits. The word "limits" shall mean the corporate limits or legal
boundary of the Borough of Collegeville.
H. Mayor. Whenever the word "Mayor" is used, it shall mean the Mayor of
the Borough of Collegeville.
I. Municipality. The words "the municipality" or "this municipality" shall
mean the Borough of Collegeville, Pennsylvania.
J. Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be
construed as though the words "of the Borough of Collegeville" were
added.
K. Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the
language; but technical words and phrases and others that may have
acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed
and understood according to that meaning.
L. Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
includes the singular number.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
§ 1-2. General penalty. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No. 363]
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the Borough any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty
is provided for that act, the violator of any such provision of this Code
or ordinance shall, upon conviction, for every such violation, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $25 or not more than $600 and costs of
prosecution, or, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Provided: each day's violation of
any such provision of this Code or ordinance shall constitute a separate
violation.
M. Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath,
and in those cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to
the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
N. Or; and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the
sense required it.
O. Other officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officers,
agencies or departments by title only, such as "Secretary," "Treasurer,"
"Solicitor," "Engineer," "Tax Collector," they shall mean the officers,
agencies or departments of the Borough of Collegeville.
P. Person. The word "person" may extend and be applied to associations or
organizations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, corporations and
bodies politic and corporate, or any combination of them, as well as to
individuals.
Q. Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street
between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
R. Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, alleys,
highways, bridges and other ways in the Borough intended for
vehicular travel, and shall embrace all parts of them constituting the
designated right-of-way, except where the context clearly indicates that
the work "street" shall include the roadway only. The word "street" shall
also be construed to embrace highways as used and referred to in the
Vehicle Code.1
1. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 1-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 1-2
1:4
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 589]
§ 1-3. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 3301.5 of the Borough Code (8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3301.5), the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Collegeville,
County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General Code,
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 680, together with an Appendix, is
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of
the Borough of Collegeville, which shall be known and is hereby designated
as the "Code of the Borough of Collegeville," hereinafter referred to as the
"Code."
§ 1-4. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the 1985 Code of Ordinances and the ordinances and resolutions
in force immediately prior to the enactment of this ordinance, are intended
as a continuation of such ordinances and resolutions and not as new
enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the
date of adoption of the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions
are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as
to their adoption by the Borough Council of the Borough of Collegeville,
and it is the intention of said Borough Council that each such provision
contained within the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears
in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted
from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions
of § 1-5 below, and only new or changed provisions, as described in § 1-8
below, shall be deemed to be enacted from the effective date of this Code,
as provided in § 1-17 below.
§ 1-5. Inconsistent legislation repealed.
Repeal of inconsistent ordinances. Except as provided in § 1-6, Legislation
saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or
parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code
adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed as of the effective date given
in § 1-17; provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of
such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Collegeville
which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to
remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-6. Legislation saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-5 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-5 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to June 7, 2017.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
§ 1-6 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 1-6
1:6
§ 1-7. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-6A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-8. Changes and revisions in previously adopted legislation; new
provisions.
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
S. Any currently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental
cooperation or establishing an intermunicipal agreement.
T. Any Comprehensive Plan and amendment thereto.
A. Nonsubstantive changes. In compiling and preparing the ordinances
and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances and resolutions. It is the
intention of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, the following terms are updated
as follows:
(1) "Justice of the Peace," "District Justice," "District Magistrate" or
"Magistrate" is changed to "Magisterial District Judge."
(2) "Department of Community Affairs" is changed to "Department of
Community and Economic Development."
(3) U.S. Department of Agriculture's "Soil Conservation Service (SCS)"
is changed to "Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)."
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:7
§ 1-9. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-10. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
(4) "Department of Environmental Resources" is changed to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources."
(5) "Department of Public Welfare" is changed to "Department of
Human Services."
(6) "Burgess" is changed to "Mayor."
C. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth below, are hereby made to various ordinances and
resolutions included in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring
provisions into conformity with the desired policies of the Borough
Council, and it is the intent of the Borough Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the legislation so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such. All such
changes and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective
date of the Code specified in § 1-17.
(1) In Chapter 345, § 345-20, the definition of "base flood elevation" is
amended to change the reference to "Section 1101" to read "the
definition of 'base flood elevation' in § 680-193B."
(2) In Chapter 580, § 580-33A is amended to revise the first sentence,
in part, to include an amount as indicated: ". . .a fine of not more
than $100 for each violation, recoverable with costs."
(3) In Chapter 592, § 592-14V(1) and (2) are each amended to change
the reference to "§ 120-23C" to read "§ 592-14N(2)(i)."
(4) In Chapter 680, § 680-203A(6) is amended to change the reference
to "Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, § 13-321" to
read "Chapter 600, Subdivision and Land Development, §§ 600-30
and 600-31."
(5) In Chapter 680, § 680-211O is amended to change the reference to
"Section 8.13 of this Ordinance" to read "§ 680-51A(1), Fences, of
this chapter."
§ 1-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 1-10
1:8
§ 1-11. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-12. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-13. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and
all legislation adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new legislation are printed as supplements
to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 1-14. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:9
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the notice
of introduction, the availability of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection
by the public and the filing of an attested copy of this ordinance with the
county, as required by law, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-15. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Any person who violates or permits a
violation of this section of this ordinance shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, pay a fine of not more than $600,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment
pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers
or agents of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief,
including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 1-16. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-17. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after September 6, 2018.
§ 1-18. Failure to enforce not a waiver.
The failure of the Borough to enforce any provision of this ordinance and of
the Code adopted hereby shall not constitute a waiver by the Borough of its
rights of future enforcement hereunder.
§ 1-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 1-18
1:10
Chapter 11
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:11

ARTICLE I
Organization and Meetings of Borough Council
[Adopted 8-7-1985 by Ord. No. 332 as Part 2, Ch. 1, Art. B, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances]
§ 11-1. Bylaws of Council.
A. The regular meetings of Council shall be held on the first Wednesday of
each month at 8:00 p.m. in the Collegeville Fire House. Whenever the
first Wednesday of any month is a legal holiday, the regular meeting for
that month shall be held on the first Tuesday.
B. Special meetings of Council may be called and held as provided by the
Borough Code and any other law governing the subject.
C. Election and terms of officers; vacancy procedure.
(1) At its biennial organization meeting, as provided in the Borough
Code, Council shall elect one of its members as President and one
as Vice President. The election of these officers shall proceed as
follows: The Mayor will call the meeting to order and ask for
nominations for President. After the nominations are closed, unless
only one candidate is nominated, a roll call vote shall be made. The
person receiving the majority of votes of the members present shall
be named President. He/she shall then assume office and continue
with the same procedure to elect a Vice President.
(2) The President and the Vice President shall each serve an indefinite
term, at the pleasure of Council, and at any regular meeting of
Council, or at any special meeting called for that purpose, Council
may, on motion, declare a vacancy in either or both offices.
(3) In case of a vacancy, from any cause, in the office of President or
Vice President of Council, the Council shall, within 30 days after
the occurrence of the vacancy, proceed to fill the vacancy by
following the procedure prescribed in Subsection C(1) of this
section.
D. The President of Council, in addition to exercising his authority to
preside over the meetings of Council, and to perform the other specific
powers and duties vested in him/her by law or ordinance, shall be
required to authenticate, with his signature, all actions taken by
Council.
E. Committee appointments and membership.
(1) At the organization meeting of Council, or within 10 days
afterward, the President of Council shall appoint the members of all
the standing committees of Council. Each standing committee shall
be composed of two or three members of Council, and the
individual first named to a committee by the President shall be the
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1
1:13
§ 11-2. Rules of order of Council.
Chairman of that committee. Standing committees shall serve at
the pleasure of the President of Council.
(2) The President of Council, ex officio, shall be a member of each
standing committee, and the Borough Treasurer, ex officio, shall be
a member of the committee dealing generally with matters of
finance. Ex officio members shall be entitled to participate in all
discussions at the meetings of the committees of which they are
members, but they shall not vote as committee members.
F. Council adopts as its parliamentary authority the volume entitled
"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised," 1970 Edition, which shall
govern all matters within the purview of that volume, except that
conflicting provisions in the Borough Code2 or other applicable statutes
of Pennsylvania, or in these bylaws or in the rules of order of Council
shall supersede the provisions of the parliamentary authority on the
same subject matter.
G. These bylaws, wholly or in part, may be amended or repealed by an
affirmative vote of two-thirds of all the members of Council, following
advance notice to each member at least 28 days before the meeting at
which action on amendment or repeal is to be taken. The notice shall
state the extent and precise nature of the repeal or amendment that is
proposed. If notice is given at a regular, special or adjourned meeting of
Council, held at least 28 days before the meeting at which action in
repeal or amendment is to be taken, special or individual notice shall be
required to be given only to those members not in attendance at the
earlier meeting and present at the time notice was given.
A. Rule 1. The parliamentary authority for Council, as adopted by the
bylaws of Council, being Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised, shall
govern procedure in the meetings of Council, except where otherwise
provided in the law, in the bylaws of Council, and in these rules.
B. Rule 2. The order of business at regular meetings of Council shall be as
follows:
(1) Call to order.
(2) Roll call.
(3) Reading and approval of minutes.
(4) Meeting open for public discussion.
(5) Meeting closed for public discussion.
(6) Report of standing committees:
2. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 11-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 11-2
1:14
(a) Streets and roads.
(b) Engineers report.
(c) Planning commission.
(d) Light committee.
(e) Finance committee.
(f) Water committee.
(g) Park committee.
(h) Public safety committee.
(i) Code enforcement committee.
(7) Police report.
(8) Building/Plumbing Inspector's report.
(9) Zoning Officer report.
(10) Reports of special committees.
(11) Letters, petitions, and general correspondence.
(12) Resolutions to be considered.
(13) Unfinished business.
(14) Ordinances for first reading-second reading-third reading.
(15) New business.
(16) Mayor's report.
(17) Comments for good of Council.
(18) Adjournment.
C. Rule 3. The order of business at special or adjourned meetings shall
follow that for regular meetings, but omitting all items of business not
pertinent to the special or adjourned meeting.
D. Rule 4. The President of Council shall have complete charge over all
meetings of Council, and his rulings, in all matters of parliamentary
procedure, shall be binding upon all members of Council, unless
overruled on appeal.
E. Rule 5. In the absence of the President of Council, the Vice President of
Council shall conduct the meeting, and in the absence of both the
President and the Vice President, the members in attendance at the
meeting shall choose a President Pro Tempore to preside.
§ 11-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-2
1:15
F. Rule 6. The President shall call the meeting to order at the time fixed
for the meeting, but if no quorum is present, he/she shall delay the call
to order until a quorum is present. But if the absence of a quorum shall
continue until 30 minutes after the time fixed for the meeting, the
President shall declare the meeting adjourned for lack of a quorum.
G. Rule 7.
(1) When a question is put to the members for vote, each member shall
be required to vote, except when he/she shall be required to
abstain because of a special, personal or financial interest in the
matter before Council. When a member shall abstain for cause, he/
she shall state the reason for his abstention. An abstention is a
neutral vote; it counts neither for nor against the motion.
(2) The President of Council shall be required to vote on every question
put to the members of Council, and may abstain only as provided in
Subsection G(1) of this section. In a roll call vote, the name of the
President shall be called in normal alphabetical order.
(3) When a member's interest in a matter before Council shall be an
interest common to other Council members, he/she shall not be
deemed to have a special interest such as would preclude or
prohibit him/her from voting. In such matters, he/she shall vote,
and if he/she is a candidate for an office in Council, he/she shall
have the right to vote for himself or for another person, as he/she
chooses.
H. Rule 8. Elected and appointed Borough officials, required to be present
at Council meetings to give reports, and not being members of Council,
shall be permitted to leave the meeting at the conclusion of the
respective reports, unless Council specifically requests that they
remain for a longer time.
I. Rule 9. Any of these rules may be suspended or waived at any specific
meeting of Council, except where that suspension or waiver would be
contrary to the law or to the bylaws of Council. Suspension or waiver
shall not be permitted except upon an affirmative vote of two-thirds of
the members of Council.
J. Rule 10. These rules, wholly or in part, may be amended or repealed by
majority vote in any meeting of Council, provided that each member of
Council shall be given advance notice of the intent to amend or repeal,
at least 28 days before the meeting at which action on amendment or
repeal is to be taken. The notice shall state the extent and precise
nature of the repeal or amendment that is proposed. If notice is given at
a regular, special or adjourned meeting of Council, held at least 28 days
before the meeting at which action on repeal or amendment is to be
taken, special or individual notice shall be required to be given only to
those members not in attendance at the earlier meeting and present at
the time notice was given.
§ 11-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 11-2
1:16
Chapter 18
AUDITOR
§ 18-1. Right of Borough Council to appoint independent auditor.
Pursuant to the authority granted by the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania by Act No. 581 of 1986, 53 P.S. § 46005(7),3
the Council of the Borough of Collegeville does hereby establish the right to
appoint an independent auditor who shall be a certified public accountant,
registered in Pennsylvania, or a firm of certified public accountants so
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Said auditor shall be
appointed annually, by resolution, before the close of a fiscal year to make
an independent examination of the accounting records of the Borough for
such fiscal year and such independent auditor shall also perform the other
duties and exercise the powers as conferred upon him/her or the firm by 53
P.S. § 46196,4 General powers and duties of independent auditor.
§ 18-2. Appointment of independent auditor.
Following the passage of this chapter by a two-thirds vote of the entire
number of Councilmen elected, an independent auditor shall be appointed
annually, by resolution, before the close of the fiscal year.
§ 18-3. Abolishment of position of elected auditors.
When an independent auditor is appointed as set forth in § 18-1, the office of
elected Borough auditors shall thereby be abolished, although the Borough
auditors then in office shall continue to hold their office during the term
for which elected and the Borough auditors or controllers shall not audit,
settle, or adjust the accounts audited by such independent auditor, but shall
perform any other duties of their office.
Chapter 25
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
3. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1005(7).
4. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1059.11.
§ 11-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3
1:17

ARTICLE I
Joint Authority
[Adopted 11-14-1968 by Ord. No. 216 (Part 2, Ch. 3, Art. A, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 25-1. Intention and desire to organize authority jointly with
Borough of Trappe.
The Council of the Borough of Collegeville, Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
Authority jointly with the Borough of Trappe, of Montgomery county,
Pennsylvania, under the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382,
known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,"5 its amendments and
supplements for the purpose of acquiring, holding, constructing, improving,
owning, leasing, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee, maintaining
and operating sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof, sewage treatment
works, including works for treating and disposing of industrial waste and
the facilities and equipment thereof; acquiring, holding, constructing,
improving, maintaining and operating, owning, leasing, either in the
capacity of lessor or lessee, waterworks, water supply works and water
distribution systems.
§ 25-2. Articles of Incorporation of Collegeville-Trappe Municipal
Authority.
The Mayor, President of Council and the Secretary of this Borough are
authorized and directed to execute on behalf of this Borough, Articles of
Incorporation for said Authority, in substantially the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION TO THE SECRETARY OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L.
382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945," as amended
and supplemented, and pursuant to Ordinances adopted by the municipal
authorities of the Boroughs of Collegeville and Trappe, respectively, all
situated in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, expressing the intention and
desire of the municipal authorities of said municipalities to organize a joint
municipality authority under said Act, the said municipalities hereby do
certify:
Attest:
Helen Hartzell, Secretary
(Seal)
1. The name of the Authority is "Collegeville-Trappe Municipal Authority."
5. Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 25-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-2
1:19
2. The said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of May
2, 1945, P.L. 382, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,"
as amended and supplemented for the purpose of acquiring, holding,
constructing, improving, owning, leasing, wither in the capacity of
lessor or lessee, maintaining and operating sewers, sewer systems or
parts thereof, sewage treatment works, including works for treating
and disposing of industrial waste and the facilities and equipment
thereof; acquiring, holding, constructing, improving, maintaining and
operating, owning, leasing either in the capacity of lessor or lessee,
waterworks, water supply works and water distribution systems.
3. No other Authority has been organized under the said Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented, or under Act
of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463, as amended, or is in existence in or for the
incorporating municipalities, except:
(a) Collegeville-Trappe Joint School Authority heretofore has been
organized jointly by the Boroughs of Collegeville and Trappe, both
in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, under the provisions of said
Authorities Act and presently exists.
4. The names of the incorporating municipalities are:
BOROUGH OF COLLEGEVILLE, MONTGOMERY COUNTY, PA.
BOROUGH OF TRAPPE, MONTGOMERY COUNTY, PA.
5. The names and addresses of the municipal authorities of said
incorporating municipalities are:. . .
6. The names and addresses and terms of office of the first members of
the Board of said Authority, each of whom is a resident and citizen of
the appointing municipality, are as follows:. . .
7. The members of the Board of the said Authority shall be six in number;
and said members shall be apportioned on the basis of three members
for each of the incorporating municipalities.
Each member of the Board of the said Authority shall be appointed by the
municipal authorities of the municipality which he/she is to represent of
said board. The term of each member of the Board of the said Authority
appointed to succeed any of the first members of the Board shall be for a
period of five years.
The municipal authorities of each of said municipalities, at a meeting held
not later than one month prior to January 1 in each year in which a vacancy
will occur in the Board by reason of the expiration of the term of a member
appointed by that municipality, shall appoint, as a member of the Board, a
citizen of that municipality, for a term of five years, to succeed the member
whose term expires on January 1, next succeeding.
Any other vacancy in the Board shall be filled by the municipal authorities
of the municipality which appointed the member whose vacancy is to be
filled, and the person so appointed to fill said vacancy shall hold office
for the remainder of the unexpired term of the member whose vacancy in
office he/she has been appointed to fill.6
§ 25-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 25-3
1:20
§ 25-3. Necessity for enactment.
The adoption of this article is deemed necessary for the benefit and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare of,
and will increase the prosperity of, the people of this Borough.
6. Note: Following paragraph 4 of the Articles was a list of the officers of each Borough at
the time of enactment of the ordinance; following paragraph 5 were the names, addresses
and terms of appointments of the first members of the Board from each Borough; at the
end of the section was a witnessed statement that the Articles had been executed and
attested.
§ 25-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-3
1:21

ARTICLE II
Rights and Conditions
[Adopted 12-1-1971 by Ord. No. 237 (Part 4, Ch. 3, §§ 4-3001 and
4-3002, of the 1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 25-4. Grant of rights and privileges to Collegeville-Trappe
Municipal Authority.
This Borough does grant to the Authority, its successors and assigns, all
easements, rights-of-way and other rights and privileges necessary and
desirable in, along, over and under streets, roads, lanes, courts, culs-de-sac,
alleys, public ways, public squares and other properties of this Borough,
together with free ingress, egress and regress therein and thereto, along
with other persons having interests or rights therein, for use in connection
with constructing, replacing, repairing, altering and maintaining the sewer
system, as the same shall exist, from time to time.
§ 25-5. Conditions of exercise of rights and privileges.
The rights and privileges granted to the Authority under § 25-4 shall be
exercised by the Authority under and subject to such reasonable rules
and regulations as shall be adopted and specified, from time to time, by
resolution or ordinance of this Borough; and this Borough does reserve the
right to adopt and specify, from time to time, such reasonable rules and
regulations in connection with exercise by the Authority of such rights and
privileges.
§ 25-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5
1:23
Chapter 73
FIRE COMPANY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 321.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 330.
Fires, flammable material, and
chimneys — See Ch. 337.
§ 73-1. Fire company recognized.
The Collegeville Fire Company No. 1 is recognized by the Borough as the
official fire protection unit for the Borough.
§ 73-2. Recognized activities of members of fire company.
In addition to actually fighting fires or while engaged in going to or
returning from any fire, the members of the fire company recognized by the
Borough are authorized to do the following things:
Chapter 120
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 120-1. Investment program to be provided; authorized forms of
investments.
Council shall provide for an investment program of its funds in one or more
of the following forms of investments:
A. Answer any type of fire alarm or call, whether general alarm, private
call or investigation of fire report or emergency call of any type, inside
or without the Borough;
B. Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremonial, practice, test or
parade when duly called or authorized by a proper officer or officers of
the fire company;
C. Engage in fund-raising activities for the fire company, when authorized
by a proper officer or officers of the fire company;
D. Engage in the performance of any other duty or activity authorized by
any officer of the recognized Fire Department.
A. United States Treasury Bills.
B. Short-term obligations of the United States government or its agencies
or instrumentalities.
§ 25-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 120-1
1:24
C. Deposits in savings accounts or time deposits or shared accounts of
institutions insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or
the Federal Savings and Loan Corporation or the National Credit Union
Share Insurance Fund to the extent that such accounts are so insured.
D. Obligations of the United States of America or any of its agencies or
instrumentalities backed by the full faith and credit of the United States
of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any of its agencies or
instrumentalities backed by the full faith and credit of the
commonwealth, or of any political subdivision of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any of its agencies or instrumentalities backed by the
full faith and credit of the political subdivision.
E. Shares of an investment company whose shares are registered under
the Securities Act of 1933,7 provided that the only investments of that
company are in the authorized investments for Borough funds listed in
Subsections A through D, above.
F. As a settlor with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act8 in the Pennsylvania
Local Government Investment Trust (the trust) and entering into a
declaration of trust, which is adopted by reference herein.
(1) The Borough is authorized to purchase shares in the trust from
time to time with available municipal funds, and to redeem some or
all of those shares from time to time as funds are needed for
Borough purposes. These actions are to be taken by the officers
designated for this purpose, pursuant to general or specific
instructions by Council.
(2) The trustees of the trust are designated as having official custody of
the Borough's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares
in the trust.
(3) As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, the
following matters are specifically found and determined:
(a) The conditions of the agreement are set forth in a Declaration
of Trust referred to in this section.
(b) This Borough's participation in the trust shall be terminable at
any time by ordinance.
(c) The Declaration of Trust and the purchases of its shares are for
the purpose of investing this Borough's funds in obligations
which are otherwise legal investment as part of a pooled
arrangement with other governmental units, thereby achieving
economic and other advantages of pooled investments.
7. Editor's Note: See 15 U.S.C. § 77a.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-1
1:25
§ 120-2. Authority to place funds in specific forms of investment.
The proper officers, agents or employees of the Borough are directed to
place the funds of the Borough in one or more of the above forms of
investment as they determine to be in the best interests of the Borough.
Chapter 126
MANAGER
§ 126-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 126-2. Creation of position.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Collegeville hereby creates the
position of Borough Manager.
§ 126-3. Appointment and removal.
The Borough Manager shall be appointed for such term as agreed upon by
majority vote of the Borough Council and as set forth in a contract between
the Borough and the Borough Manager.
(d) It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein
for municipal funds except through the purchase of shares in
the trust.
(e) The trust shall be managed by the Board of Trustees as set
forth in the Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided by
their end.
(f) Shares may be purchased and redeemed from time to time as
the Borough may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its cash investment requirements.
A. The purpose of this article is to enable the Borough to delegate
administrative functions to a Borough Manager. The Borough Council
shall be responsible for legislative policy making. The Mayor shall be
responsible for administration of the Police Department. The Borough
Manager shall be responsible for the implementation and execution of
policies an programs affecting the Borough which are established by
the Borough Council.
B. It is the intent of this article to delegate to the Borough Manager such
nonlegislative powers and duties of the Borough Council as shall be set
forth in resolutions adopted from time to time by the Borough Council
pursuant to the authority set forth in 53 P.S. § 460059 of the Borough
Code, Act of February 1, 1966, No. 581, Section 1005.
9. Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1005.
§ 120-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 126-4
1:26
§ 126-4. Qualifications and compensation.
The qualifications and compensation of the Borough Manager shall be set
forth in a contract between the Borough and the Borough Manager and
shall be approved from time to time by a resolution passed on a majority
vote of the Council.
§ 126-5. Powers and duties.
The Borough Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the
Borough except for police administration, which, by the Borough Code,10 is
the responsibility of the Mayor, and shall be responsible to Borough Council
as a whole for the proper and efficient administration, implementation,
and execution of the policies and programs of the Borough Council, unless
expressly imposed or conferred by statute upon other Borough officers.
§ 126-6. Borough Secretary.
The Borough Manager shall also be the Borough Secretary, as defined in the
Borough Code.11
§ 126-7. Hiring and discharging of employees.
The Borough Manager shall recommend to Borough Council the individuals
for hiring or discharge, but the decision to hire or to fire shall be solely the
responsibility of the Borough Council.
Chapter 147
PENSIONS
10.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
11.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 126-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 126-7
1:27

ARTICLE I
Firemen's Relief
[Adopted 9-8-1931 by Ord. No. 76 (Part 2, Ch. 4, Art. B, of the 1985
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 147-1. Firemen's relief association recognized.
The Collegeville Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association of Collegeville,
Pennsylvania, is officially recognized by Council as an organization formed
for the purpose of maintaining an association for beneficial and protective
purposes, to its members and their families in case of death, sickness,
temporary or permanent disability or accident, from the funds collected
therein.
§ 147-2. Firemen's relief association designated to receive moneys
from foreign fire insurance tax.
The Collegeville Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association of Collegeville is
designated by Council as the proper association to receive such funds
as are due and payable to the Borough treasury by the Treasurer of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, from the 2% tax on premiums from foreign
fire insurance companies.
§ 147-3. Annual appropriations authorized.
There is annually appropriated from the Borough treasury all such sums
of money that may in the future be paid into the Borough treasury by the
Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, on account of taxes paid
on premiums by foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance to an Act of
Assembly in such case made and provided.
§ 147-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-3
1:29

ARTICLE II
Police Retirement Plan
[Adopted 1-4-2010 by Ord. No. 540]
§ 147-4. Establishment.12
This article establishes a retirement plan for the police employees of
Collegeville Borough through the adoption of the police document effective
January 1, 2010.
12.Editor's Note: A copy of the plan and any amendments thereto are on file in the Borough
offices.
§ 147-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-4
1:31

ARTICLE III
Municipal Pension Plan
[Adopted 5-1-2013 by Ord. No. 557]
§ 147-5. Participation in Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System; election to amend benefits.
Collegeville Borough (the Borough), being a member municipality of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System (the system), hereby elects to
amend its Municipal Pension Plan administered by the system in accordance
with Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law, 53 P.S.
§ 881.101 et seq. (Retirement Law), and does hereby agree to be bound
by all the requirements and provisions of the Retirement Law and the
Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act, 53 P.S.
§ 895.101 et seq., and to assume all obligations, financial and otherwise,
placed upon member municipalities.13
§ 147-6. Administration.
As part of this article, the Borough agrees that the system shall administer
and provide the benefits set forth in the amended Municipal Pension Plan
Contract entered into between the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
Board and the Borough effective February 1, 2013 (the contract).
§ 147-7. Acceptance of contract and financial obligations.
The passage and adoption of this article by the Borough is an official
acceptance of the contract and the financial obligations resulting from the
administration of the contract.
§ 147-8. Payment; liability of Borough.
Payment for any obligation established by the adoption of this article and
the contract shall be made by the Borough in accordance with the
Retirement Law and the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act.14 The Borough hereby assumes all liability for any
unfundedness created due to the benefit structure set forth in the contract.
§ 147-9. Authorization of contract; repealer.
The Borough intends this article to be the complete authorization of the
contract and it shall become effective and specifically repeal Ordinance No.
487 either immediately or on February 1, 2013, which is the effective date
of the contract, whichever is later.
13.Editor's Note: A copy of the plan and any amendments thereto are on file in the Borough
offices.
14.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 881.101 et seq. and 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq., respectively.
§ 147-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-10
1:33
§ 147-10. Filing requirement.
A duly certified copy of this article and an executed contract shall be filed
with the system.
§ 147-10 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 147-10
1:34
Chapter 154
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
600.
Zoning — See Ch. 680.
§ 147-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-10
1:35

ARTICLE I
Borough Planning Commission
[Adopted 8-4-1965 by Ord. No. 187 (Part 2, Ch. 3, Art. B, § 2-3011
through 2-3014, of the 1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 154-1. Planning Commission established; membership.
There is hereby created a Planning Commission consisting of seven persons
to be appointed by Council.
§ 154-2. Term of members; vacancies; number of citizen members.
[Amended 4-7-1971 by Ord. No. 233]
§ 154-3. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall be the planning agency of the Borough and
shall perform the duties and responsibilities and may exercise the powers
vested by law in planning agencies in boroughs. The Planning Commission
shall have access to the maps, files and other papers or the Borough and
if Council by motion so decides may keep on file all maps, plans and other
pertinent material. Within the limitations prescribed and appropriations
provided for the purpose, Council may, on motion, authorize maps and plans
to be made under the supervision of the Planning Commission and likewise
may authorize changes and additions to be made to the maps and plans.
The Planning Commission may recommend such changes and additions as it
may deem proper, but such recommendations shall not restrict the right of
Council to initiate proceedings for the laying out and changing of highways
and public places in the Borough.
§ 154-4. Chairman, Vice Chairman, and other officers. [Amended
4-7-1971 by Ord. No. 233]
The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman and create
and fill such other offices as it may determine. Such officers shall serve
annual terms and may succeed themselves. Provisions of Section 207 of Act
247 are hereby incorporated by reference.15
A. The term of each of the members of the Commission shall be for four
years or until his successor is appointed and qualified and no more than
two of such members shall be reappointed or replaced during any
future calendar year and any such vacancy shall be filled for the
unexpired term.
B. At least five members of the Commission shall be citizen members.
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10207.
§ 154-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-4
1:37

ARTICLE II
Regional Planning Commission
[Adopted 6-7-2005 by Ord. No. 512 (Part 2, Ch. 3, Art. B, § 2-3015,
of the 1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 154-5. Member municipalities; purpose.
The municipalities of Collegeville Borough, Lower Frederick Township,
Perkiomen Township, Schwenksville Borough, Trappe Borough and Upper
Frederick Township, collectively known as the "Central Perkiomen Valley,"
have joined together for the purpose of mutual cooperation through
regional planning.
§ 154-6. Findings.
The regional Comprehensive Plan requires the implementation of the plan's
stated goals, objectives, and recommendations through a document known
as the "Central Perkiomen Valley Intergovernmental Cooperative
Implementation Agreement (ICIA)." The group has recognized that current
growth and anticipated growth, if not properly managed, would inevitably
lead to a lessening in the region's rural quality of life; the municipalities of
the Central Perkiomen Valley directed that a regional Comprehensive Plan
be prepared.
§ 154-7. Acceptance of agreement.
The Central Perkiomen Valley municipalities have reviewed the ICIA and
have found it to constitute a suitable and rational approach for the
implementation of the Central Perkiomen Valley Regional Comprehensive
Plan.
§ 154-8. Operation pursuant to ICIA standards required.
The Central Perkiomen Valley Regional Planning Commission shall operate
pursuant to the standards set forth in the ICIA in dealing with matters of
land use, planning and zoning.
§ 154-9. Adoption of agreement.
Collegeville Borough adopts the Central Perkiomen Valley
Intergovernmental Cooperative Implementation Agreement.
§ 154-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 154-9
1:39
Chapter 161
POLICE
§ 154-9 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 154-9
1:40
ARTICLE I
Police Department16
[Adopted 8-6-1969 by Ord. No. 224 (Part 10, Ch. 2, Art. A, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 161-1. Establishment of Police Department; Chief of Police.
A Police Department is established in and for the Borough. The Chief of
Police shall be the chief executive of the Police Department. He/she shall,
under the direction of the Mayor, be in charge of the police force and have
supervision over its members, in the exercise of their powers, duties and
authority.
§ 161-2. Subordinate classification of patrolman.
Subordinate to the Chief of Police in the Police Department, the
classification of patrolman is hereby established. The number of persons to
serve in the classification of patrolman on a full-time and/or part-time basis,
and the compensation of each shall be as determined by Council from time
to time.
§ 161-3. Appointment of special policemen by Mayor.
Nothing in this article shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint
special policemen during emergencies.
16.Editor's Note: Police cooperative agreements are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 161-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-3
1:416
Chapter 184
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
§ 184-1. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to establish a Borough commission that plans
for the ongoing beautification of public spaces and encourages good
planting and landscaping of private spaces in the community. In addition, it
is intended to further the following objectives:
§ 184-2. Establishment.
A group known as the "Shade Tree Commission of Collegeville Borough" is
hereby established.
§ 184-3. Membership, terms, vacancies and meetings.
A. Develop a shade tree planting plan that meets the tree planting
requirements of the Montgomery County Open Space Preservation
Program.
B. Provide a source of expertise available to residents for private planting
and landscaping activities and that assists the Borough in its reviews of
proposed land developments.
C. Encourage public/private partnerships in tree planting and similar
Borough beautification activities.
D. Encourage special planting programs, such as an Avenue of Trees
program or designating an official tree of Collegeville.
E. Encourage volunteerism among interested citizens.
A. The Commission shall be composed of at least three residents of the
Borough, who shall be appointed by the Borough Council and shall
serve without compensation. If possible, at least one member shall have
a relevant technical background, such as a registered landscape
architect, horticulturalist, or arborist.
B. When first established, Borough Council shall appoint to the
Commission one member to serve for a term of three years, one
member to serve for a term of four years, and one member to serve for a
term of five years.
C. On the expiration of a term, a successor shall be appointed by Borough
Council to serve a term of five years.
D. Vacancies in the office of Shade Tree Commission shall be filled by
Borough Council for the unexpired term.
§ 161-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 184-3
1:42
§ 184-4. Powers.
The Commission shall have the responsibility to plan and make
recommendations to Borough Council for the planting, replacement,
removal, protection, and needed maintenance of shade trees on public
roads and in public spaces in the Borough and make similar
recommendations for planting and landscaping of land developments in
accordance with the landscaping provisions of the Borough Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.17 It shall specifically be responsible
for implementing new tree planting in accordance with the tree planting
provisions of the Montgomery County Open Space Program.
§ 184-5. Notice of Commission activities.
Whenever the Commission formally recommends that the Borough plant,
transplant, remove, or prune shade trees on any street or public area, notice
of time and place of meeting at which work is proposed shall be given in at
least one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough once a week for
two weeks immediately preceding the time of the meeting. The notice shall
specify in detail the public streets or public areas upon which the proposed
action will occur.
§ 184-6. Report of Commission.
The Commission shall annually report in full to Borough Council its
transaction, expenses and related activities for the last fiscal year of the
Borough.
§ 184-7. Required permit.
Except for trees planted by the Borough and those provided as part of
an approved land development, no person shall plant, remove, replace, or
attach a man-made fixture or object to a shade tree on any public street
(including in a right-of-way) or public area unless a permit application for
the activity is submitted to the Commission. The application for a permit,
together with the required filing fee, if any, shall be made in writing to
the Commission, and include information on tree locations, species, and
proposed action. The Commission shall recommend approval or denial of
each permit application to Borough Council.
§ 184-8. Installation, maintenance, replacement, removal.
Installation, maintenance, replacement or removal of all new and existing
planting provided as part of land development or provided in public areas
E. The Commission shall meet from time to time as members determine to
be necessary, such meetings being duly advertised and open to the
public.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 184-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-8
1:43
shall meet all applicable standards of the Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.18
§ 184-9. Removal of diseased trees.
§ 184-10. Emergency situations.
The Borough reserves the right, without prior notice to the property
owner(s), to perform any acts necessary to abate clear, present, and
immediate threats to the public health, safety, or welfare caused by the
condition of shade trees or trees or parts thereof. The Borough reserves the
right to assess the cost of such abatement against the property owner(s).
§ 184-11. Appointment of members.
Borough Council shall appoint members to the Shade Tree Commission
following the enactment of this chapter.
Chapter 196
TAX COLLECTOR
A. The Commission may recommend to Borough Council that upon 60
days' prior written notice, the owner(s) of the property be required to
cut and remove trees or parts thereof that, because of disease or a
similar adverse condition, threaten to injure or destroy shade trees in a
public right-of-way or other public space. Upon failure of any such
owner(s) to comply with such notice, the Borough can cause the work to
be done by Borough personnel or by a contractor hired by the Borough
and levy and collect the cost thereof from the owner(s) of the property.
B. The Borough shall provide the written 30 day notice by regular mail to
the last known address of the property owner(s) and by posting the
notice at the main entrance to the principal building on the property.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 184-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 184-11
1:44
ARTICLE I
Compensation
[Adopted 8-7-1985 by Ord. No. 332 as Part 3, Ch. 1, § 3-1001, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances]
§ 196-1. Compensation of Tax Collector.
The rate of compensation to be paid to the Borough's Tax Collector for
collection of those taxes for which he/she is designated collector shall be
5% of those taxes collected.
§ 196-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-1
1:45
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 215
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 449.
§ 215-1. Restrictions on transportation and use of alcoholic
beverages and liquor in certain places.
Chapter 222
AMUSEMENTS AND GATHERINGS
§ 222-1. Applicability and purpose.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, in or upon any public street, alley,
sidewalk in the Borough, or in or upon any public property of the
Borough, or of any authority created individually or jointly by the
Borough, whether that person is in or upon a vehicle or conveyance or
is a pedestrian, to:
(1) Carry or have control over any opened bottle or other container
containing any alcoholic beverage or liquor; or
(2) Drink, imbibe or ingest any alcoholic beverage or liquor.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty
of an offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
A. This chapter shall apply to all circuses, carnivals and other
amusements, entertainments or gatherings, including but not limited to
concerts, sports events, motion picture shows, art exhibitions, cultural
exhibitions, and public dances to which the public may be admitted,
whether or not an admission or entrance fee or other charges is made,
and whether held in or upon any public or private property, or upon any
public street, alley or sidewalk in the Borough, in a tent or other shelter,
in a building, or out of doors. These activities and presentations shall be
referred to in this chapter as "public amusements and gatherings," or
"amusements or gatherings."
B. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, welfare and
morals of the community and its inhabitants by exercising some
supervision and control over public amusements and gatherings that
§ 196-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 222-1
1:46
§ 222-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, install or conduct any public
amusement or gathering anywhere in the Borough without first having
obtained a permit as provided in § 222-3, and unless all the terms and
conditions prescribed in this chapter are complied with.
§ 222-3. Application for permit; issuance.
might, without such supervision, involve overcrowding of facilities,
inadequate control of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or other conditions
constituting a threat to health, safety, welfare or morals.
A. Application for the permit required by this chapter shall be made to the
Mayor and shall be either for a single amusement or gathering held on
one day only or upon more than one consecutive days in single calendar
week, or a scheduled series of amusements or gatherings of the same
type or for the same purpose, held over a period of not more than three
months of the same year.
B. Application for the permit shall be made at least two full calendar
weeks in advance of the single amusement or gathering, if the permit is
for such a single performance, exhibition or gathering, or at least two
full calendar weeks in advance of the first of a series of amusements or
gatherings if the permit is to be for such a series.
C. Application shall be made by the promoter of the amusement or
gathering or by the owner of lessee or the premises where it is to be
held, or his agent or representative.
D. The application for the permit shall give or exhibit the following
information or material:
(1) The applicant's present and previous occupation;
(2) The length and location of the applicant's residence for the
preceding five years;
(3) The owner of the premises at which the public amusement is to be
held;
(4) A copy of any lease agreement or other contract, or any other type
of agreement, between the owner of the premises at which the
dance or other amusement is to be held, and the applicant;
(5) Whether or not the applicant is a citizen of the United States of
America;
(6) Whether the applicant intends to allow the use of intoxicating
beverages on the premises;
(7) The provisions for private police protection and maintenance of
crowd control made by the applicant;
§ 222-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 222-3
1:47
§ 222-4. Revocation of permit.
The Mayor shall have authority to revoke any permit issued under this
chapter when he/she shall deem such revocation to be in the interest of
the health, safety, welfare or morals of the Borough and its inhabitants.
Provided, appeals from action of the Mayor in refusing or revoking a permit
under this chapter may be made to Council within 10 days after the action
appealed from.
Chapter 230
ANIMALS
(8) The provisions for noise control made by the applicant;
(9) The number of parking spaces available for use by the applicant, a
detailed plot plan and any agreements for additional parking;
(10) The days or nights of the week on which the amusement or
gathering is to be held, and the time of commencement and time of
closing of that amusement or gathering;
(11) The charge of admission, if any;
(12) Whether or not music is to be supplied, and if so whether it is to be
live or recorded and amplified;
(13) The names of any and all partners whether involved by written or
oral contract, the names of any and all individuals with any interest
in the dance or public amusement.
E. Before granting the permit, the Mayor shall have authority to have an
investigation made of the proposed amusement or gathering, and he/
she may refuse to issue the permit when he/she deems the refusal is to
be in the interest of the health, safety, welfare or morals of the Borough
and its inhabitants. The Mayor may, in his discretion, refuse to grant a
permit unless the applicant shows that he/she has procured and has in
force liability insurance in an amount required by the Mayor. If the
Mayor shall see fit to grant the permit, he/she shall issue it to the
applicant without requirement for any fee, and for the specific period of
time stated on the permit. It shall be unlawful for the permit holder to
commence the holding of the amusement or gathering before the first
day specified on the permit or to continue to hold it after the last day
specified on the permit, or to violate or fail to observe any condition
contained in or attached to the permit.
F. The permit, after issuance, shall be granted to the applicant, and copies
shall be transmitted to and kept on file by the Secretary and Chief of
Police.
§ 222-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 222-4
1:48
ARTICLE I
Riding or Driving Horses
[Adopted 6-4-1980 by Ord. No. 303 (Part 5, Ch. 3, Art. C, of the 1985
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 230-1. Riding or driving on or across sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall ride or drive a horse or horse-drawn vehicle over, along or
across the sidewalks in the Borough.
§ 230-2. Riding or driving on property of another prohibited
without permission.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner or occupant of
ground or persons duly authorized by the owner or occupant of ground,
to ride or drive a horse or horse-drawn vehicle over, along or across any
ground situate in the Borough.
§ 230-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings brought in the name of the Borough before
the Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $5 and not more than $1,000 and costs; and in default
of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment in the Montgomery
County prison for a period not in excess of 30 days. All fines and penalties
imposed and collected under this section shall be paid over to the Treasurer
for the use of the Borough.
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-3
1:49

ARTICLE II
Animal Control Officer
[Adopted 8-7-1985 by Ord. No. 332 as Part 5, Ch. 3, Art. A, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances]
§ 230-4. Contract authorized.
Council shall have authority, at its discretion, from time to time, to enter
into a contract with an individual or person to act as Animal Control
Officer for the Borough. The Animal Control Officer shall be an independent
contractor and shall not be the agent, servant or employee of the Borough.
He/she shall serve for the period of time set out in the contract that is valid
at any specific time, and shall receive for his services from the Borough the
amount of money provided in the contract.
§ 230-5. Authority.
The Animal Control Officer is authorized by the Borough to preserve the
peace and to arrest or to enforce the law under the terms of the
Pennsylvania Dog Law of 1965,19 as amended. The Animal Control Officer
and any of his employees shall perform any of the work in the Borough after
having been sworn in for the limited service referred to in this section and
in § 230-6 only, and shall have limited powers of a police officer.
§ 230-6. Extent of animal control work.
The animal control coverage shall be at the discretion of the Chief of
Police and shall include the control of animals responsible for bites and the
containing and removal of stray dogs.
19.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 230-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-6
1:51

ARTICLE III
Keeping of Certain Animals Restricted
[Adopted 3-1-1989 by Ord. No. 363 (Part 5, Ch. 3, Art. B, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 230-7. Unlawful to keep pigs or maintain pig pens in Borough;
violations and penalties.
No person shall keep any pig or hog at any place within the Borough,
nor shall any person maintain any pig pen or hog pen anywhere in the
Borough. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, for
each violation, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 and costs, and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Provided, each day's continuance
of a violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate
violation or offense.
§ 230-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-7
1:53

ARTICLE IV
Curbing of Dogs
[Adopted Ord. No. 472 (Part 5, Ch. 3, Art. D, of the 1985 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 230-8. Restrictions.
Any person who owns, harbors, keeps, or is in charge of any dog within or
frequenting the Borough, shall not permit such dog to be unattended within
the Borough unless such dog is within the bounds of such dog owner's
private property. Said dog owner shall require said dog to be restrained
by a leash or other appropriate device of control off that owner's private
property so that it cannot stray beyond the premises on which it is secured,
or under reasonable control of some person, which for the purpose of this
article shall be "curbing." Such "curbing" shall be permitted only on public
streets and on private property with the express permission of the owner of
such property.
§ 230-9. Guide dogs.
Guide dogs accompanying blind persons, dogs used to assist any other
physically handicapped persons or animals used in any police or fire
activities shall be exempt from this article.
§ 230-10. Enforcement.
§ 230-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons convicted of violating this article shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $300 and costs per incident.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officer, his duly authorized representatives or any officer of the
Borough.
B. In understanding the enforcement of this article, the Borough is
assuming only to promote the general welfare. The Borough is not
assuming, nor is it imposing on any of its officers or employees, an
obligation for breach of which it is liable in law or equity to any person
who claims that any breach proximately caused injury.
C. A violation of this article shall not be considered negligence per se.
§ 230-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-11
1:55

ARTICLE V
Control of Animal Defecation on Public and Private Property
[Adopted 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 593]
§ 230-12. Animal defecation on public and private property.
No person having possession, custody or control of any animal shall
knowingly or negligently permit any dog or other animal to commit any
nuisance, i.e., defecation or urination, upon any gutter, street, driveway,
alley, curb or sidewalk in the Borough of Collegeville, or upon the floors
or stairways of any building or place frequented by the public or used in
common by the tenants, or upon the outside walls, walkways, driveways,
alleys, curbs or stairways of any building abutting on a public street or park,
or upon the grounds of any public park or public area, or upon any private
property other than the property of the owner of such animal.
§ 230-13. Persons to provide container for disposal of animal feces.
Any person having possession, custody or control of any animal in the
Borough of Collegeville, on property other than the private property of the
owner of such animal, shall have in his or her possession and conspicuously
display a container, bag or other receptacle for the purpose of immediately
removing any feces from such surface.
§ 230-14. Disposal of animal feces.
Any person having possession, custody or control of any animal which
commits a nuisance, i.e., defecation, in any area other than the private
property of the owner of such animal, as prohibited in § 230-12, shall be
required to immediately remove the feces from such surface and either:
§ 230-15. Dogs accompanying blind or handicapped persons
exempted.
The provisions of §§ 230-12, 230-13, and 230-14 hereof shall not apply to a
guide dog accompanying any blind person, or to any dog used to assist any
other physically handicapped person.
§ 230-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $300.
A. Carry same away for disposal in a toilet; or
B. Place same in a nonleaking container for deposit in a trash or litter
receptacle.
§ 230-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-16
1:57
Chapter 241
BLASTING
§ 241-1. Definitions and interpretation.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPLOSIVE or EXPLOSIVES — Any chemical compound or mechanical
mixture, that is commonly or actually used or intended for the purpose
of producing an explosive, that contains any oxidizing and combustible
units, or other ingredients, in such proportion, quantity or packing
that an ignition by fire, by friction or concussion by percussion, or by
detonation of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a
sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressure is capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous
objects or of destroying life or limb. That term shall be deemed to
include dynamite in any form or quantity, dynamite caps or blasting
compounds or equipment. That term shall not include any small arms,
ammunition or devices or compositions actually intended and used to
obtain visible or audible pyrotechnic effects nor explosives in the forms
prescribed in the official United States Pharmacopeia. That term shall
not be deemed to include explosives produced or stored in experimental
quantities in the laboratories of high schools, colleges or similar
institutions by the duly qualified personnel of these institutions for the
purposes of investigation and instruction.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, company,
organization or group of any kind, including Borough employees.
STORAGE — The keeping in any article, truck, building, shed, enclosure
or outdoors or at any place whatsoever at any time within the limits of
the Borough.
TRANSPORTATION — The moving by vehicle, cart, by hand or
otherwise of any of the articles or materials mentioned in this chapter
from one place within the Borough limits to another place within the
limits of the Borough.
USE — The term "use" when employed in this chapter shall be deemed
to mean and to include any handling, disposition, employment, placing,
or use as commonly understood and defined of any of the articles
or materials mentioned in this chapter except those conducted by
the duly qualified and authorized professional personnel of accredited
high schools and colleges or the students thereof under professional
supervision for research, investigation and instruction.
B. Interpretation. This chapter shall not supersede any provision of state
or federal law or regulations that is in conflict with or identical to any
provision of this chapter, but is to be construed as to be correlated with
any such statutes and regulations. It is the intent of the Borough that
§ 230-16 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 241-1
1:58
§ 241-2. Manufacture of explosives prohibited.
No person shall manufacture any explosives in the Borough.
§ 241-3. Permit required for certain activities and operations.
No person shall have, keep, use, store, sell or transport any explosive
or explosives or do, perform, conduct, supervise or permit any blasting
or detonation of explosives or blasting materials within the Borough at
any time whatsoever unless that person shall have obtained and have in
his possession and/or properly exhibited a valid permit duly issued by
the Secretary as specified in §§ 241-4 through 241-6, and then only in
accordance with the conditions and subject to the limitations specified on
the permit.
§ 241-4. Application for permit; fees.
An applicant seeking issuance of a permit shall execute an application, in
writing, on a form prescribed by the Building Committee and provided by
the Secretary or the Building Committee. Every applicant shall set forth on
that form the following specified information:
any provision of this chapter that is stricter than or in addition to
any such statute or regulation shall be in effect and shall be enforced
within the Borough, subject to the penalties prescribed by § 241-11 for
a violation of this chapter.
A. The complete name, address and identity or the person who proposes to
transport, store, keep or use explosives or do the blasting, and the
name, address, and identity of the specific individual who will be in
charge.
B. Whether or not the applicant or any employee of the applicant is
involved in any litigation, either civil or criminal, the names of any
pending cases, the jurisdiction, court, term, and number, and whether
there have been any fines levied or judgments rendered at any time
against the applicant for damages growing out of the storage or use of
explosives.
C. The type and extent of the applicant's operations and the projects
contemplated (so far as known or ascertainable at the time application
is made) in connection with which blasting will be conducted.
D. The type or kind of explosives generally used by the applicant.
E. The applicant shall promise and agree upon the application forms to be
furnished by the Secretary that the applicant will be fully liable for and
promises to pay for any and all damages of every kind and nature
resulting to any person or property from the conduct of the blasting
operations, and that the applicant will display at all times the permit on
the premises designated in the permit.
§ 241-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-4
1:59
§ 241-5. Bond or insurance required.
Every applicant, as a condition precedent to issuance of a permit, shall
furnish an irrevocable bond in the sum of $300,000 or more, or evidence
to the Secretary or the Building Committee that there is and will continue
in full force a public liability insurance policy against personal injury and
property damage in an amount of not less than $300,000 for any one
accident, which liability insurance coverage must remain in effect during
the entire period of the blasting operations.
§ 241-6. Permits.
F. Every applicant shall supply satisfactory proof before a permit is issued
that the applicant has provided and maintains at reasonable accessible
points adequate fire extinguishing equipment wherever explosives are
stored, transported, sold or used.
G. Fees. All applications shall be accompanied by a fee in the sum of $20
payable to the Borough, except that applications for annual renewal of a
permit made at or before the expiration of the previous permit shall be
$10 and fees may be waived as to employees of the Borough applying
for permits in the course of performance of Borough business.
A. Permits for any of the purposes enumerated in this section and in
§ 241-3 may be issued on the recommendation of a majority of the
Building Committee of Council by and upon the signature of the
Secretary, upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions of this
chapter and the regulations established under this chapter by the
Building Committee:
B. Separate annual permits shall be required for each of the following:
transporting and/or storing and/or selling any explosive or explosives;
transporting and/or using for blasting any explosive or explosives.
C. A permit shall be valid only for a period of one year from the date of
issuance, and shall be subject to all limitations and provisions of this
chapter.
D. The permit for transporting explosives shall designate the time when
and the route whereon the explosive may be transported. A police
escort shall be required where the aggregate amount of explosives
being transported on any one vehicle is 25 pounds or more.
E. Every vehicle while carrying explosives shall have painted on its front,
sides and back in letters easily legible at least four inches high, in
contrasting colors, the word "Explosives" or in lieu thereof shall display,
in such manner that it will be visible from all directions, a red flag with
the word "Danger" printed, stamped or sewn thereon in white letters.
Such flag shall be at least 24 inches square and the letter shall be six
inches high.
§ 241-4 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 241-6
1:60
§ 241-7. Blasting provisions.
No blasting shall be permitted except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m., Mondays through Saturdays. There shall be no blasting on legal
holidays. Blasting operations shall be conducted by the permit holder in a
safe, careful manner with full, proper and adequate safety precautions and
protection to all persons and property and after suitable public warning at
the expense and responsibility of the holder of the permit.
§ 241-8. Liability of permit holder; nonliability of Borough.
The permit holder shall be fully liable for any and all damages of every
kind and nature resulting to any person or property from the conduct of the
blasting operation and from the storage or transportation of explosives. This
chapter shall not be construed as to impose or increase liability upon the
Borough, its agents, representatives or employees.
§ 241-9. Storage of explosives.
F. No person shall be permitted to smoke in or on a vehicle containing
explosives nor drive any such vehicle while intoxicated, nor drive any
such vehicle or conduct himself in a careless or reckless manner, nor
load or unload the vehicle while the motor is running or in a careless
manner or while smoking or intoxicated, nor shall such vehicle be left
unattended while it contains explosives.
G. No person shall be permitted to place, carry or cause to be placed or
carried in the same compartment of the bed or body of any vehicle
containing explosives, any metal tool or other piece of metal, any
matches, any exploders, detonators, blasting caps, or other similar
explosive material or any other merchandise or equipment, provided
the restriction as to tools and metals shall not apply to plumbing
contractors licensed by the Borough when carrying less than 10 pounds
of such explosives.
A. Any person holding a valid permit may store the explosives covered by
the permit only in a magazine complying with the construction
specifications for magazines containing explosives issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry and at such places as
comply with the American Table of Distances issued by the Institute of
Makers of Explosives and an accurate record shall be kept at all times
showing the size and contents of each container or package of
explosives so stored.
B. Blasting caps or detonators of any kind shall not be kept in the same
magazine with other explosives and such magazines must be kept clean
and free from grit, rubbish and empty packages.
C. All magazines containing explosives shall be kept locked except when
an actual process of being inspected or when explosives are being
placed therein or are being removed therefrom. All explosives and
§ 241-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-9
1:61
§ 241-10. Suspension and revocation of permits.
§ 241-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, for every such
violation, upon conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment of fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30
days. Provided, each separate offense or violation of any provision of this
chapter, and each day on which any offense or violation takes place shall
constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to a separate penalty.
Chapter 248
BUILDINGS, VACANT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 270. Fire prevention — See Ch. 330.
§ 248-1. Authority.
These regulations are adopted pursuant to authority granted in the Borough
Code, Sections 1202(3), (5), (6), (10), (24), and (74), 53 P.S. § 46202 et seq.20
portable magazines shall be stored at the end of each working day in a
permanent, locked magazine.
A. Whenever the Mayor or Secretary finds that any person holding a
permit has obtained the permit with false information in the application
or has violated any condition of the permit, or of this chapter, or finds,
that the conduct of that permit holder is wilful or creates a fire or
explosion hazard requiring corrective action the Mayor or Secretary, as
the case may be, shall certify the violation to council and the Mayor or
Secretary shall forthwith suspend the permit.
B. Council, upon being notified of any such suspension of a permit, or upon
its own motion upon information received of careless conduct or
violations of this chapter requiring corrective action may by majority
vote revoke any permit. Before any such final revocation of permit, at
least five days' notice of a hearing before council shall be given to the
permit holder of the time and place of hearing, at which time a fair
hearing shall be accorded the permit holder.
20.Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1202.
§ 241-9 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 248-2
1:62
§ 248-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to: assist the Borough and, in particular,
the Borough Code Official, in assuring the proper maintenance of vacant
buildings for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and welfare;
monitor the number of vacant commercial and industrial buildings in the
Borough and to assess the effects of the condition of those buildings on
nearby businesses and on the neighborhoods in which they are located,
particularly in light of firesafety hazards, visual blight and unlawful,
temporary occupancy by transients, including users and traffickers of illegal
drugs; require the continued maintenance and upkeep of such vacant
buildings; and promote substantial efforts to maintain in a good condition
and state of repair, rehabilitate, rent or sell such vacant commercial and
industrial buildings. The provisions of this chapter are in addition to and
not in lieu of any other applicable provisions of the Borough of Collegeville
Code of Ordinances.
§ 248-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BOARDED — A building or structure subject to the provisions of this
chapter where, in place of one or more exterior doors, other than a storm
door, or of one or more windows, there is plywood or similar material
covering the space for such door or window so that such door or window is
secured.
BUILDING — Any combination of materials having a roof and enclosed
within exterior walls or fire walls, built to form a structure for the shelter
of persons or property, excluding accessory structures that are incidental to
the principal structure located on the same lot.
OCCUPIED — A building or structure subject to the provisions of this
chapter where one or more persons actually conducts a lawful business
in all or any part of the building as the licensed business occupant, or
as the legal or equitable owner/occupant(s) or tenant(s) on a permanent,
nontransient basis, or any combination of the same. For purposes of this
chapter, evidence offered to prove that a building is so occupied may
include, but shall not be limited to, the regular receipt of delivery of regular
mail through the United States Postal Service, proof of continual telephone,
electric, gas, heating, water and sewer services, a valid Borough business
license, or the most recent federal, state or local tax statements indicating
that the subject property is the official business address of the person or
business claiming occupancy.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, corporation or other entity having a
legal or equitable interest in the property, or recorded in the official records
of the County of Montgomery or the Borough as holding title to the property,
or otherwise having control of the property and the right to present use and
enjoyment thereof.
§ 248-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-3
1:63
SECURED — A building or structure subject to the provisions of this chapter
that has a permanent door or window in each appropriate building opening
that is secured to deter vandalism and unauthorized entry, and has all
its door and window components, including frames, jambs, rails, stiles,
muntins, mullions, panels, sashes, lights and panes intact and unbroken.
UNSECURED — Any vacant or abandoned building or structure subject to
the provisions of this chapter not continuously secured, maintained, locked
or boarded to deter vandalism and unauthorized entry or which fails to
provide protection from weather damage.
VACANT — A building or structure subject to the provisions of this chapter
where no person or persons actually, currently conducts a lawfully licensed
business, or lawfully occupies any part of the building as the legal or
equitable owner(s) or tenant-occupant(s) or owner-occupants, or tenant(s)
on a permanent, nontransient basis.
§ 248-4. Applicability; exemptions.
§ 248-5. Filing of registration statement; contents; maintenance
plan.
A. Applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to any building or
structure designed or used for commercial, industrial, manufacturing,
storage or other nonresidential uses or purposes that has been vacant
for at least 60 consecutive days.
B. Exemptions. The following buildings are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter:
(1) A building that is undergoing an active renovation or rehabilitation
and all required permits have been obtained;
(2) A building that is vacant as a result of a natural disaster and
covered by emergency response requirements under federal, state
or local law;
(3) A building owned by the United States, the commonwealth,
Montgomery County, the Borough, or any of their respective
agencies or political subdivisions;
(4) A residential single-family home or owner-occupied two-family
dwelling residential property; or
(5) Residential condominium and rental units in a building whose
vacancy rate does not exceed 95%.
A. Registration. The owner of a vacant building or structure shall file a
registration statement for each such building or structure with the
Borough on forms provided by the Borough. Registration shall be
required for all vacant buildings, whether vacant and secured, vacant
and unsecured, or vacant and boarded, whenever any building or
structure has remained vacant for 60 consecutive days or more. In no
§ 248-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 248-5
1:64
instance shall the registration of a vacant building or structure be
construed to exonerate the owner, agent or responsible party from
responsibility for compliance with any other building, property
maintenance, fire, housing, zoning or other applicable codes,
ordinances or requirements. One registration statement shall be filed
for each vacant building or structure owned by the owner so
registering.
B. Contents. The following information and documentation shall be
provided in or accompanying the registration statement:
(1) The street address of each vacant building or structure;
(2) The names and addresses of all owners (as further described in
Subsection C below), together with the name of the responsible
person to contact regarding building repairs and emergency
conditions;
(3) A working telephone number that has service 24 hours a day and
seven days a week;
(4) A survey or plot plan of the lot and an interior plan depicting the
layout of each building floor; and
(5) Any other information deemed necessary by the Borough Code
Official.
C. Owner defined. For purposes of completing the registration statement,
the term "owner" shall mean the following:
(1) If the owner is a corporation, the registration statement shall
provide the names and resident addresses of all officers and
directors of the corporation and shall be accompanied by a copy of
the most recent relevant corporate filing with the Secretary of
State.
(2) If the owner is an estate, the registration statement shall provide
the name and business address of the executor of the estate.
(3) If the owner is a trust, the registration statement shall provide the
name and address of all trustees, grantors and beneficiaries.
(4) If the owner is a partnership or limited-liability company, the
registration statement shall provide the names and residence
addresses of the managing partner or managing member and of all
partners or members with an ownership interest in the partnership
or limited-liability company of 10% or greater.
(5) If the owner is an individual, the registration statement shall
provide the name and residence address of that person.
§ 248-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-5
1:65
§ 248-6. Local agent.
If no person identified on the registration statement has an address within
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the registration statement also shall
provide the name and address of a person who resides within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and is authorized to accept service of
process on behalf of the owner and who shall be designated as a responsible
local party or agent, both for purposes of notification in the event of an
emergency affecting the public health, safety or welfare, and for purposes
of service of any and all notices as herein authorized.
§ 248-7. Inspection.
D. Maintenance plan. At the time of registration, the owner shall provide a
maintenance plan for the property, which shall include at least the
following:
(1) The length of time the owner expects the vacancy to continue.
(2) The measures to be taken to secure the building or structure and
ensure that it will be kept weathertight and secure from
trespassers, safe for entry by police officers and firefighters in
times of exigent circumstances or emergency, compliant with the
maintenance obligations set forth in § 248-8 of this chapter, free
from nuisance, and in good order and condition.
(3) A description of the contents of the building or structure.
(4) Permission for the Borough, its officers, employees, consultants
and agents, to enter and inspect the building and the property.
A. At the time of registration, the Borough Code Official shall conduct an
interior and exterior inspection of the building(s) and the premises,
following reasonable notice to the owner, and shall advise the owner of
any conditions that violate the Borough building, property
maintenance, fire, housing, zoning or similar codes, and shall advise of
any corrective actions required to abate such violations. The owner
shall attend the inspection and cooperate with the Borough in
completing all required corrective action. The Borough Code Official,
upon inspection, shall issue an order for any work needed to:
(1) Comply with the maintenance standards described in § 248-8
hereof and adequately protect the building from intrusion by
trespassers and from deterioration by weather conditions; and
(2) Ensure that allowing the building to remain vacant will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, will not
unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of other
premises within the neighborhood, and will not pose an
extraordinary hazard to police officers or firefighters entering the
premises in times of emergency.
§ 248-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 248-7
1:66
§ 248-8. Maintenance standards.
B. When issuing a work order, the Borough Code Official shall specify the
time for completion of the work. The order shall act as an interim
vacant building permit, the duration of which shall be for the time set
forth in the Borough Code Official's order. No interim permit shall be
effective for a period of more than three months. All work done
pursuant to this chapter shall be done in compliance with applicable
building, property maintenance, fire, housing, zoning and other similar
codes, ordinances and requirements.
C. Upon completion of the work identified in the foregoing work order and
a satisfactory follow-up inspection and determination that the building
is in compliance with this chapter, the Borough Code Official shall issue
a vacant building permit for the property. The permit shall be effective
for one year.
A. Lot maintenance. The lot upon which the building or structure is
located shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, free
from waste, rubbish, debris or excessive vegetation, and shall not pose
a threat to the public health or safety. In furtherance thereof, the
following lot maintenance standards shall be applicable:
(1) Accessory buildings/structures. All accessory and appurtenant
buildings or structures, including, but not limited to, garages,
sheds and fences, shall be free from safety, health and fire hazards
and shall otherwise comply with the maintenance standards set
forth in this section.
(2) Vegetation. All grass and weeds on the premises, including
abutting sidewalks, gutters and alleys, shall be kept below eight
inches in height and all dead or broken trees, tree limbs and
shrubbery shall be cut and removed from the premises.
(3) Walkways. Public walkways, whether adjoining or on the lot, shall
be in good repair, free of ice and snow and be safe for pedestrian
travel.
(4) Exterior premises. No waste, rubbish, junk, debris or excessive
vegetation shall be permitted to accumulate in the yards
surrounding the vacant building or structure or on any portion of
the lot. No portion of the lot nor any structure, vehicle or
receptacle on the premises shall be maintained or operated in any
manner that causes or produces a health or safety hazard or
permits the premises to become or be conducive to becoming a
rodent harborage. Water shall not accumulate or be permitted to
pool on the ground.
(5) Lighting and fencing. All exterior lighting, signage, fences and
gates shall be maintained in sound condition and in good repair.
§ 248-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-8
1:67
B. Exterior maintenance. The owner of a vacant building or structure shall
secure all doors, windows and other openings in the building or
structure to deter vandalism and entry by unauthorized persons. In
furtherance thereof, the following exterior maintenance standards shall
be applicable:
(1) Building openings. Doors, windows, areaways and other openings
shall be weathertight, locked and secured against entry by birds,
vermin and trespassers and free from graffiti. Missing or broken
doors, windows and other such openings shall be replaced within
five days of becoming damaged and shall be covered by glass or
other rigid transparent materials which are weather protected, and
tightly fitted and secured to the opening. Graffiti shall be removed
within 24 hours of its occurrence.
(2) Roofs. The roof and flashings shall be sound and tight, not admit
moisture or have defects which might admit moisture, rain or roof
damage, and allow for drainage to prevent dampness or
deterioration in the interior walls or interior of the building.
(3) Drainage. The building storm drainage system, including, but not
limited to, gutters, downspouts, scuppers and flashing, shall be
functional, in good repair, and installed in an approved manner, and
allow adequate discharge in an approved manner to remove water
from the building and the lot.
(4) Building structure. The building shall be maintained in good
condition and repair, structurally sound and free from debris,
rubbish and garbage. The building shall be sanitary and shall not
pose a threat to the public health and safety. Structural members
shall be free of deterioration and capable of safely bearing imposed
dead and live loads.
(5) Foundation walls. The foundation walls shall be maintained in good
condition, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition so as not
to pose a threat to public health and safety, shall be capable of
supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed
thereon, and shall be free from open cracks and breaks, free from
leaks, free from graffiti, and be animal and rodentproof.
(6) Exterior walls. The exterior walls and building facade shall be free
of holes, breaks, graffiti and loose or rotting materials. Exposed
metal, wood or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements
and against decay, corrosion or rust by periodic application of
weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface
treatment.
(7) Decorative features. The cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta
trim, fences, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be
safe, anchored, and in good repair and free from graffiti. Exposed
metal, wood or other surfaces shall be protected from the elements
and against decay, corrosion or rust by periodic application of
§ 248-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 248-8
1:68
weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface
treatment.
(8) Overhanging extensions. All balconies, canopies, marquees, signs,
metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts
and similar features shall be in good repair, anchored, safe and
sound, and free from graffiti. Exposed metal, wood or other
surfaces shall be protected from the elements and against decay,
corrosion or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
(9) Chimneys and towers. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and
similar appurtenances shall be structurally safe and in good repair,
and free from graffiti. Exposed metal and wood surfaces shall be
protected from the elements and against decay, corrosion or rust by
periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
C. Interior maintenance. The owner of a vacant building or structure shall
maintain the interior of the building or structure and all major systems
therein or servicing such building, including, but not limited to, the
electrical and plumbing systems, the water supply system, and the
sewer system, in a manner consistent with the requirements of the
codes, ordinances and regulations of the Borough, including, without
limitation, the 1996 BOCA National Property Maintenance Code, as
amended from time to time. In addition, the owner shall remove all
combustible waste and refuse therefrom in compliance with the
Borough fire prevention code and shall remove any waste, rubbish or
debris from the interior of the structure. In furtherance thereof, the
following interior maintenance standards shall be applicable:
(1) Debris. The owner shall not accumulate or permit the accumulation
of junk, trash, debris, boxes, lumber, scrap metal or any other
materials that may produce a health, fire or safety hazard, or
provide harborage for rodents or other animals.
(2) Structural supports. Every floor, wall, stair, ceiling or other
structural support shall be safe and capable of supporting the loads
associated with normal usage and shall be kept in sound condition
and repair.
(3) Plumbing. Plumbing fixtures shall be maintained with no leaking
pipes, and all pipes for water shall either be completely drained or
heated to resist being frozen.
(4) Exits. Every exit door shall be secured with an internal dead bolt
lock, or with a locking mechanism deemed equivalent or better by
the Borough Code Official, and every exit door shall be capable of
being opened from the inside easily and without the use of a key or
special knowledge.
§ 248-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-8
1:69
§ 248-9. Registration fees; waiver; renewal.
(5) Stairways. Interior stairs shall have treads and risers that have
uniform dimensions, are sound, securely fastened and have no
rotting, loose or deteriorating supports.
(6) Extermination. Every owner shall be responsible for the
extermination of inspects, rodents and other vermin in or about the
premises.
D. Standards for boarding vacant buildings. The boarding of the doors,
windows and other openings of any building or structure shall comply
with the following minimum standards:
(1) Securing by boarding. Windows, exterior doors and similar
openings shall be boarded by the attachment of exterior grade
plywood or similar material, which completely covers the space for
such window, door or similar opening, is attached in a secure
fashion to deter vandalism and unauthorized entry, and meets the
requirements of the Building Code and applicable insurance
underwriter standards relating to the boarding of buildings.
(2) Painting of boarded openings. All boarded windows shall be
painted with a minimum of one coat of exterior black or dark gray
paint, with mullions painted on the boards using exterior white
paint to simulate window panes or gridwork. All boarded doors
shall be painted with a minimum of one coat of exterior paint,
which is of a color compatible with the exterior color of the building
or structure.
E. Additional requirements. The owner of a vacant building or structure
shall also comply with the following requirements:
(1) Sewer. The sewer shall be capped in a manner approved by the
Borough so as to prevent the accumulation of methane gas in the
building.
(2) Insurance. The owner shall acquire or otherwise maintain liability
insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence
and $2,000,000 in the aggregate covering any damage to any
person or property caused by any physical condition of or in the
building. Evidence of this insurance shall be provided to the
Borough Code Official at the time of registration and any renewal
thereof.
(3) Knox-Box®. A Knox-Box® (i.e., a wall-mounted safe for the storage
of building keys) shall be installed at a visible location near the
main entrance to the building, the precise location for which shall
be determined by the Fire Chief or the Fire Marshal, in his
discretion.
§ 248-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 248-9
1:70
§ 248-10. Reinspection fees.
A. Registration. A registration fee of $500 shall be imposed for a vacant
building permit or renewal of such permit to cover the administrative
cost of inspecting and monitoring the building or structure and
ensuring the proper maintenance thereof. The registration fee shall be
paid at the time of application or renewal. No permit shall be issued
prior to payment of the registration or renewal fee.
B. Waiver. All but $75 of the registration fee shall be waived by the
Borough upon a showing, to the satisfaction of the Borough Code
Official, that the building or structure is being actively marketed for
sale or lease and is being maintained in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the permit issued for the building. The
full registration fee shall be tendered with the written waiver request
and all but $75 shall be refunded if the waiver is granted by the
Borough Code Official.
C. Renewal. Registration of a vacant building or structure shall be
renewed on an annual basis, within 10 days of the date of permit
expiration, in the same manner as initial permit issuance if the
structure is still a vacant building. An inspection of the premises shall
be performed prior to the renewal of a vacant building permit. All
renewed permits shall be subject to all of the same conditions and
obligations applicable to the initial permit, unless expressly exempted
therefrom by the Borough.
A. To compensate the Borough for inspection and administrative costs
related to the enforcement of this chapter, an escalating fee established
by Borough Council through resolution may be charged for any
reinspection following the initial inspection that resulted in an order for
corrective action, and the first reinspection to determine compliance
with an order for corrective action issued hereunder. There shall be no
reinspection fee for a final inspection indicating compliance, or for a
reinspection occurring during the period of an approved time extension
granted for good cause and involving a good faith effort on the part of
the owner to comply with the order.
B. Reinspection fees not paid within 30 days of mailing an invoice to the
owner shall be charged and collected as a special assessment against
the real estate upon which the reinspections were made, and the
Borough may file a municipal lien against the real estate until paid in
full, as provided for by law, with interest accruing on the unpaid
balance at the rate of 6% per annum. There shall also be a $100
administrative charge added to the charge and special assessment to
cover the administrative costs of charging and specially assessing the
property.
§ 248-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-11
1:71
§ 248-11. Continuing obligations of owner; duty to update
registration statement.
The obligations of the owner as set forth in this chapter constitute
continuing obligations throughout the period in which the building or
structure is vacant. The owner, or the responsible person or agent for the
owner, shall notify the Borough Code Official within 30 days of any change
to the information contained in the registration statement on file with the
Borough.
§ 248-12. Violations and penalties.
The failure or refusal of any owner to register a vacant building or structure
and/or to otherwise comply with this chapter shall constitute a summary
offense punishable upon conviction thereof by a fine of not less than $200
nor more than $1,000, plus costs of prosecution, for each failure or refusal
to register, or for each failure or refusal to pay a required vacant building
fee, as applicable. Each day that the owner is in violation shall constitute a
separate offense. This penalty shall be in addition to the registration fee of
$500.
§ 248-13. Appeals.
Any person affected by any notice issued in connection with the
enforcement of this chapter shall have the right to appeal and request a
hearing on the matter before the Board of Appeals established by the BOCA
National Building Code, which shall be composed of the Borough Council,
ex officio, and shall be the appeal board as referred to in this chapter.
The appeal shall proceed in the same manner and subject to the same
limitations as prescribed in the building code for appeals from the orders
and/or decisions of the Building Official under that code. The appeal shall be
filed with the Borough Secretary, in writing, within 30 days of the rendition
of the order or decision of the Code Official being appealed from.
§ 248-14. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause, part or provision hereof shall be held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections, sentences, clauses,
parts or provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intent of
the Council that this chapter would have been adopted even if such illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had
not been included herein.
Chapter 259
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 248-11 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 248-14
1:72
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 259-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Collegeville Borough
Cable Television Ordinance."
§ 259-2. Purpose.
A. The Borough of Collegeville finds that the development of cable
television and communications systems has the potential of having
great benefit and impact upon the people of Montgomery County.
Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated
with cable television, the Borough further finds that the public
convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by
establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the Borough
or such persons as the Borough shall designate. It is the intent of this
chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the
means to attain the best possible public interest and public purpose in
these matters, and any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof.
B. Further, it is recognized that cable communications systems have the
capacity to provide not only entertainment and information services to
the Borough's residents, but can provide a variety of broadband,
interactive communications services to institutions and individuals.
C. For these purposes, the following goals underlie the regulations
contained herein:
(1) Cable communications services should be available to all Borough
residents.
(2) The system should be capable of accommodating both the present
and reasonably foreseeable future communications needs of the
Borough and its residents and be upgraded to correspond to
present state of the art.
(3) The system shall be constructed and maintained during the
franchise term so that new components may be integrated to the
maximum extent possible with existing facilities.
(4) The communications system authorized by this chapter shall be
responsive to the needs and interests of the local community.
§ 259-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-2
1:73

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 259-3. Word usage.
The present tense includes the future; the singular number includes the
plural, and the plural, the singular; and the masculine gender includes the
feminine gender. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is
permissive.
§ 259-4. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall be
construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings indicated:
ACCESS CHANNELS (PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT -
"PEG") — Any channel on a cable system set aside by the franchisee for
public, educational, and/or governmental use.
AFFILIATE — Any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by,
or is under common ownership or control with the franchisee.
BASIC SUBSCRIBER SERVICE or BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service
tier which includes the retransmission of local broadcast signals, being the
lowest cost tier of service provided.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Collegeville, Collegeville, Pennsylvania.
CABLECAST SIGNAL — A nonbroadcast signal that originates within the
facilities of the cable communications system.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM, CATV, or CABLE
TELEVISION — A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term
does not include:
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit
dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless
such facility or facilities is covered within the terms and regulations of
the Cable Act;21
B.
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part,
to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934,22 as
amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system
[other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act] to the
C.
21.Editor's Note: See 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: See 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.
§ 259-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-4
1:75
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other
programming service.
CHANNEL — A video channel shall include both the visual and aural
carriers and corresponding side bands which constitute the picture and
sound of a television program. If at any time during the term of any
franchise agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter the bandwidth
necessary to deliver a video signal decreases so that a video signal may be
delivered on a band of frequencies of less than six megahertz (MHz), the
channel capacity on the cable system shall be increased accordingly if the
Borough finds that such increase in channel capacity will not result in a
loss of signal quality or will meet any FCC signal quality standards that may
apply to such signals. A franchisee may establish additional requirements
concerning voice and data channels consistent with the franchise
agreement in order to ensure technical and operational integrity and
compatibility of the system, including switching, provided they are
consistent with the performance standards of this chapter and the franchise
agreement.
CLOSED-CIRCUIT or INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE — Such video, audio, data,
and other services provided to institutional users on an individual
application basis. These may include, but are not limited to, one-way video,
audio or digital signals among institutions and, as may be specified in the
franchise to residential subscribers.
COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in a
place of business where the service may be utilized in connection with a
business, trade or profession and who pays the charges therefor.
COMMUNICATIONS POLICY ACT or CABLE ACT — The Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1934, and the Cable Communications Policy
Act of 1984, as it may be amended or succeeded, including the Cable
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and/or any
amendments.23
CONVERTER — An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber,
and any channel selector which permits a subscriber to view all signals
delivered at designated converter dial locations at the set or by remote
control.
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers;
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems; or
D.
A facility which provides noncable services (other than those for public,
educational and governmental use).
E.
23.Editor's Note: See 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.
§ 259-4 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-4
1:76
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Collegeville.
DISCRETE CHANNEL — A channel which can only be received by the
person and/or institution intended to receive signals on such channel.
DROP — A coaxial connection from feeder cable to the subscriber/user
premises in accordance with the Cable Act.
EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated for
educational access use.
FAIR MARKET VALUE — The price that a willing buyer would pay to a
willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing
in the industry at the time, without the assignment of any value to the
franchise rights.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed
successor.
FRANCHISE — The nonexclusive rights granted pursuant to this chapter
to construct, operate and maintain a cable communications system along
the public ways within all or a specified area in the Borough. Any such
authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or include any
license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on
a business within the Borough as required by other ordinances and laws of
the Borough.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — A contract entered into between the Borough
and any franchisee setting forth the specific terms and provisions of the
grant of a franchise pursuant to this chapter.
FRANCHISE AREA — The entire Borough, or portions thereof, for which
a franchise is granted under the authority of this chapter. If not otherwise
stated in the franchise agreement, the franchise area shall be the corporate
limits of the Borough, including all territory thereafter annexed to the
Borough.
FRANCHISE FEE — The percentage, as specified by the Borough, of the
franchisee's gross annual revenues from all sources payable in exchange for
the rights granted pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement.
The term "franchise fee" does not include any tax, fee or assessment of
general applicability that my be assessed against a franchisee by the
Borough, including but not limited to the Business Privilege Tax.
FRANCHISEE or GRANTEE — The natural person(s), partnership(s),
domestic and foreign corporation(s), association(s), joint venture(s), or
organization(s) of any kind which has or have been legally granted a
franchise by the Borough, and its lawful successors, transferee or assignee.
GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel specifically designated
or dedicated for government access use.
GRANTOR — The Borough of Collegeville as represented by the Borough
Council acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.
§ 259-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-4
1:77
GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES — Any and all cash, credits, property or other
consideration of any kind or nature received annually directly or indirectly
by the franchisee, its affiliates, or any person in which the franchisee
has a financial interest, or by any other entity that is a cable operator
of the system arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived from
the operation of the franchisee's cable system, including the studios and
other facilities associated therewith. Gross Annual Revenues include, but
are not limited to, monthly fees charged subscribers for any basic, optional,
premium, per-channel, or per-program service; installation, disconnection,
reconnection, and change-in-service fees; leased channel fees; late fees
and administrative fees; fees, payments, or other consideration received
from programmers for carriage of programming on the system; revenues
from converter rentals or sales; studio rental, production equipment, and
personnel fees; advertising revenues; barter; revenues from program
guides; revenues from the sale or carriage of noncable services, including
information services; and revenues from home shopping and bank-at-home
channels. Gross Annual Revenues shall be the basis for computing the
franchise fee under this chapter. Gross Annual Revenues shall not include
any taxes on services furnished by the franchisee which are imposed
directly on any subscriber or user by the state, Borough, or other
governmental unit and which are collected by the franchisee on behalf of
said governmental unit.
INSIDE WIRING — That portion of the wire installation within and about
a premise that is transferable upon purchase in accordance with the Cable
Act.
INSTALLATION — The connection of the system from feeder cable to
subscribers' terminals.
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL or COMMERCIAL ACCESS CHANNEL — Any
channel designated or dedicated for use by persons unaffiliated with the
grantee, at rates in accordance with the cable subscribers.
NONCABLE SERVICES — Except as expressly set forth in the franchise
agreement, the Borough has not granted authority for the provision of
noncable services except public, educational and governmental uses. The
Borough may grant authority for the provision of noncable services on
whatever terms and conditions the Borough reasonably determines are
appropriate in the circumstances, it being understood and agreed that, at
a minimum, in each case, such terms and conditions may include payment
to the Borough of compensation at rates different from those set forth for
franchise fees. The franchisee shall pay to the Borough an amount equal
to the reasonable costs for the use of the Borough's streets to provide
noncable services in the franchise area. Payment of such costs and expenses
shall not be deemed to be franchise fees within the meaning of the Cable
Act, and such payments shall not be deemed to be:
Payments-in-kind or involuntary payments chargeable against the
compensation to be paid to the Borough by the franchisee as franchise
fees; or
A.
§ 259-4 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-4
1:78
PAY AUDIO/VIDEO — Any type of audio or audio/video service for which a
fee is charged.
PAY PER VIEW — Any channel for which a fee is charged for a single or
multiple viewing of a specific program.
PAY TV CHANNEL — Any channel for which a fee is charged for viewing.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, organization,
corporation or any lawful successor or transferee of said individual,
partnership, association, organization or corporation.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designated or dedicated for
use by the general public or organizations which is made available for use
without charge on a nondiscriminatory basis in accordance with the rules
and regulations specified in the franchise agreement.
PUBLIC WAY or PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY — The surface, the air space
above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street,
highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park,
parkways, waterways, utility easements or other public right-of-way now
or hereafter held by the Borough which shall entitle the Borough and the
grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the
grantee cable television system. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to
the public way shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the
Borough that its title to any property is sufficient to permit its use for such
purpose, and the grantee shall, by its use of such terms, be deemed to gain
only such rights to use property in the Borough as the Borough may have
the undisputed right and power to give.
REASONABLE NOTICE — Where not elsewhere specified, written notice
shall be addressed to the grantee at its principal office within the Borough
or such other office as the grantee has designated to the Borough as the
address to which notice shall be transmitted to it, which notice shall be
certified and postmarked not less than 10 business days prior to that day
in which the party giving such notice shall commence any action which
requires the giving of notice. In computing said 10 business days, holidays
recognized by the Borough shall be excluded.
RESIDENT — Any person residing in the Borough, as defined by applicable
law.
RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives a service in an
individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection
with a business, trade or profession and who pays the charges therefor.
SALE — Includes any sale, exchange or barter transaction.
SCHOOL — Any public or nonprofit educational institution, including
primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, both public and
private.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Part of the compensation to be paid to the Borough by the franchisee as
franchise fees.
B.
§ 259-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-4
1:79
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who legally receives cable services and/or
noncable services (to the extent franchisee is authorized to provide
noncable service).
SYSTEM FACILITIES or FACILITIES — Cable communications equipment
used by the franchisee to provide services in the franchise area; provided,
however, such system facility excludes buildings, contracts, facilities, and
equipment whose primary use is for providing service to other system
facilities located outside the Borough limits.
TIER — Any level of service having one or more channels offered as a
program service or group of services.
TRANSFER — Any transaction in which an ownership or other interest in
a franchisee, its cable system, or of any person that is a cable operator
of the cable system is transferred from one person or group of persons to
another person or group of persons so that control or controlling interest
of the franchisee is transferred; or the rights and/or obligations held by
the franchisee under a franchise agreement are transferred or assigned
to another person or group of persons. "Control" or "controlling interest"
means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including,
without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt
instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of a system, a franchise
or a franchisee. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or
a controlling interest may arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or
indirectly, by any persons or group of persons acting in concert (other than
underwriters during the period in which they are offering securities to the
public) of 5% or more of any person (which person or group of persons
is hereinafter referred to as "controlling person"). Control or controlling
interest as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one
person or group of persons.
TRUNK LINE — The major distribution cable used in cable communications
which divides the feeder lines which are tapped for service to subscribers.
USER — A person or organization utilizing channel or equipment and
facilities for purpose of producing and/or transmission of material, as
contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
§ 259-4 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-4
1:80
ARTICLE III
Grant of Franchise
§ 259-5. Grant and continuing obligations.
A. In the event that the Borough shall grant to a grantee a nonexclusive
revocable franchise to construct, operate, and maintain a cable
communications system within the Borough, said franchise shall
constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a
cable communications system as regulated by the provisions of this
chapter and a franchise agreement.
B. The franchise shall be granted under the terms and conditions
contained herein, consistent with the Municipal Borough Code and/or
other applicable statutory requirements.
C. Any franchise granted by the Borough is hereby made subject to the
general ordinances provisions now in effect and hereafter made
effective. Nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to waive the
requirements of the various codes and ordinances of the Borough
regarding permits, fees to be paid, or manner of construction.
D. State of the art continuing obligation.
(1) General requirement. Throughout the term of any franchise
agreement, the franchisee shall construct, operate, maintain and
upgrade the cable communications system in order to ensure that it
continuously conforms to the state of the art in accordance with the
requirements set forth herein below. In addition, the franchisee,
either on its own initiative or at the reasonable request of the
Borough, shall participate in or undertake experiments, test, and
other activities to enhance and advance the state of the art of cable
communications systems technology.
(2) State-of-the-art report. A franchisee shall provide to the Borough,
in a form satisfactory to the Borough, at the Borough's request, but
no more often than once every year, a report setting forth the
franchisee's review and assessment of the current state of the art
of cable communications systems and its plans, if any, for
upgrading the system to conform to the state of the art. The report
shall address, at a minimum: technological advances making
possible enhanced signal quality, publicly available equipment for
the receipt of services or greater channel capacity and interactive
systems; a list of each jurisdiction in which new technologies have
been or are being used and a description of the experience those
jurisdictions have had with such new technologies; and assessment
of the costs associated with implementing such new technologies
into the system; the franchisee's activities to enhance or advance
such technology in connection with the system and any other cable
communications system or systems operated by the franchisee or
any affiliated person in the Borough or elsewhere and the
§ 259-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-5
1:81
franchisee's compliance with and any modifications with respect
thereto; and assessment of the need to scramble Signals
distributed over the system in order to prevent theft of service
(such assessment to investigate alternatives to scrambling of
signals and include a cost/benefit analysis of both scrambling and
such alternatives that takes into account significant costs and
benefits both to the franchisee and subscribers); a discussion of
additional technological advances anticipated during the
remainder of the term of the franchise, along with a projection of
the costs and timetable for the franchisee offering such advances
as part of or over the system; a discussion of what improvements
the franchisee anticipates making in its customer service facilities,
equipment, systems and operations during the remainder of the
term of the franchise, along with a projection of the costs and
timetable for the implementation of such improvements; a
description of any technical experimentation which the franchisee
or any affiliated person anticipates undertaking during the
remainder of the term of the franchise; an assessment of the
compatibility of the system with subscribers' televisions and video
cassette recorders, the franchisee's compliance with the rules and
regulations promulgated by the FCC pursuant to Section 624A
of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 544a) and any experimentation the
franchisee is making to enhance such compatibility; and, generally,
the steps the franchisee or any affiliated person is undertaking to
continuously construct, operate, maintain and upgrade the system
in accordance with the state of the art. The state-of-the-art report
submitted by a franchisee may be only one resource that the
Borough will consider in evaluating the franchisee's obligation
pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter to
continuously construct, operate, maintain and upgrade the system
in accordance with the state of the art, and the Borough may
commission third parties, as necessary, to ascertain the current
state of the art in cable communications systems generally.
(3) Procedures for maintaining state of the art. Upon receiving the
report from a franchisee required pursuant to this section of this
chapter, the Borough will evaluate such report and assemble any
additional data necessary to ascertain whether the franchisee's
system or any aspect thereof needs to be upgraded so that it meets
the state-of-the-art requirement set forth herein.
(4) Directive. Upon completing the evaluation contemplated by this
section of this chapter, and after providing notice to a franchisee
and an opportunity for the franchisee to comment, the Borough
may issue a reasonable directive to the franchisee to upgrade the
system so as to incorporate state-of-the-art features. Within 45 days
after receipt of such directive, such franchisee shall submit plans,
as specified by the Borough, describing how it intends to complete
such Upgrade. Upon approval of such plans by the Borough, the
§ 259-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-5
1:82
§ 259-6. Use of public rights-of-way.
For the purpose of operating and maintaining a cable communications
system in the Borough, a grantee may erect, install, construct, repair,
reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the public
streets and ways within the Borough such wires, cable, conductors, ducts,
conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments
and other property and equipment as are necessary to the operation of the
cable communications systems; provided, however, that grantee complies
with all design, construction, safety, and performance provisions contained
in this chapter, the franchise agreement, and other applicable laws,
including but not limited to the Federal Technical Performance Standards,
National Electrical Safety Code (current edition) and the power company
and telephone company pole contract standards.
§ 259-7. Use of grantee facilities.
No poles shall be erected by a grantee without prior approval of the
Borough with regard to location, height, type and any other pertinent
aspect. However, no location of any pole of the grantee shall be a vested
right and such poles shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its
own expense whenever the Borough determines that the public convenience
would be enhanced thereby. Grantee shall utilize existing poles and
conduits, where possible. The Borough shall have the right, during the
life of the franchise, to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles
franchisee shall commence and diligently pursue implementation
of the required upgrade.
(5) "State-of-the-art" or "state of the art," as applicable, means that
level of technical or service performance, capacity and capability
(including, but not limited to, plant or other equipment, access
channel and other production equipment or facilities, construction
techniques, customer service, facilities, equipment systems and
operations, and performance standards) which has been developed
and demonstrated in the cable industry, or any other comparable
industry that provides services to the public under similar
conditions, to be workable and economically and technically
feasible and viable from time to time throughout the term of the
franchise.
(6) "Economically and technically feasible and viable" means capable
of being provided:
(a) Through technology which has been demonstrated in actual
applications (not simply through tests or experiments) to
operate in a workable manner; and
(b) In a manner which has a reasonable likelihood of generating
additional revenues or other financial benefits for a system,
when measured over the term of the franchise.
§ 259-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-7
1:83
owned by the grantee, any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably
interfere with the operations of the grantee.
§ 259-8. Franchise required.
No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the
streets of the Borough or be allowed to operate without a franchise.
§ 259-9. Term of franchise.
The term of any franchise as granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
specified in the franchise agreement in the discretion of the Borough.
§ 259-10. Franchise nonexclusive.
Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. The
Borough specifically reserves the right to grant at any time such additional
franchises for a cable communications system as it deems appropriate, and/
or build, operate and own such cable communications system or systems as
it deems appropriate.
§ 259-11. Transfer of ownership or control.
A. Transfer of franchise. No franchise granted hereunder shall be
transferred and no control or controlling interest in any system,
franchise, or franchisee shall be transferred without the prior written
consent of the Borough, and then only under such reasonable
conditions as the Borough may establish, and only if in compliance with
Section 617 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 537) and regulations
promulgated by the FCC to implement Section 617.
B. The franchisee shall promptly notify the Borough by written petition of
any proposed transfer. The petition shall fully describe the proposed
action and shall be accompanied by a justification for the action and, if
applicable, an argument as to why such action would not involve a
change in control or controlling interest. The Borough shall notify the
franchisee as soon as all of the information required by the FCC, the
franchise agreement, this chapter and all applicable state and local law
has been received by the Borough and that therefore the petition is
complete, after which the Borough shall take action within 120 days
following the date such notice is provided by the Borough, pursuant to
Section 617(e) of the Cable Act.
C. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to a transfer,
the Borough may inquire, with the assistance of the grantee, into the
legal, financial, character, technical, customer service, and operations
qualifications of the prospective controlling party, and the effect that
the proposed transfer and sale price may have on rates being paid by
subscribers. Failure to provide all information reasonably requested by
the Borough as part of said inquiry shall be grounds for denial of the
proposed transfer. If the Borough finds the results of this inquiry are
§ 259-7 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-11
1:84
satisfactory, its consent to such transfer shall not be unreasonably
withheld.
D. Assumption of control. Any financial institution having a pledge of the
franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the
construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to
notify the Borough that it or its designees satisfactory to the Borough
will take control and operate the cable television system. Further, said
financial institution shall also submit a plan for such operation that will
insure continued service and compliance with all franchise obligations
during the term the financial institution exercises control over the
system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over the
system for a period exceeding one year, unless extended by the Borough
at its discretion, and during said period of time it shall have the right to
petition for transfer of the franchise to another grantee. If the Borough
finds that such transfer, after considering the legal, financial, character,
technical, customer service, and operations qualifications of the
applicant are satisfactory and that the proposed transfer and sale price
will not result in a rate increase to subscribers, the Borough will
transfer and assign the rights and obligations of such franchise as in the
public interest. The consent of the Borough to such transfer shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
E. The consent or approval of the Borough to any transfer of the grantee
shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the Borough in
and to the streets, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be expressly
subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise
agreement.
F. The Borough reserves the right to review the purchase price of any
transfer or assignment of the cable television system. Any negotiated
sale value which the Borough deems unreasonable will not be
considered in the rate base for any subsequent request for rate
increases, if permitted by applicable law and § 259-16 of this chapter.
G. Any approval by the Borough of transfer of ownership or control shall
be contingent upon the prospective controlling party becoming a
signatory to the franchise agreement.
H. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection D above, the Borough
reserves the right of first purchase in any transfer of the system. Should
the Borough exercise this option, it shall do so within 30 days of
notification and thereafter shall make payment therefor under the same
terms and conditions as the proposed Transferee, or as the parties
might otherwise agree.
I. The transfer of any franchise or the transfer of control or controlling
interest in any system, franchise or franchisee without the prior written
consent of the Borough shall be deemed to be an abandonment of the
system by the franchisee under § 259-33 of this chapter and shall entitle
the Borough to all of the rights set forth under § 259-33C.
§ 259-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-12
1:85
§ 259-12. Franchise fees.
§ 259-13. Revocation and acceleration of expiration date.
A. Because the Borough finds that: the streets of the county, state, and
Borough to be used by the grantee in the operation of its system within
the boundaries of the franchise area are valuable public properties
acquired and maintained by the county, state, and Borough at great
expense to its taxpayers; and the grant to the grantee to the said streets
is a valuable property right without which the grantee would be
required to invest substantial capital in right-of-way costs and
acquisitions; and the administration of this chapter and the franchise
imposes upon the Borough additional regulatory responsibility and
expense; and the presence of the grantee and its facilities places
additional burdens upon the Borough police and road departments and
the volunteer fire company serving the area which is supported by the
Borough; A grantee of any franchise hereunder shall pay to the Borough
a franchise fee in an amount as designated in the franchise agreement
up to the maximum amount permitted under applicable federal, state,
or local law. The present maximum franchise fee allowable is 5% of
gross annual revenues.
B. In the event that any franchise fee payment or recomputed amount is
not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement,
grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge,
computed from such due date, at the annual rate equal to the
commercial prime interest rate of the Borough primary depository bank
during the period that such unpaid amount is owed.
C. The franchise fee shall be payable as specified in the franchise
agreement and shall be furnished at the time of each payment with a
statement certified by the grantee's Chief Financial Officer reflecting
the total amounts of gross revenues for the period conveyed by the
payment.
D. The Borough shall have the right to inspect the grantee's income
records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts
determined to be payable under this chapter for a period of five years
from the date of payment. Audits shall be at the expense of the Borough
unless the audit discloses an underpayment in any one year of 5% or
more, in which case the costs of the audit shall be borne by the grantee.
Any additional amount due the Borough as a result of the audit shall be
paid within 30 days following written notice to the grantee by the
Borough, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report, unless
written notice of disagreement is filed by the grantee with the Borough
within such time.
A. Grounds for revocation or acceleration of expiration date. The Borough
reserves the right to accelerate the expiration of the franchise term
and/or revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights
and privileges associated with the franchise in the following
§ 259-12 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-13
1:86
circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and breach
under this chapter and the franchise agreement:
(1) If the grantee shall default in the performance of any of the
material obligations under this chapter or under such documents,
contracts and other terms and provisions entered into by and
between the Borough and the grantee.
(2) If the grantee shall fail to provide or maintain in full force and
effect the liability and indemnification coverage or any
performance bond or security fund as required.
(3) If the grantee shall violate any lawful orders or rulings of any
regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this
chapter or the franchise.
(4) If the grantee practices any fraud upon the Borough or any
Subscriber.
(5) If it is determined that the grantee underpaid its franchise fee by
15% or more for any year.
(6) If the grantee's construction schedule is delayed later than the
schedule contained in the franchise agreement or beyond any
extended date set by the Borough.
(7) If there is an occurrence of any event which may reasonably lead to
the foreclosure or other similar judicial or nonjudicial sale of all or
any material part of the system, including, but not limited to, any of
the following events:
(a) Default under any loan or any financing arrangement material
to the system or the obligations of the grantee under the
franchise agreement;
(b) Default under any contract material to the system or the
obligations of the grantee under the franchise agreement; or
(c) Termination of any lease or mortgage covering all or any
material part of the system.
(8) If in regards to any grantee:
(a) A grantee shall suspend or discontinue its business, shall make
an assignment for the benefit of creditors, shall fail to pay its
debts generally as they become due, shall become insolvent
(however such an insolvency may be evidenced), shall be
adjudicated insolvent, shall petition or apply to any tribunal
for, or consent to, the appointment of, or taking possession by,
a receiver, custodian, liquidator or trustee or similar official
pursuant to state or local laws, ordinances or regulations of or
for it or any substantial part of its property, or assets, including
all or any part of this system; or
§ 259-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-13
1:87
(b) A writ or warrant of attachment, execution, distraint, levy,
possession or any similar process shall be issued by any
tribunal against all or any material part of a grantee's property
or assets; or
(c) Any creditor of a grantee petitions or applies to any tribunal for
the appointment of, or taking possession by, a trustee, receiver,
custodian, liquidator, or similar official for the grantee or of
any substantial parts of the assets of the grantee under the law
of any jurisdiction, whether now or hereafter in effect, and an
order, judgment or decree is entered appointing any such
trustee, receiver, custodian, liquidator, or similar official, or
approving the petition in any such proceedings; or
(d) Any order, judgment or decree is entered in any proceedings
against a grantee decreeing the voluntary or involuntary
dissolution of the grantee.
(9) If there is a failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of
total system outage in 40% or more of the system, except when
approval of such interruption is obtained from the Borough or is
excused pursuant to Subsection B.
(10) If the grantee transfers the franchise or transfers control or a
controlling interest in any system, franchise or in the grantee itself
without the prior written consent of the Borough pursuant to the
provisions set forth in § 259-11.
B. Effect of circumstances beyond control of grantee. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this chapter or the franchise agreement, a grantee
shall not be liable for delay in performance of, or failure to perform in
whole or in part its obligations pursuant to the franchise agreement or
this chapter, due to strike, war or act of war, (whether an actual
declaration of war is made or not), insurrection, riot, act of public
enemy, accident, fire, flood or other act of God, sabotage or other
events, where a grantee has exercised all due care in the prevention
thereof and to the extent that such causes or other events are beyond
the control of the grantee and such causes or other events are without
the fault or negligence of the grantee. In the event that any such delay
in performance or failure to perform affects only part of a company's
capacity to perform, the company shall perform to the maximum extent
that it is able to do so and shall take all steps within its power to correct
such cause or causes. In correcting such cause or causes, a grantee
shall take all reasonable steps to do so in as expeditious a manner as
possible. A grantee shall notify the Borough in writing of the occurrence
of an event covered by this subsection within five business days of the
date upon which the grantee learns of its occurrence. Shortage or
unavailability of equipment from suppliers shall not be deemed to be
beyond the control of the grantee in regards to any construction delays.
§ 259-13 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-13
1:88
C. Pending litigation or any appeal to any regulatory body or court having
jurisdiction over the grantee shall not excuse the grantee from the
performance of its obligations under this chapter or the franchise
agreement. Failure of the grantee to perform such obligations because
of pending litigation or petition may result in forfeiture or revocation
pursuant to the provisions of this section. The Borough shall comply
with any related court orders.
D. Procedure prior to revocation.
(1) The Borough shall make written demand that the grantee do so
comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule
or regulation or correct any action deemed cause for revocation.
After written demand is made, the Borough may place its request
for revocation of the franchise upon a regular Council meeting
agenda. The Borough shall cause to be served upon such grantee at
least seven days prior to the date of such Council meeting, a
written notice of this intent to request such revocation, and the
time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by
the Borough once, at least seven days before such meeting, in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Borough.
(2) The Council shall hear any persons interested therein, and shall
determine in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or
neglect by the grantee was with just cause.
(3) If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee was with just
cause, as determined by the Council, the Council shall direct the
grantee to comply within such time and manner and upon such
terms and conditions as are reasonable.
(4) If the Council shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by the
grantee was without just cause, then the Council may, by
resolution, declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be
revoked and the performance bond forfeited.
E. Disposition of facilities. In the event a franchise expires, is revoked or
otherwise terminated, the Borough may in its sole discretion, do any of
the following:
(1) Order the removal of the system facilities from the Borough within
a reasonable period of time as determined by the Borough.
(2) Require the grantee to maintain and operate its system for a period
of up to 18 months or such further time as may be mutually agreed
upon. During any time the grantee continues to operate the system
it shall do so pursuant to the terms of this chapter and its franchise
agreement and shall be entitled to the revenues from the system.
(3) Order that the system be transferred to another cable operator.
§ 259-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-13
1:89
§ 259-14. Receivership and foreclosure.
F. Restoration of property. In removing its plant, structures and
equipment, the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation
that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as
good a condition or better as that prevailing prior to the grantee's
removal of its equipment and appliances without affecting the electrical
or telephone cable wires or attachments. The Borough shall inspect and
approve the condition of the public ways and public places and cables,
wires, attachments and poles after removal. The liability, indemnity,
insurance and performance bond as provided herein shall continue in
full force and effect during the period of removal and until full
compliance by the grantee with the terms and conditions of this
subsection, this chapter and the franchise agreement.
G. Restoration by Borough; reimbursement of costs. In the event of a
failure by the grantee to complete any work required by Subsection E
or F of this section, or any other work required by Borough law or
ordinance within the time as may be established and to the satisfaction
of the Borough, the Borough may cause such work to be done and the
grantee shall reimburse the Borough the cost thereof within 30 days
after receipt of an itemized list of such costs or the Borough may
recover such costs through the performance bond or letter of credit
provided by grantee. The Borough shall be permitted to seek legal and
equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this section.
A. Termination by insolvency. The franchise granted hereunder shall, at
the option of the Borough, cease and terminate 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or receivers or trustee to take over and
conduct the business of the grantee whether in a receivership,
reorganization, bankruptcy or similar action or proceeding unless such
receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the
expiration of said 120 days, or unless:
(1) Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after their
election or appointment, full complied with all the terms and
provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement, and the
receivers or trustees within said 120 days shall have remedied all
defaults under this chapter or the franchise agreement; and
(2) Such receivers or trustees shall, within said 120 days, execute an
agreement duly approved by the Court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to
be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the
franchise agreement and this chapter.
B. Termination by judicial action. In the case of a foreclosure or other
judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the grantee or any
part thereof, including or excluding the franchise, the Borough may
serve notice of termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder
at such sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of
§ 259-13 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-14
1:90
§ 259-15. Notices.
All notices from grantee to the Borough pursuant to this chapter and the
franchise agreement shall be to the Borough Manager or his designee.
Grantee shall maintain with the Borough, throughout the term of the
franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. Grantee shall also
maintain with the Borough, a local office and telephone number for the
conduct of matters related to the franchise during normal business hours.
The grantee shall be required to advise the Borough of such address and
telephone numbers and any changes thereof.
the grantee granted hereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after
service of such notice, unless:
(1) The Borough shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, in
the manner this chapter provides, and
(2) Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
Borough to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of
the franchise agreement.
§ 259-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-15
1:91

ARTICLE IV
Regulation of Franchise
§ 259-16. Regulatory authority.
§ 259-17. Supervision of franchise.
A. The Borough shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the
provisions of this chapter and applicable law. This authority shall be
vested in the Borough Council and administered in through the
Borough Administrator or his or her designee in order to provide dayto-
day administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
and any franchise granted hereunder, and to carry out the Borough's
responsibilities with regard to cable communications.
B. The Borough reserves the right to exercise the maximum plenary
authority, as may at any time be lawfully permissible, to regulate the
cable communications system, the franchise and the grantee. Should
applicable legislative, judicial or regulatory authorities at any time
permit regulation not presently permitted to the Borough, the Borough
may without the approval of the grantee engage in any such additional
regulation as may then be permissible, whether or not contemplated by
this chapter, including without limitation, regulation regarding
franchise fees, taxes, programming, rates charged to subscribers and
users, consumer protection, or any other similar or dissimilar matter.
A. The Borough shall have the following regulatory responsibility:
(1) Administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
and any franchise agreement.
(2) Award, renewal, extension or termination of a franchise pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, the franchise agreement, and
other applicable law.
(3) Consent prior to sale or transfer of any franchise granted
hereunder.
(4) Performance evaluation.
(5) Rate regulation, to the extent authorized and/or elected by the
Borough under law. If the Borough elects to regulate rates, it will
comply with all FCC regulations and permit all members of the
public to participate in rate-making proceedings.
(6) Establishment of customer service standards.
B. The Borough also reserves the right to perform the following functions
and all other functions allowed by law present or future:
(1) Develop objectives and coordinate activities related to the
operation of government channels.
§ 259-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-17
1:93
§ 259-18. Cable television evaluation and advisory committee.
(2) Approve procedures and standards for public, government and
educational access and operations and services, including the use
of dedicated channels and sharing of public facilities.
(3) Analyze plans for expansion, interconnection and growth of cable
services.
(4) Analyze the possibility of integrating cable communications with
other local, state or regional telecommunications networks.
(5) Formulate and recommend long-range telecommunications policy
for the Borough, and determine the future cable-related needs and
interests of the community.
(6) Provide the administrative effort necessary for the conduct of
performance evaluations, and any other activities required for the
administration of the franchise.
(7) Monitor grantee's training programs for customer service
representatives and its process for handling citizen complaints and
periodically inspect and analyze the records related to such
complaints.
(8) Receive applications for rate changes, if applicable, and provide
staff assistance in the analysis and recommendations thereto.
(9) Monitor grantee's adherence to operational standards, service
requirements and line extension policies.
(10) Assure compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(11) Arrange tests and analysis of equipment and performance, as
needed, to insure compliance with this chapter and the franchise
agreement.
(12) Assure continuity in service.
(13) Receive for examination all data and reports required by this
chapter.
(14) Regulate rates on a regional basis in cooperation with other
municipalities.
A. The Borough may in its discretion create a citizen's committee entitled
the Cable Television Advisory Committee. The responsibilities of the
Committee shall include, but not be limited, to the following:
(1) Monitor and advise the Borough Council and Borough
administration on the performance of the grantee under the
provisions of this chapter, franchise agreement, and related
ordinances.
§ 259-17 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-18
1:94
§ 259-19. Rates and charges.
(2) Serve as advisory body with respect to the public, educational, and
local government access channels of cable television and any
institutional programming that may be developed. Encourage the
use of the public channels among the widest range of institutions,
groups, and individuals within the Borough.
(3) Advise the Borough government of objectives to be obtained in the
Borough's cable communications system based upon its continues
evaluation of the Borough's cable television franchise, cable
technology, performance of the grantee, and the future cablerelated
needs and interests of the community.
(4) Prepare an annual report to the Council on the activities of the
Committee and the performance of the grantee.
(5) Cooperate with the Borough and the grantee in fulfilling its
responsibilities herein.
B. The Committee shall be composed of at least three residents of the
Borough who shall be appointed by the Council and who shall serve
without compensation. Members shall not be employees of, nor have
any financial interest in, a grantee or a parent or subsidiary corporation
of a grantee.
A. Grantee shall file with the Borough schedules which shall describe all
services offered, all rates and charges of any kind, and all terms and
conditions relating thereto, on the effective date of the franchise and 60
days prior to any change. Notice of all proposed rate changes must be
filed with the Borough at least 60 days prior to any change whether the
Borough has the authority to regulate the rate or not, so that the
Borough can respond to any public inquiries or complaints. If the
Borough elects to regulate rates pursuant to the Cable Act, the Borough
will comply with all FCC regulations and permit all members of the
public to participate in rate-making proceedings. No rates or charges
shall be effective except as they appear on a schedule so filed. Grantee
shall notify subscribers in writing at least 30 days prior to the
implementation of any change in services offered, rates charged, or
terms and conditions related thereto. The grantee's written notice shall
include a comparison of old and new rates and charges and shall be
included in the customer's bill. A complete schedule of grantee's rates
shall be mailed to subscribers annually.
B. Grantee shall establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within the
same general class of subscribers which must be applied fairly and
uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area for all services.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee from offering
discounts to commercial and multiple-family dwelling subscribers billed
on a bulk basis, promotional discounts, senior citizens and economically
§ 259-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-19
1:95
disadvantaged individuals. Grantee's charges and rates for all services
shall be itemized on subscriber's monthly bills.
C. Grantee shall provide the Borough immediately upon receipt with
copies of all rate or other complaints received by it and/or the FCC.
§ 259-19 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-19
1:96
ARTICLE V
Bonds, Insurance and Indemnification
§ 259-20. Performance bond and/or letter of credit.
A. Performance bond. Upon the effective date of the franchise, the grantee
shall obtain and maintain during the entire term of the franchise and
any extensions and renewals thereof, at its cost and expense, and file
with the Borough, a corporate surety bond in such sum as specified in
the franchise agreement to guarantee the faithful performance by the
grantee of all its obligations provided under this chapter and the
franchise agreement. Failure to timely obtain, file and maintain said
bond shall constitute a substantial violation within the meaning of this
section.
B. Conditions. The performance bond shall provide the following
conditions:
(1) There shall be recoverable by the Borough jointly and severally
from the principal and surety, any and all fines and liquidated
damages due to the Borough, as specified in the franchise
agreement, and any and all damages, losses, costs, and expenses
suffered or incurred by the Borough resulting from the failure of
the grantee to faithfully comply with the provisions of this chapter
and the franchise agreement, comply with all orders, permits and
directives of any Borough agency or body having jurisdiction over
its acts or defaults, pay fees due to the Borough, pay any claims,
liens or taxes due the Borough which arise by reason of the
construction, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable
communication system. Such losses, costs and expenses shall
include but not be limited to attorney's fees and other associated
expenses.
(2) The total amount of the bond shall be forfeited in favor of the
Borough in the event that the Borough revokes the franchise
pursuant to § 259-13 for either of the following two reasons:
(a) The grantee abandons the cable communication system at any
time during the term of the franchise or any extension thereto;
or
(b) The grantee assigns the franchise without the express written
consent of the Borough provided that the grantee has been
notified of such noncompliance in writing by the Borough and
has failed to cure same within 30 days.
C. Reduction of bond. Upon written application by the grantee, the
Borough may, at its sole option, permit the amount of the bond to be
reduced or waive the requirements for a performance bond subject to
the conditions set forth below. Reductions granted or denied upon
application by, the grantee shall be without prejudice to the grantee's
§ 259-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-20
1:97
subsequent applications or to the Borough's right to require the full
bond at any time thereafter.
D. Letter of credit. If requested by the Borough in lieu of the performance
bond required by this section, the grantee shall obtain, maintain and
file with the Borough an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial
institution licensed to do business in the state in an amount specified in
the franchise agreement, naming the Borough as beneficiary. The form
and contents of such letter of credit shall be approved by the Borough
and shall be released only upon expiration of the franchise or upon the
replacement of the letter of credit by a successor grantee. Failure to
obtain the letter of credit within the time specified herein shall
constitute a substantial violation within the meaning of this chapter.
E. Use of performance bond or letter of credit. Prior to drawing upon the
letter of credit or the performance bond for the purposes described in
this section, the Borough shall notify the grantee in writing specifying
the item for which payment is claimed and the date it was due. The
grantee shall have 10 days from the receipt of such written notice to
make a full and complete payment. If the grantee does not make the
payment, the Borough may withdraw the amount thereof, with interest
and penalties, from the letter of credit or the performance bond.
F. Notification. Within three days of a withdrawal from the letter of credit
or performance bond, the Borough shall sent to the grantee, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the amount, date
and purpose of such withdrawal.
G. Replenishment of letter of credit or performance bond. No later than 30
days after mailing to the grantee by certified mail notification of a
withdrawal pursuant to Subsection F above, the grantee shall replenish
the letter of credit or performance bond in an amount equal to the
amount so withdrawn. Failure to make timely replenishment of such
amount to the letter of credit or performance bond shall constitute a
substantial violation of this chapter.
H. Nonrenewal, alteration, or cancellation of letter of credit or
performance bond. The performance bond or letter of credit required
herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the Borough and shall require
30 days' written notice of any nonrenewal, alteration or cancellation to
both the Borough and the grantee. The grantee shall, in the event of any
such cancellation notice, obtain, pay all premiums for, and file with the
Borough, written evidence of the issuance of replacement bond or letter
of credit within 30 days following receipt by the Borough or the grantee
of any notice of cancellation.
I. To offset the effects of inflation, the amounts of the bond or letter of
credit provided for herein are subject to reasonable increases at the
end of every three-year period of the franchise, applicable to the next
three-year period, upon the determination of the Borough.
§ 259-20 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-21
1:98
§ 259-21. Security fund.
§ 259-22. Liability and insurance.
A. Within 10 days after the effective date of a franchise agreement, the
grantee shall deposit with the grantor and maintain on deposit through
the term of this franchise, in cash, such sum as specified in the
franchise agreement, as security for the payment of any fees, liquidated
damages or penalties imposed under this chapter. Said sum shall be
placed by the grantor in an interest-bearing account.
B. Within 10 days after notice to the grantee that any amount has been
withdrawn from the security fund deposited pursuant to Subsection A
of this section, the grantee shall pay to, or deposit with, the grantor a
sum of money or securities sufficient to restore such security fund to
the original amount as specified in the franchise agreement.
C. The security fund deposited pursuant to this section shall become the
property of the grantor in the event that this franchise is canceled by
reason of default of the grantee. The grantee, however, shall be entitled
to the return of such security fund, or portion thereof, as remains on
deposit with the grantor at the expiration of the term of this franchise,
provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the
grantee.
D. The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the security funds are
in addition to all other rights of the grantor, whether reserved by this
chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a
right with respect to such security funds shall affect any other right the
grantor may have.
A. Within 30 days after the effective date of the franchise agreement and
thereafter continuously through the duration of the franchise and any
extensions or renewals thereof, the grantee shall furnish to the Borough
certificates of insurance, approved by the Borough, for all types of
insurance required under this section. Failure to furnish said
certificates of insurance in a timely manner shall constitute a violation
of this chapter.
B. Any insurance policy obtained by the grantee in compliance with this
section shall be filed and maintained with the Borough during the term
of the franchise, and may be changed from time to time to reflect
changing liability limits and/or to compensate for inflation. Grantee
shall immediately advise the Borough of any litigation that may develop
that would affect this insurance.
C. Neither the provisions of this section, nor any damages recovered by
the Borough hereunder, shall be construed to or limit the liability of the
grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages.
§ 259-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-22
1:99
D. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this chapter or the
franchise agreement shall contain the following, or a comparable,
endorsement:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this insurance policy may
not be canceled by the insurance company nor the intention not to
renew be stated by the insurance company until 30 days after receipt
by the Borough Manager, by registered mail, of a written notice of such
intention to cancel or not to renew."
E. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this chapter or the
franchise agreement shall name the Borough as an additional insured.
F. All insurance policies provided under the provisions of this chapter or
the franchise agreement shall be written by companies authorized to do
business in the state, and approved by the state Insurance Commission.
G. At any time during the term of the franchise, the Borough may request
and the grantee shall comply with such request, to name the Borough,
all elected Borough officials, and Borough employees with cable related
responsibilities as additional named insured for all insurance policies
written under the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement.
H. To offset the effects of inflation and to reflect changing liability limits,
all of the coverages, limits, and amounts of the insurance provided for
herein are subject to reasonable increases at the end of every threeyear
period of the franchise, applicable to the next three-year period,
upon the determination of the Borough by resolution.
I. General liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain, and by its
acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that
it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, general liability
insurance insuring the grantee for a minimum of $50,000,000 for all
damage, injury, accident, or death.
J. Libel and allied torts. The grantee shall maintain a libel and allied torts
insurance policy in an amount specified in the franchise agreement.
K. Such general liability insurance must include coverage for all of the
following: comprehensive form, premises-operations, explosion and
collapse hazard, underground hazard, products/completed operations
hazard, contractual insurance, broad form property damage, and
personal injury.
L. Motor vehicle liability insurance. The grantee shall maintain, and by its
acceptance of any franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that
it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, motor vehicle
liability insurance for owned, nonowned, or rented vehicles in the
minimum of:
(1) Five million dollars for bodily injury and consequent death per
occurrence;
§ 259-22 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-22
1:100
§ 259-23. Indemnification.
(2) Five million dollars for bodily injury and consequent death to any
one person;
(3) One million dollars for property damage per occurrence.
M. Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance. The grantee
shall maintain and by its acceptance of any franchise granted
hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term
of the franchise, worker's compensation and employer's liability, valid
in the state, in the minimum amount of:
(1) Statutory limit for worker's compensation;
(2) One hundred thousand dollars for employer's liability.
A. To the fullest extent permitted by law, grantee shall, at its sole cost and
expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Borough, its
officers, public officials, boards and commissions, agents, and
employees from and against any and all lawsuits, claims (including
without limitation worker's compensation claims against the Borough
or others), causes of action, actions, liability, and judgments for injury
or damages (including but not limited to expenses for reasonable legal
fees and disbursements assumed by the Borough in connection
therewith):
(1) To persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts
or omissions of grantee, its subcontractors, agents or employees.
(2) Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for
defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation of
infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service
mark or patent, or any other right of any person, firm or
corporation, but excluding claims arising out of or related to
Borough programming or programming for which the grantee is
not legally responsible.
(3) Arising out of grantee's failure to comply with the provisions of any
federal, state, or local statute, ordinances or regulation applicable
to grantee in its business hereunder.
(4) Arising out of any action or claim related to obscenity, indecency or
sexually explicit programming.
B. The foregoing indemnity is conditioned upon the following:
The Borough shall give grantee prompt notice of any claim or the
commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the
provisions of this section. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent
the Borough from cooperating with the grantee and participating in
the defense of any litigation by its own counsel at its own costs and
expense.
§ 259-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-23
1:101

ARTICLE VI
Initial Grant, Fees; Construction Requirements
§ 259-24. Application for grant of initial franchise.
A. A person may apply for an initial franchise by submitting a request for
issuance of a request for proposals (RFP) and requesting an evaluation
of that proposal pursuant to Subsection C of this section. Upon receipt
of a request for an RFP, the Borough shall commence a proceeding to
identify the future cable-related needs and interests of the community
and, upon completion of that proceeding, shall promptly issue an RFP
and proposed franchise agreement, which shall be mailed to the person
requesting its issuance and made available to any other interested
party. The applicant shall respond within the time directed by the
Borough, providing the information and material set forth in Subsection
C of this section. The procedures, instructions, and requirements set
forth in the RFP shall be followed by each applicant as if set forth and
required herein. The Borough Manager, or his designee, shall be
authorized to seek additional information from any applicant and to
establish deadlines for the submission of that information.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A of this section, a person
may apply for an initial franchise by submitting an unsolicited proposal
and requesting an evaluation of that proposal pursuant to Subsection C
of this section.
C. An RFP for the grant of an initial franchise shall require, and an
unsolicited proposal shall contain, at minimum, the following
information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant and identification of the
ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and
addresses of the 10 largest holders of an ownership interest in the
applicant and affiliates of the applicant, and all persons with 5% or
more ownership interest in the applicant and its affiliates, all
officers and directors of the applicant and its affiliates, and any
other business affiliation and cable system ownership interest of
each named person.
(2) A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to construct
and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification
of key personnel.
(3) Legal qualifications.
(a) A demonstration of the applicant's legal qualifications to
construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including,
but not limited to, a demonstration that the applicant meets
the following criteria:
[1] The applicant must not have submitted an application for
an initial or renewal franchise to the Borough, which was
§ 259-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-24
1:103
denied on the ground that the applicant failed to propose
a system meeting the cable-related needs and interests
of the community, or as to which any challenges to such
franchising decision were finally resolved adversely to the
applicant, within three years preceding the submission of
the application.
[2] The applicant must not have had any cable television
franchise validly revoked by any Borough within three
years preceding the submission of the application.
[3] The applicant must have the necessary authority under
Pennsylvania law to operate a cable system.
[4] A franchise will not be issued to an applicant that may not
hold the franchise as a matter of federal law. An applicant
must have, or show that it is qualified to obtain, the
necessary federal licenses or waivers required to operate
the system proposed.
[5] An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time
during the 10 years preceding the submission of the
application, applicant was convicted of any act or omission
of such character that the applicant cannot be relied upon
to deal truthfully with the Borough and the subscribers of
the cable system, or to substantially comply with its lawful
obligations under applicable law, including obligations
under consumer protection laws and laws prohibiting
anticompetitive acts, fraud, racketeering, or other similar
conduct.
[6] An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files
materially misleading information in response to an RFP
issued by the Borough, or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to
provide.
[7] An applicant shall not be issued a franchise if an elected
official of the Borough holds a controlling interest in the
applicant or an affiliate of the applicant.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Borough shall provide an
opportunity to an applicant to show that it would be
inappropriate to deny it a franchise under Subsection
C(3)(a)[2] or [5] of this section, by virtue of the particular
circumstances surrounding the matter an the steps taken by
the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom, the lack of
involvement of the applicant's principals, or the remoteness of
the matter from the operation of cable television systems.
§ 259-24 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-24
1:104
(4) A statement prepared by a certified public accountant regarding
the applicant's financial ability to complete the construction and
operation of the cable system proposed.
(5) A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable system
ownership, construction, and operation, and identification of
communities in which the applicant or any of its principals have, or
have had, a cable franchise or license or any interest therein.
(6) Identification of the area of the Borough to be served by the
proposed cable system, including a description of the proposed
franchise area's boundaries.
(7) A detailed description of the physical facilities proposed, including
channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics,
headend, and access facilities.
(8) Where applicable, a description of the construction of the proposed
system, including an estimate of plant mileage and its location, the
proposed construction schedule, a description, where appropriate,
of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new
facilities, and information of the availability of space in conduits,
including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of any
necessary rearrangement of existing facilities.
(9) The proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each
service tier, installation, converters, and other equipment or
services.
(10) A demonstration of how the applicant's proposal will reasonably
meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the
community, including descriptions of how the proposal will meet
the needs described in any recent community needs assessment
conducted by or for the Borough, and how the proposal will provide
adequate public, educational, and governmental access channel
capacity, facilities, or financial support to meet the community's
needs and interests.
(11) Pro forma financial projections for the proposed franchise term,
including a statement of projected income, and a schedule of
planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions
explained in notes or supporting schedules.
(12) If an applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already
served by an existing cable franchise, the identification of the area
where the overbuild would occur, the potential Subscriber density
in the area that would encompass the overbuild, and the ability of
the Streets to accommodate an additional system.
(13) Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 259-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-24
1:105
(14) Information that the Borough may request of the applicant that is
relevant to the Borough's consideration of the application.
(15) An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the
application, acknowledging the enforceability of application
commitments, and certifying that the proposal meets all federal
and state law requirements.
D. In evaluating an application for a franchise, the Borough shall consider,
among other things, the following factors:
(1) The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with
the applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable
franchise for the Borough.
(2) Whether the quality of the applicant's service under an existing
franchise in the Borough, including signal quality, response to
customer complaints, level of services billing practices, and the
like, has been reasonable in light of the needs and interests of the
communities served.
(3) Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal
qualifications to provide cable service.
(4) Whether the applicant's proposal is reasonable to meet the future
cable-related needs and interests of the community, taking into
account the cost of meeting such needs and interests.
(5) Whether, to the extent not considered as part of Subsection C(4) of
this section, the applicant will provide adequate public,
educational, and governmental access channel capacity, facilities,
or financial support.
(6) Whether issuance of a franchise is warranted in the public interest
considering the immediate and future effect on the public rights-ofway
and private property which would be used by the cable system,
including the extent to which installation or maintenance as
planned would require replacement of property or involve
disruption of property, public services, or use of the public rightsof-
way; the effect of granting a franchise on the ability of cable to
meet the cable-related needs and interests of the community.
(7) Whether the applicant or an affiliate of the applicant owns or
controls any other cable system in the Borough, or whether grant of
the application may eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery
of cable service in the Borough.
E. If the Borough finds that it is in the public interest to issue a franchise
considering the factors set forth above, it shall issue a franchise,
subject to the applicant's entry into an appropriate franchise
agreement. If the Borough denies a franchise, it will issue a written
§ 259-24 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-24
1:106
§ 259-25. Filing fees.
To be acceptable for filing, an application submitted after the effective date
of this chapter shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the following amount*,
as appropriate:
§ 259-26. System construction schedule.
The franchise agreement shall specify the construction schedule.
§ 259-27. Use of streets.
decision explaining why the franchise was denied. Prior to deciding
whether to issue or not to issue a franchise, the Borough may hold one
or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which
comments from the public on an applicant's proposal may be received.
The Borough also may grant or deny a request for a franchise based
on its review of an application without further proceedings and may
reject any application which is incomplete or fails to respond to an RFP.
This chapter is not intended and shall not be interpreted to grant any
applicant or existing franchisee standing to challenge the issuance of a
franchise to another.
F. If the Borough grants a franchise subject to the applicant's entry into a
franchise agreement, the Borough and the franchisee shall agree on the
terms of a franchise agreement within 30 calendar days from the date
of Borough resolution granting the franchise. This period may be
extended for good cause by the Borough. If agreement is not reached
with the Borough within 30 calendar days from the date of the Borough
resolution granting the franchise, or if the period is not extended by the
Borough, the franchise will be null and void without further action by
the Borough. The Borough shall approve or disapprove the proposed
agreement by resolution, or may direct that it be subject to further
negotiation.
A. For an initial franchise: $30,000.
(1) The request for issuance of an RFP: $5,000.
*These fees may be increased in an amount equal to the increase
in the Consumer Price Index for the Philadelphia Metropolitan area
using the year of this chapter as the base year.
(2) The response to the RFP or the unsolicited proposal: $5,000.
B. For renewal of a franchise: $10,000.
C. For modification of a franchise agreement: $10,000.
A. All installations shall be underground in those areas of the Borough
where public utilities providing both telephone and electric service are
underground at the time of installation. In areas where either telephone
§ 259-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-27
1:107
or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of installation,
grantee may install its service above ground, provided that at such time
as both those facilities are required to be place underground by the
Borough or are placed underground, the grantee shall likewise place
its services underground. Where not otherwise required to be placed
underground by this chapter or the franchise agreement, the grantee's
system shall be located underground at the request of a property owner,
provided that the excess cost over aerial location shall be borne by the
property owner making the request. All cable passing under the public
way shall be installed in accordance with all state and local laws and
ordinances.
B. Prior to construction or alteration in any public way, however, the
grantee shall in each case file plans with the appropriate Borough
agencies and obtain all necessary construction permits and
authorizations before proceeding.
C. Interference with persons, improvements, public and private property
and utilities. The grantee's system and facilities, including poles, lines,
equipment and all appurtenances, shall be located, erected and
maintained so that such facilities shall:
(1) Not endanger or interfere with the health, safety or lives of
persons;
(2) Not interfere with the free and proper use of public streets, alleys,
bridges, easements or other public ways, places or property, except
to the minimum extent possible during actual construction or
repair;
(3) Not interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience of private
property owners, except to the minimum extent possible during
actual construction repair; and
(4) Not obstruct, hinder or interfere with any gas, electric, water or
telephone facilities or other utilities located within the Borough.
D. Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of pavement,
sidewalk, property, or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost
and expense an in a manner approved by the Borough, replace and
restore all paving, sidewalk, landscaping, or surfacing of any property
or public way, disturbed, in as good a condition as, or better than,
before said work was commenced and in a good workmanlike, timely
manner in accordance with standards for such work set by the Borough.
Such restoration shall be undertaken within no more than 10 business
days after the damage in incurred and shall be completed within 30
business days unless otherwise authorized by the Borough.
E. Relocation of the facilities. In the event that at any time during the
period of the franchise, the Borough, county or state shall lawfully elect
to alter, or change, the grade of any street, alley or other public ways,
or make repairs or improvements to any infrastructure, the grantee,
§ 259-27 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-27
1:108
§ 259-28. Erection, removal and common use of poles.
§ 259-29. Construction reporting requirements.
upon reasonable notice by the proper authority, shall remove or
relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other fixtures at its own expense and with all due
deliberate speed.
F. Cooperation with building movers. The grantee shall, on the request of
any person holding a building moving permit issued by the Borough,
temporarily raise or lower its wire to permit the moving of buildings.
The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires
shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall
have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee
shall be given reasonable advance notice to arrange for such temporary
wire changes.
G. Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority, except when in
conflict with existing Borough ordinances, to trim any trees upon or
overhanging the public right-of-way so as to prevent the branches of
such trees from coming in contact with system facilities, except that at
the option of the Borough, such trimming as may be required by the
grantee may be done by the Borough, or under its supervision and
direction, at the expense of the grantee. The grantee shall notify the
Borough prior to trimming any trees in the right-of-way.
H. Easements. All necessary easements over and under private property
shall be arranged for by the grantee.
A. Prior to the erection of any towers, poles or conduits or the upgrade or
rebuild of the cable communications system under this chapter, the
grantee shall first submit to the Borough and other designated parties
for approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be
erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if required,
together with a map and plans indicating the proposed location of all
such facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole,
underground conduit, or fixture or any rebuilds or upgrading of the
cable communications system shall be commenced by any person until
approval therefor has been received from the Borough, such approval
not to be unreasonably withheld.
B. Where poles already exist for use in serving the Borough are available
for use by the grantee, the Borough may require the grantee to use
such poles and structures.
A. Within 30 days of the grant, the grantee shall provide the Borough with
a written progress report detailing work completed to date on initial
construction or a rebuild of a cable television system. Such report shall
include a description of the progress in applying for any necessary
agreements, licenses, or certifications and any other information the
§ 259-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-29
1:109
Borough Manager may deem necessary. The content and format of
the report will be determined by the Borough Manager and may be
modified at his discretion.
B. Such written progress reports shall be submitted to the Borough on a
monthly basis throughout the entire initial construction or rebuild
process. The Borough Manager may require more frequent reporting if
he/she determines it is necessary to better monitor the grantee's
progress.
C. Prior to the commencement of any initial construction or rebuild of a
cable television system, the grantee shall produce an informational
document to be distributed to all residents of the area to be under
construction, which shall describe the activity that will be taking place.
The informational document shall be reviewed and approved by the
Borough Manager prior to its distribution.
§ 259-29 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-29
1:110
ARTICLE VII
Service Problems
§ 259-30. Services to subscribers and users.
A. Concurrently with the activation of the cable communications system in
the Borough, the grantee shall provide all services to subscribers as
described in the franchise agreement.
(1) The system shall carry the broad categories of programming and
services listed in the franchise agreement. Should the grantee
desire to change the selection of programs or services offered it
shall maintain the mix, quality and level of services provided over
the system. Any such change in programs or services offered shall
comply with the conditions and procedures contained in the
franchise agreement, and shall be reported to the Borough at least
60 days prior to the proposed implementation. The grantee shall
notify all subscribers in writing at least 30 days prior to
implementing any change in the selection of programs or services
offered on any tiers, or prior to adding or deleting any channels or
changing the channel number for any station. The grantee shall
endeavor to ensure diversity of programming regarding the
community's needs.
(2) The grantee shall provide and maintain on such channels as the
franchise agreement may direct, at a minimum, the following
access services:
(a) Government access channel, which shall be a governmental
use by the Borough and shall be managed, scheduled and
programmed exclusively by the Borough or shared with other
local governmental entities at the discretion of the Borough.
(b) Educational channel, which shall be a specifically designated
channel for use by local public and private school authorities,
and shall be managed, scheduled an programmed exclusively
by them.
(c) Public access channel, which will be a specifically designated
channel available on a nondiscriminatory basis to residents of
the Borough.
(d) No public, educational, or government access channel may be
assigned, transferred, or leased, in whole or in part.
(3) The grantee shall make available leased access channels to assure
that the widest possible diversity of information sources are made
available to subscribers.
(a) Such channels shall be specifically designated for Leased
Access use by persons unaffiliated with the grantee, at rates
which are in accordance with the Cable Act.
§ 259-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-30
1:111
§ 259-31. Connections and other grantee services.
(b) The number of such channels shall be determined by the
provisions of the Cable Act or other applicable federal and
state law.
(c) Grantee shall not exercise any editorial control over any
programming provided over such channels, except that
grantee may consider such content to the minimum extent
necessary to establish a fair and reasonable price for the use of
such channels.
(4) The grantee shall fully provide the services facilities and equipment
for public, educational and government access as indicated in the
franchise agreement.
(5) The grantee shall comply with all obscenity and indecency
regulations as adopted by the FCC.
B. Emergency override. The grantee shall, without charge, provide,
service and maintain public emergency transmission facilities on all
channels to the Borough, as described in the franchise agreement.
A. Deposits. For any deposit required by grantee that earns interest, such
interest shall be returned to the subscriber at such time as the deposit
is returned.
B. Parental control devices. The grantee shall provide to subscribers, as
part of its literature, information concerning the availability of a
parental control device for use by a subscriber. The parental control
device described shall be made available to all subscribers upon
request.
C. Reconnection. Grantee shall restore service to customers wishing
restoration of service provided customer shall first satisfy any previous
obligations owed.
D. Free disconnection. Subscribers shall have the right to have basic
subscriber television service disconnected without charge. A refund of
unused service charges shall be paid to the customer within 60 days
from the date of termination of service.
E. Billing. Grantee shall not require subscribers to pay for services more
than one month in advance. All bills shall be itemized by level of service.
F. Delinquent accounts. Grantee shall use its best efforts to collect on
delinquent subscriber accounts. In all cases, the grantee shall provide
the customer with at least 10 working days' written notice prior to
disconnection.
G. Prohibited activities. In the conduct of its business franchised
hereunder, neither the grantee nor its officers, employees, or agents
shall directly or indirectly sell, lease, repair, install, or maintain
§ 259-30 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-31
1:112
§ 259-32. Customer standards, service and procedures.
§ 259-33. Continuity of service mandatory.
television sets or receivers or antennas; provided, however, that
nothing hereunder shall prohibit grantee, at customer's request, from
examining or adjusting customer's receiving set to determine whether
reception difficulties originate in the set or in the grantee's system.
A. The grantee shall adopt and abide by any and all customer service
standards for cable operators issued by the FCC, including but not
limited to the standards appearing at 47 CFR 76.309, as amended,
which are hereby adopted by the Borough. The standards issued by the
FCC are the minimum standards for customer service under this
chapter, and additional standards may be set forth in the franchise
agreement or otherwise adopted by the Borough.
B. The grantee shall prepare and file with the Borough copies of all of its
rules and regulations in connection with the handling of inquiries,
requests and complaints. The grantee shall, by appropriate means, such
as a card or brochure, furnish information concerning the procedures
for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address and
local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent to whom
such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed.
C. The grantee shall keep full records of service calls in connection with
the system. Such records shall identify the person contacting the
grantee, and the person responding on behalf of the grantee, the
subject matter of the contact, the date and time it was received, the
resolution of the matter in question or the action taken by the grantee
in connection with the contact, and the date and time thereof, and such
other in formation as may be deemed pertinent by the grantee. These
records shall be made available for periodic inspection by the Borough.
D. The grantee shall repair or replace without charge all defective
equipment provided by it to the subscriber, provided however, that the
grantee may charge a subscriber for service to or replacement of any
equipment rendered inoperable or damage due to negligence of such
subscriber.
E. Hearing impaired. Grantee shall upon request of subscriber install
equipment designed to enhance reception of programming with
encoded signals for the hearing impaired.
F. Credit for service interruption. Grantee shall upon request of
subscriber give a credit for 24 hours of free cable service for every
service outage lasting for more than four hours in any twenty-four-hour
period, or 1/30 of the monthly bill. For this purpose, a service outage is
defined as the loss of picture or sound on one or more channels.
§ 259-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-33
1:113
A. It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive continuous,
uninterrupted service insofar as their financial and other obligations to
the grantee are honored.
B. In the event that a grantee elects to rebuild, modify or sell its system, or
the Borough gives notice of intent to terminate or fails to renew its
franchise, the grantee shall cooperate with the Borough or new grantee
or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers.
During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any
period during which it operates the system.
C. Abandonment of system. In the event the grantee willfully fails to
operate the system for a continuous 24 hour period without prior
approval of the Borough or without just cause, the Borough may, at its
option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as
grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the Borough or
a permanent operator is selected. If the Borough is required to fulfill
this obligation for the grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the Borough
for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the
system received by the Borough that are the result of the grantee's
failure to perform, and grantee should be obligated to continue to
provide headend programming services until the Borough is able to
obtain equivalent headend service from another source.
§ 259-33 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-33
1:114
ARTICLE VIII
Books, Records and Reports
§ 259-34. Records and books available to grantor.
The Borough shall have the right to inspect, copy or transcribe at any
time during normal business hours at grantee's office within the franchise
territory all records of the grantee which are required to carry out its
regulatory responsibilities hereunder.
§ 259-35. Reports required.
Except where a different time or requirement is specified by this chapter
or the franchise agreement, the grantee shall file with the Borough upon
request:
A. Regulatory communications. All correspondence received from the
FCC, as well as all reports submitted to the FCC, including, but not
limited to annual proof of performance tests and results, and Equal
Employment Opportunity (EEO) reports, and all petitions, application
and communications of all types submitted by grantee to the FCC, the
Security and Exchange Commission (SEC), or any other federal or state
regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction over any matter
affecting operation of grantee's system shall be provided
simultaneously to the Borough.
B. Facilities report. An annual report setting forth the physical miles of
plant construction and plant in operation during the fiscal year shall be
submitted to the Borough. Such report shall also contain any revisions
to the system as-built maps filed with the Borough.
C. Construction reports. Construction reports shall be sent to the Borough
30 days after the franchise is awarded and monthly thereafter until
construction is completed.
D. Proof of bonds and insurance. Grantee shall submit to the Borough the
required performance bond, or a certified copy thereof, and written
evidence of payment of required premium, and all policies of insurance
required by this chapter, or certificates evidencing same.
E. Financial and ownership reports.
(1) An annual ownership report, indicating all persons, who at any time
during the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest in
the franchise of 1% or more.
(2) An annual financial report for the previous calendar year specific to
operations within the Borough, certified by the grantee's Chief
Financial Officer or appropriate corporate officer attesting to the
truth and accuracy of the information provided, including year-end
balance sheet, income statement for the twelve-month period
ending December 31, showing subscriber revenue, nonsubscriber
§ 259-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-35
1:115
revenue, operating expenses, depreciation expense, interest
expense and taxes paid, statement of sources and applications of
funds, and depreciation schedule, prepared in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles.
(3) A current annual statement of all capital expenditures including the
cost of construction and of equipment.
(4) An annual list of officers and members of the Board of grantee
specific to operations within the Borough and of any parent
corporation.
F. Operational reports.
(1) An annual report on the system's technical tests and measurements
as set forth herein and in the franchise agreement.
(2) An annual summary of programs and services offered by grantee,
including public, educational, government, and leased access.
(3) An annual projection of system and service plans.
(4) A semiannual summary of service calls received an handled in
addition to any reports required in the franchise agreement.
(5) A quarterly summary of activities, including, but not limited to,
subscriber totals for each category of service offered, including
number of pay units sold and new services offered.
G. Additional reports. The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the
Borough at the times and in the form prescribed, such additional
reports with respect to its operation, affairs, transactions or property,
as may be reasonably necessary and appropriate to the performance of
any of the regulatory duties of the Borough in connection with this
chapter or the franchise agreement.
§ 259-35 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 259-35
1:116
ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 259-36. Failure to perform act within time allotted.
Whenever this chapter shall set forth any time for an act to be performed by
or on behalf of the grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and
any failure of the grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always
be sufficient ground for the Borough to invoke an appropriate penalty,
including possible revocation of the franchise.
§ 259-37. Law governs.
In any controversy or dispute under this chapter, the law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall apply.
§ 259-38. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter or the franchise agreement is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by any federal,
state, or local statute or regulation, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
§ 259-39. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 283 of the Code of Collegeville Borough, and all previous
ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict with the provisions of this chapter
are hereby repealed upon the effective date as defined in § 259-40 or upon
the date of execution of a new franchise agreement with Suburban Cable
TV Cable Communications, the current sole franchisee within the Borough,
whichever shall last occur.
§ 259-40. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective five days after the date of enactment,
subject to the provisions of § 259-39 herein.
§ 259-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-40
1:117
Chapter 270
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
600.
Zoning — See Ch. 680.
§ 270-1. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Collegeville hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 270-2. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the building code of the Borough of
Collegeville.
§ 270-3. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the UCC within the Borough of
Collegeville shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined
by the Borough Council of the Borough of Collegeville from time to time by
resolution:
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough to serve as the
Borough code official to act on behalf of the Borough.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of the Borough.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 259-40 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 270-4
1:118
§ 270-4. Establishment of Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Borough
Council of Borough of Collegeville in conformity with the requirements
of the relevant provisions of the UCC, as amended from time to time,
and for the purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and
administration is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities,
said Board of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the
participating municipalities.
§ 270-5. Effect on provisions of other ordinances, regulations and
policies.
§ 270-6. Amendments to standards.
The following provisions were duly adopted by the Borough of Collegeville
on or before July 1, 1999, and are specifically identified as equaling or
exceeding the requirements of the UCC and shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as the provisions fail to equal or exceed the minimum
requirements of the UCC, as amended from time to time. The following
provisions are not intended as an exhaustive list of provisions adopted by
the Borough before July 1, 1999, which equal or exceed the requirements of
the UCC and the Borough reserves the right to enforce, without limitation,
all other building code provisions not specifically listed below which were
adopted on or before July 1, 1999, which equal or exceed the requirements
of the UCC, as amended from time to time.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Borough of Collegeville on or before July 1, 1999, and
which equal or exceed the requirements of the UCC shall continue in
full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or
exceed the minimum requirements of the UCC, as amended from time
to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the UCC are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the UCC.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Borough of
Collegeville not governed by the UCC shall remain in full force and
effect.
A. Amend Section 403.42(e)(1) by adding the following:
"The required documents shall also include all plans, profiles, and
details necessary to demonstrate compliance with the required
provisions of the UCC and adopted supplements relating to accessibility
requirements."
B. Delete Subpart (xvii) of Section 403.62(c)(1) in its entirety.
§ 270-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-6
1:119
§ 270-7. Establishment of fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough of Collegeville for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the UCC shall be
established by the Borough Council by resolution from time to time.
§ 270-8. Violations and penalties.
Any individual, firm or corporation that violates any provision of the UCC
commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs. Each day that a violation of the
UCC continues shall be considered a separate violation.
Chapter 279
CURFEW
§ 279-1. Findings.
Council finds that the increase in the number and in the seriousness of
crimes committed by minors has been caused in part by the large number
of minors who are permitted to congregate and remain in public places and
in certain establishments during night hours without adult supervision and
that regulation of the same in the exercise of the police power delegated
by the Borough Code for the preservation of order and the welfare of the
community is required for the preservation or maintenance of public peace,
safety, good government and the welfare of the Borough.
§ 279-2. Definitions. [Amended 9-2-1981 by Ord. No. 306]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business carried on for
a profit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is
invited.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment; and whenever used
in any clause prescribing a penalty, the term "operator" as applied to
associations or partnerships shall include the members or partners thereof
and as applied to corporations, shall include the officers thereof.
PARENT — Any natural parent of a minor, a guardian or any adult person,
21 years of age or over, responsible for the care and custody of a minor.
C. Add a new Subpart (f) to Section 403.62 as follows:
(f) A permit is required for the installation of all decks.
§ 270-6 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 279-2
1:120
PREVAILING TIME — Eastern standard time except from the last Sunday
in April to the last Sunday in October, when it shall mean Eastern daylight
saving time.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
public building or vacant lot.
REMAIN — To loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon.
§ 279-3. Unlawful conduct of minors; violations.
§ 279-4. Unlawful conduct of parents; violations.
§ 279-5. Unlawful conduct of operators of establishments;
violations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in or upon any public place
or any establishment between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of
the following day prevailing time, except that on Friday and Saturday
evenings the commencement hour shall be extended to 12:00 midnight.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor accompanied
by a parent, or to a minor upon an errand or other legitimate business
directed by that minor's parents, or to any minor who is engaged in
gainful lawful employment during the curfew hours. Where there are
special event programs or functions by properly organized and
supervised organizations to advance legitimate recreation, character
development, religious training and school activities in the building of
good citizenship in young people, the Borough Police Department will
grant special consideration in such cases upon receipt of notice thereof
and the children will be permitted to proceed directly home from the
event without incident.
C. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any parent knowingly to allow or permit any
minor to remain in or upon any public place or any establishment
between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day,
prevailing time, except that on Friday and Saturday evenings the
commencement hour shall be extended to 12:00 midnight.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any parent who
accompanies a minor or to a parent who directs a minor upon an errand
or other legitimate business or to any parent of a minor engaged in
gainful lawful employment during the curfew hours.
C. Each violation of the provision of this section shall constitute a separate
offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any operator of any establishment or any of his
agents or employees knowingly to permit any minor to remain upon the
§ 279-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 279-5
1:121
§ 279-6. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989
by Ord. No. 363]
Chapter 313
FIREARMS AND HUNTING
premises of that establishment at any time between the hours of 10:30
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, prevailing time, except that
on Friday and Saturday evenings the commencement hour shall be
extended to 12:00 midnight.
B. Each violation of the provisions of this section constitutes a separate
offense.
A. Any police officer who finds a minor violating any provision of this
article shall obtain information from that minor as to his name and
address, age and the name and address of his parent or parents. The
minor shall thereupon be instructed to proceed to his home forthwith
and, if possible, shall be accompanied by the police officer. The police
officer shall ascertain, if possible, if the parent or parents are at home
and if so, notify them verbally of the violation of both the parent and the
child. If the parent or parents are not found at home, the police officer
shall make such report to his superior officer. In all cases whether or
not verbal notice has been given, a written notice shall also be mailed to
the parent or parents of the minor advising them of the violation of this
chapter.
B. Any parent who permits a minor to violate any provision of this article
after having received notice of a prior violation shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings brought in the name of the Borough
before the Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $5 and not more than $600 and costs; and
in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment in the
Montgomery County prison for a period not in excess of 30 days. All
fines and penalties imposed and collected under this subsection shall be
paid over to the Treasurer for the use of the Borough.
C. Any operator of any establishment and any agents or employees of any
operator who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof by summary proceedings brought in the name of the
Borough before the Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $5 and not more than $600 for
each violation and costs; and in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to undergo imprisonment in Montgomery County prison for a
period not in excess of 30 days. All fines and penalties imposed and
collected under this subsection shall be paid over to the Treasurer for
the use of the Borough.
§ 279-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 313-1
1:122
§ 313-1. Restrictions on use of firearms and other weapons and on
firing or discharging projectiles.
No person shall, except in necessary defense of person or property, or as set
out in § 313-2, fire or discharge any gun or other firearm or any instrument
or device by which a projectile of any kind may be fired or discharged.
§ 313-2. Permissible use of weapons and firing or discharge of
projectiles.
§ 313-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 313-4. Correlation with other provisions; severability.
It is the intent of the Borough that this article be supplementary and not
contrary to the Constitutions of the United States and of Pennsylvania, any
laws thereof and any regulations of their agencies and departments. Should
any part of this article be declared invalid because of such conflict, or for
any other reason, the provisions of this article shall be deemed severable,
so that the unaffected portions hereof shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 321
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 640.
A. It shall be permissible for any person to maintain a target range for the
firing of certain weapons and the use of instruments or devices by
which a projectile may be fired or discharged under the following
conditions: adequate safety precautions have been taken to the
satisfaction of the police and the Mayor; and permission of Council shall
have been granted following recommendation by the Police Department
and the Mayor. It shall not be a violation of this article for any person,
with permission of and under supervision of the operator of any such
approved firing range, to use that firing range for the purposes for
which authorization is given by Council.
B. Hunting of game shall be permissible in locations within the Borough
where hunting would be lawful, by persons acting in conformity with
statutes and regulations of the commonwealth dealing with hunting,
but only with specific permission from the owner or the occupier if
other than the owner, of the land on which the hunting is to be done.
§ 313-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 313-4
1:123
§ 321-1. Authority to establish fire lanes. [Amended 11-6-2013 by
Ord. No. 561]
Whenever Borough Council, upon recommendation of the Fire Marshal, the
Fire Chief or the Police Chief, shall determine that the parking of motor
vehicles upon any public or private street, lane, or alley within Collegeville
Borough, or along one or more travel lanes within any shopping center
located within Collegeville Borough, is likely to interfere with the operations
and activities of the Fire Department or may seriously hamper the egress of
occupants from a building or structure in case of fire, Borough Council may
adopt a resolution directing that signs be posted on that street, lane or alley
or along the travel lanes within that shopping center by an officer or other
duly authorized designee of the Borough, which shall state "No Parking
by Order of Fire Marshal" or "No Parking Fire Lane" or other wording
acceptable to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in accordance
with PennDOT Publication 236, Handbook of Approved Signs, most recent
edition.
§ 321-2. Authority to prohibit parking under temporary fire
regulations.
The Fire Marshal or Fire Chief is hereby given authority to adopt and
enforce temporary parking regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions in any public or private street, lane, alley or shopping center
if he/she shall determine that the parking of motor vehicles is liable to
interfere with the operations of the Fire Department. He/she shall post
signs reading "No Parking - Temporary Fire Regulation by Order of the
Fire Marshal of the Borough of Collegeville" on that street, lane, alley or
shopping center.
§ 321-3. Marking of fire lanes on roadway surface.
Whenever the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief shall determine that "No Parking
by Order of Fire Marshal" signs on any public or private street, lane, alley
or shopping center will not clearly indicate the area in which parking is
prohibited, he/she is hereby authorized to establish fire lanes by painting
lines four inches in width on the roadway surface indicating the area in
which parking is prohibited. In addition, he/she shall paint the words "Fire
Lane" in letters three feet in height on the roadway surface at intervals he/
she deems necessary within the prohibited parking area.
§ 321-4. Marking of fire lanes without posting sign.
Whenever the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief shall determine that the parking
of motor vehicles upon any public or private street, lane, alley or shopping
center is liable to interfere with the operations of the Fire Department or
seriously hamper the egress of occupants from buildings in case of fire, he/
she is hereby authorized to establish fire lanes by painting lines four inches
§ 313-4 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 321-4
1:124
in width on the roadway surface indicating the area in which parking is
prohibited without posting signs reading "No Parking by Order of the Fire
Marshal" on such street, lane, alley or shopping center. He/she shall paint
the words "Fire Lane" in letters three feet in height on the roadway surface
at intervals he/she deems necessary within the prohibited parking area.
§ 321-5. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violation of this article shall be governed by § 640-26.
Chapter 330
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 321. Fires, flammable material, and
chimneys — See Ch. 337.
§ 330-1. Adoption of standards.
A. BOCA National Fire Prevention Code. For the purpose of establishing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from
fire and explosion, the Borough of Collegeville adopts as its fire
prevention code the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code, 1996, 10th
Edition, as published by the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International, Inc. One or more copies of that code have been placed on
file in the office of the Borough Secretary, and will remain on file there.
That entire Fire Prevention Code, as affected by the deletion,
amendment or modification of certain portions in the following sections
of this chapter, is adopted, and is incorporated in the Borough's Code of
Ordinances as fully as if set out verbatim in this chapter. From the date
on which this chapter takes effect, the provisions of that fire prevention
code, as affected by this chapter, shall be in effect within the limits of
the Borough of Collegeville. In this chapter, the BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code may be referred to as "the code" or "this code."
B. Amendments and changes in the published code. All amendments,
changes, additions and deletions in the published 1996 10th Edition of
the Fire Prevention Code referred to in Subsection A of this section, as
made by the publisher and transmitted to the Borough prior to the
publication of a new code that is to supplant this code, shall be
considered as part of this chapter and effective in the Borough,
provided that copies of the publisher's modifications are kept on file in
the office of the Borough Secretary, preferably with notations made by
the Code Official of those changes inserted in the proper and pertinent
places in the file copies of the published Fire Prevention Code that is
referred to in Subsection A of this section.
§ 321-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-2
1:125
§ 330-2. Modifications and amendments.
A. The fire prevention code adopted by § 330-1 of this chapter is amended
and changed in the following respects:
(1) Wherever the words "name of jurisdiction" appear in brackets in
the code, the words "Borough of Collegeville" shall be inserted in
place of those bracketed words. Likewise, the words "Borough of
Collegeville" shall be substituted for the word "jurisdiction," where
the latter word appears singly in the code, without being preceded
by the words "under the."
(2) The term "chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction" and the
term "appointing authority of the jurisdiction" as used in the code
shall mean the Borough Council.
(3) The term "legal counsel of the jurisdiction" as used in the code shall
mean the Borough Solicitor.
(4) The term "Code official" as used in the code shall mean the
individual or individuals designated by Borough Council to
administer and enforce this code in the Borough.
(5) The term "department" as used in the code shall mean and include
the Code Official or Code Officials, as defined in Subsection A(4),
directly above, and all Borough personnel performing any duties or
functions authorized or directly provided or referred to in the code.
(6) Section F-101.1 of the code shall be amended to read as follows:
"F-101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the 'Fire
Prevention Code of the Borough of Collegeville,' hereinafter
referred to as 'the code' or 'this code.'"
(7) The following new section is added directly after Section F-103.2 of
the code:
"F-103.3 Validity of other laws, regulations and ordinances:
Nothing in this code shall be construed to prevent the enforcement
of other laws, state regulations and ordinances of this Borough
which prescribe more restrictive or stricter requirements or
limitations. When any provision specified in this code pertaining
to health, safety and/or welfare is more restrictive than any such
other provision, this code shall control, but, in any case, the most
rigid requirements of either this code or other laws, regulations or
ordinances shall apply whenever they may be in conflict."
(8) Section F-104.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"F-104.2 Modifications: Upon application in writing by the owner
or lessee of the property involved, which application shall be kept
on file with the Borough Secretary, the Code Official shall have
power to authorize modifications of specific provisions and
§ 330-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 330-2
1:126
requirements of this code, involving alternative methods or
materials or other kinds of modifications. Such authorization shall
be granted where there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the code, providing that the spirit of
the code is observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done. The particulars of every such modification, when granted or
allowed, and the decision of the Code Official on the matter, shall
be reported to Borough Council, and kept on file with the Borough
Secretary, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant."
(9) Section F-104.2.1 of the code shall be deleted.
(10) Section F-105.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"F-105.2 Appointment: The Code Official or Code Officials shall
be appointed by Borough Council, and shall serve at the pleasure
of the Council. Council shall have authority to designate as a Code
Official under this ordinance any one or more of the following: (a)
any individual holding no elected office under Borough Government
except that the Borough Council may appoint the Mayor or a
member of Council as Code Official, on the condition that the
appointee receive no salary from the Borough in his/her capacity
as Mayor, member of Council or Code Official/Fire Marshal, or;
(b) any individual holding another appointed position in Borough
Government; or (c) any individual holding active office in the
Borough Fire Company."
(11) Section F-105.5 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"F-105.5 Restriction of employees: Any official or employee
involved in the enforcement of this code shall not be engaged in,
or directly or indirectly connected with, the furnishing of labor,
materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or
maintenance of a structure or the preparation of construction
documents thereof, unless that person is the owner of the
structure; nor shall any such official or employee engage in any
work which conflicts with official duties or with the interests of the
department."
(12) Section F-106.6 of the code is amended to add the following
sentence at the end thereof:
"Provided: Borough Council shall have authority, at its discretion,
to abrogate any rule or regulation, or part thereof, in which case
that rule or regulation shall cease to be in effect in the Borough."
(13) Section F-107.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"F-107.1 Requirement for notice to Code Official and
obtaining permit: It shall be unlawful to engage in any business
activity involving the handling, storage or use of hazardous
materials, substances or devices; or to maintain, store or handle
§ 330-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-2
1:127
such materials; or to conduct processes producing conditions
hazardous to life or property; or to install equipment utilized in
connection with such activities; or to establish an assembly
occupancy without first notifying the Code Official and obtaining
a permit therefor. Provided: wherever any section or subsection of
this code states that 'approval shall be required,' it is meant that a
permit is required."
(14) Section F-107.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"F-107.2 Permits required: Permits shall be obtained from the
Code Official and shall at all times: (a) be kept on the premises
designated in the permit; and (b) be subject to inspection by the
Code Official."
(15) Section F-107.2.3 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"F-107.2.3 Listing of permits and fees: The permits required
under this code and the fees for each permit shall be adopted by
resolution of Council."
(16) The following new subsection shall be added directly after Section
F-107.6:
"F-107.6.1 Outside plan review: At the direction of the Borough,
plans submitted for review may be reviewed by an outside
inspection agency/firm to ensure they conform to Borough Codes.
This agency/firm must be approved by the Borough. The cost of this
review is to be borne by the applicant or owner."
(17) Section F-109.0 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"SECTION F-109.0 FIRE INVESTIGATIONS
"F-109.1 Investigation of fires: The Code Official/Fire Marshal
shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, every fire or
explosion occurring within the jurisdiction that is of a suspicious
nature or which involves the loss of life or serious injury or causes
destruction or damage to property. Such investigation shall be
initiated immediately upon the occurrence of such fire or explosion;
and if it appears that such an occurrence is of a suspicious nature,
the Code Official/Fire Marshal shall immediately take charge of the
physical evidence; and, in order to preserve any physical evidence
relating to the cause or origin of such fire or explosion, the Code
Official/Fire Marshal shall take means to prevent access by any
person to the structure or premises until such evidence has been
properly processed. The Code Official/Fire Marshal shall notify
those persons designated by law to pursue investigations into such
matters and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the
collection of evidence and prosecution of the case and shall pursue
the investigation to its conclusion.
§ 330-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 330-2
1:128
"F-109.2 Fire records: The Code Official/Fire Marshal shall keep
a record of all fires and all facts concerning the same, including
investigation findings, statistics and information as to the cause,
origin and the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby.
(18) Section F-111.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"F-111.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who refuses to
leave, interferes with the evacuation of other occupants or
continues in any operation after having been given an evacuation
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be deemed guilty of a
violation of this code, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $200 or more than $1,000 and costs, and,
in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment
for not more than 30 days."
(19) Section F-112.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"F-112.2 Failure to correct violations: If the notice of violation
is not complied with within the time specified by the Code Official,
the Code Official shall report that fact, in writing, to the Mayor
and to Borough Council. The Mayor may then direct the Police
Department of the Borough to make any arrests for any offense
against this code or orders of the Code Official affecting the
immediate safety of the public; and Council may direct the Borough
Solicitor to institute the appropriate legal proceedings to restrain,
correct or abate the violation or to require removal or termination
of the unlawful use of the building or structure in violation of the
provisions of this code or of any order or direction made under this
code."
(20) Section F-112.3 of the code is amended to read as follows:
§ 330-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-2
1:129
"F-112.3 Penalty for violation:
(a) Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision
of this code, or who violates or fails to comply with any order
issued under this code, or who builds in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved under the terms of this code, or any certificate
or permit issued under this code and from which no appeal
was taken, or who fails to comply with any such order as
affirmed by the Board of Appeals, or by a court of competent
jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally be
guilty of a violation of this code, and upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200 or more than
$1,000 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30
days. Provided: The imposition of one penalty for any violation
shall not excuse that violation or permit it to continue; and
all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy that
violation or defect within a reasonable time; and when not
otherwise specified, each 10 days that any prohibited
condition is maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(c) If, at the expiration of the time limit for correction of the listed
violations, satisfactory remedial action has not been taken and
no exception has been filed to request consideration of the
order by the Board of Appeals, such further action shall be
initiated by the Borough as provided for by law, specifically
including the power of the Borough to cause such remedial
action to be commenced and/or completed by the Borough
and the costs thereof and expenses incurred therewith, with a
penalty of 10%, be collected from the owner of the property by
action of assumpsit or by lien; provided, however, the recovery
of the costs and expenses, together with the penalty, may be in
addition to the penalty imposed as provided for this section."
(21) Section F-133.0 of the code, "Means of Appeal," and all subsections
of that section, being Sections F-113.1 through F-133.7, are
deleted, and the following new Section F-113.0 is substituted for
the deleted material:
§ 330-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 330-2
1:130
"F-113.0 MEANS OF APPEAL
F-113.1 Right of appeal: Any person shall have the right to
appeal a decision of the Code Official to the Board of Appeals
provided for in Section F-113.2. An application for appeal shall
be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted; that
the provisions of this code do not fully apply; or that an equally
good or better method of fire prevention is used. The application
shall be filed on a form obtained from the Code Official within 20
days after the notice was served.
F-113.2 Board of Appeals: A Board of Appeals, which shall be
composed of the Borough Council, being the same membership as
the Board of Appeals serving under the building code, is hereby
established to have the duty, responsibility, and authority to decide
the matters referred to it under this code. Appeals shall proceed
in the same manner and be subject to the same limitations and
procedures as prescribed in the building code for appeals from
the orders and decisions of the Code Official under that Code.
The appeal shall be filed with the Borough Secretary, in writing,
within 30 days of the rendition of the order or decision of the Code
Official being appealed from.
F-113.3 Records: The Borough Secretary shall serve as Secretary
of the Board of Appeals, and, in the absence of the Secretary, the
Assistant Secretary shall so serve. The minutes of each meeting of
Council, serving as a Board of Appeals, shall clearly state the basis
for each decision made by the Board."
(22) The following two definitions contained in Section F-202.0, General
Definitions, are amended to read as follows:
"Code Official: The individual or individuals designated by
Borough Council to administer and enforce this code in the
Borough."
"Person: Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as
individuals. It shall also include an executor, administrator,
trustee, receiver or other representative appointed according to
law. Whenever the word "person" appears in any section of this
code prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or
associations, the word shall include the partners or members
thereof, and as to corporations, shall include the officers, agents
or members thereof who are responsible for any violation of that
section."
(23) Section F-311.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"F-311.1 Designation: Fire lanes shall be designated and
maintained as provided in Chapter 321 of the Code of Ordinances,
entitled "Fire Lanes," as well as the provisions of Sections F-311.2
§ 330-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-2
1:131
and F-311.3 of this fire prevention code. Fire lanes shall have a
minimum width of 18 feet (5,486 mm)."
(24) Section 403.0 of the code, dealing with open burning, shall be
enforced along with the provisions on open burning contained in
Chapter 337 of the Code of Ordinances, the intent of this
requirement being that the stricter and more specific provisions of
each enactment are available to the Borough to aid in protection
from fire damage.
(25) Section F-3001.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"F-3001.2 Permit required: A permit shall be obtained from the
Code Official for any of the following conditions or operations:
(1) The possession, storage, sale or other disposition of explosive
materials;
(2) The transportation of explosive materials;
(3) The use of explosive materials;
(4) The operation of a terminal for handling explosive materials;
(5) The delivery to or receipt of explosive materials from a
terminal between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
Provided: No permit need be obtained from the Borough under
this section where a license or permit is required by law or
departmental regulation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
and where a valid state license or permit is in the possession of
the person desiring to have, keep, use, store or transport explosive
materials."
(26) Section F-3003.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"F-3003.1 Manufacturing: The manufacture of any explosive
material in any quantity is prohibited everywhere in the Borough
unless that manufacture is authorized by a federal license and
is conducted in accordance with recognized safety practices.
Provided: This prohibition does not apply to hand loading of small
arms ammunition prepared for personal use and not for resale."
(27) Section F-3003.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"F-3003.2 Storage: The storage of explosive materials is
prohibited everywhere in the Borough, except for temporary
storage utilized in connection with approved blasting operations.
Provided: This prohibition shall not apply to wholesale and retail
stocks of small arms ammunition, explosive bolts, explosive rivets
or cartridges for explosive-actuated power tools in quantities
involving less than 500 pounds (277 kg) of explosive material."
(28) Chapter 31 of the code, Fireworks, and all sections and subsections
contained in that chapter (Sections F-3101.1 through F-3103.6) are
§ 330-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 330-2
1:132
deleted and the following new chapter and sections are substituted
therefor:
"CHAPTER 31
FIREWORKS
F-3101.1 Definition: For the purpose of this chapter, and as
stated elsewhere in the code, the word "fireworks" shall have the
following meaning:
'Fireworks' include any combination or explosive composition, and
any substance and combination of substances and articles
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible
effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation.
Fireworks shall include: blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons,
toy canes and toy guns in which explosives are utilized, balloons
requiring fire underneath to propel the balloon, firecrackers,
torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, sparklers and other
devices of similar construction, any device containing any
explosive or flammable compound, and any tablets and other
devices containing any explosive substance.
The term 'fireworks' shall not include automobile flares, paper
caps containing not more than an average of 0.25 grain (16 mg) of
explosive content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns and
other devices utilizing such caps. The sale and utilization of the
types of explosive devices listed herein which are not considered
fireworks shall be permitted at all times.
F-3101.2 Prohibition and Regulations:
(a) The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited everywhere in the
Borough.
(b) The storage of fireworks shall be prohibited everywhere in the
Borough except for temporary storage in advance of, during
and in connection with supervised public display of fireworks;
and, for that purpose, a permit shall be obtained from the
Council. That permit shall clearly specify the place where the
fireworks shall be stored, shall limit and state the period of
time in advance of the supervised public display when the
fireworks shall be so stored, and shall require and provide for
the supervision over the removal of any unexploded fireworks
remaining after the supervised public display. In all other
respects, supervised public displays of fireworks shall be
governed by the State Fireworks Law (1939 P.L. 134 as
amended) and by regulations adopted by Council under that
law.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose
for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any fireworks in the
Borough except as permitted by the State Fireworks Law as
amended."
§ 330-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 330-3
1:133
§ 330-3. Interpretation.
In interpreting any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted, the
following principles shall be governing:
Chapter 337
FIRES, FLAMMABLE MATERIAL, AND CHIMNEYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 330.
§ 337-1. Restrictions on bonfires and other outdoor fires. [Amended
4-6-1988 by Ord. No. 356]
It shall be unlawful for any person to kindle or maintain any bonfire or other
fire, or to authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained upon or in:
A. The said code shall not supersede any provision of any law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or of any regulation promulgated by
any department or agency of the commonwealth by authority of law,
where such law or regulation is in conflict with or identical to a
provision of the said Code; provided, however, any provision of the said
code that is stricter than or in addition to any state law or regulation
governing a particular subject or activity shall be in effect and shall be
enforced within the Borough of Collegeville, subject to the penalties
prescribed in the code.
B. Mention in or regulation by the code hereby adopted of any specific use
of property, or of any business or industry, shall not in itself authorize
such use of property or the establishment or carrying on of any such
business or industry in the Borough. It is hereby declared that the
intent of the Borough Council is that permitted and prohibited uses of
property in the Borough shall be governed by the Borough's Zoning
Ordinance,24 its amendments and supplements.
A. Any street in the Borough at any time or under any circumstances or
conditions;
B. Any public or private ground in the Borough unless the fire is confined
to a safe, approved metal or other noncombustible container or
receptacle or is kept under constant, close observation by an adult
person until the fire is extinguished. Provided, fires in Borough parks
shall be subject to the regulations and restrictions contained in§ 449-13
of this Code.
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 330-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 337-1
1:134
C. Burning in an approved container as provided for in § 337-1B may only
be done sunrise to sunset. The fire shall be completely extinguished
prior to sunset. The approved container shall be 50 feet from any
structure and 25 feet from any fence, line, trees, and bushes, etc.
D. Open burning may only be done with permission of the Fire Chief and
may only be done sunrise to sunset. The fire shall be completely
extinguished prior to sunset. The fire shall be under control and
constantly observed by an adult at all times. Also, open burning
requires appropriate tools, garden hose or pressurized water
extinguishers, minimum of two, on the site at all times.
(1) The open burn pile shall be no larger than five feet in diameter and
five feet in height with a five foot area cleared of all combustible
material. The burn pile shall be 50 feet from any structure and 25
feet from any fence line, trees, bushes, etc.
(2) Special exception for a larger pile may be considered provided
prior approval and arrangements are made before the stacking/
piling of the combustible material is started with the Fire Chief.
(3) All permits shall be requested by and issued to the owner of the
land upon which the open burning is to be kindled.
E. No open burning is permitted at construction sites either for building
materials, trash, trees, brush or any other type of materials. This
restriction also applies to any land clearing operation.
F. Bonfires may be permitted only under the following conditions:
(1) No bonfire shall be kindled on any premises without first having
obtained a permit or other proper authorization from the Fire
Chief. All permits shall be requested by and issued to the owner of
the land upon which the bonfire is to be kindled.
(2) Location restricted. No bonfire shall be kindled or maintained
without prior authorization from the Fire Chief and the location is
100 feet from any structure and adequate provisions are made to
prevent the bonfire from spreading in any direction.
(3) Bonfire material. Fuel for bonfires shall consist of seasoned dry
wood only and shall be ignited with a small quantity of paper only.
Bonfires shall not contain rubbish, garbage, trash, any material
made of or coated with rubber, plastic, leather or petroleum based
material and shall not contain any flammable or combustible
liquids. The allowable quantity of wood to be burned shall be
determined by the Fire Chief and shall be based upon the fire safety
requirements of the situation and the desirable duration of burn.
(4) Attendance at bonfires. The bonfire shall be constantly attended by
a competent person(s) until such fire is extinguished. This
§ 337-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 337-1
1:135
§ 337-2. Restrictions on storage of matter liable to spontaneous
combustion. [Amended 4-6-1988 by Ord. No. 356]
§ 337-3. Care of certain flammable material.
It shall be unlawful for any person making, using, storing or having charge
or control of any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw
or other combustible trash or fragments, to fail, neglect, or refuse at the
close of each day to cause all such material, which is not compactly baled or
stacked in an orderly manner, to be removed from the premises or stored in
a noncombustible receptacle, as prescribed in § 337-2, so as not to obstruct
the free and easy exit from and entrance to any fire escape.
§ 337-4. Restrictions on open storage of combustible containers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store any packing box, barrel or
similar combustible container, except in the open, without obtaining a
permit from the Chief of Collegeville Fire Company No. 1 (who shall be
referred to as the "Fire Chief" in the following sections of this chapter).
Provided, no permit shall be required for the storage within a
manufacturing or similar establishment of sufficient packing cases, boxes or
other similar containers to properly carry on its daily operations. Storage
in the open of packing cases, boxes, barrels and other similar combustible
person(s) shall have fire extinguishing equipment readily available
for use as deemed necessary by the Fire Chief.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit ashes, smouldering coals
or embers, grease or oily substances or other matter liable to
spontaneous combustion, within 10 feet of any wood or plastered wall,
partition, fence, floor, sidewalk, lumber, hay shavings, rubbish or other
combustible material. All combustible rubbish, oily rags or waste
material when kept within a building, shall be stored in approved metal
containers. Storage shall not produce conditions which in the opinion
and judgment of the Fire Chief will tend to create a nuisance or a
hazard to the public health, safety or welfare.
B. All approved metal containers used for storage of combustible
materials shall be covered at all times unless business operations
require it to be open to receive shavings, etc., from a machine. All
general trash containers shall be covered at all times. This includes
dumpsters and trash compactors, and not impede access to any
building or utility shut off.
C. General. Accumulations of wastepaper, wood, hay, straw, weeds, litter
or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind shall not be
permitted to remain upon any roof or in any court yard, vacant lot, alley,
parking lot or open space. All weeds, grass, vines or other growth, when
same endangers property, or is liable to be fired, shall be cut down and
removed by the owner or occupant of the property.
§ 337-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 337-4
1:136
containers shall not be more than 20 feet in heights and shall be at least 50
feet from the nearest building.
§ 337-5. Repair of defective chimneys, furnaces and smokestacks.
Chimneys, furnaces and smokestacks found defective, shall be repaired by
the owner of the property on which they are located, immediately upon
notice from the Fire Chief. The notice shall contain a specific statement of
the danger or hazard, and the recommendation of the changes that shall be
made.
§ 337-6. Authority of Fire Chief. [Amended 4-6-1988 by Ord. No.
356]
§ 337-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or who fails, neglects
or refuses to comply with any order or notice issued under any section of
this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for
not more than 30 days. Provided, each day's violation of any provision of
this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 345
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
A. The Fire Chief shall have full power to enforce all provisions of this
chapter, to identify and approve types of receptacles and containers
mentioned in this chapter, to make inspections; to notify any person of
fire hazards, and to bring complaints against any person failing,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any order or notice issued under
any provision of this chapter.
B. Prohibited fires. The Fire Chief may prohibit any and all fires (open
burning, container burning, bonfires) which are or could be offensive or
objectionable due to smoke or odor emissions when atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. The Fire
Chief or the Police Department shall order the extinguishment by the
person who kindled the fire, the property owner or the Fire Department
of any fire which creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable
situation.
§ 337-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 337-7
1:137

ARTICLE I
Flood Damage Control Regulations
[Adopted 12-4-1996 by Ord. No. 433 (Part 6, Ch. 1, Art. B,
Subarticle 1, of the 1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 345-1. Applicability.
In order to prevent excessive damage to buildings and structures due to
flooding conditions, the following provisions shall apply to all proposed
construction or development occurring in the FP - Floodplain Conservation
District designated in the Borough of Collegeville Zoning Ordinance,25 as
amended, when such construction or development is approved by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 345-2. Residential structures.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least 1 1/2 feet
above the base flood elevation. This elevation is referred to as the
regulatory flood elevation (RFE).
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of more than 50%
of its market value shall be considered a substantial improvement and
shall be elevated to the regulatory flood elevation (RFE).
C. Existing structures located in a designated floodway shall not be
expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion or
enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying stream
improvements.
D. Space below the lowest floor:
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is
prohibited.
(2) Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle,
building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "partially
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 345-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-2
1:139
§ 345-3. Nonresidential structures.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring and outlets will be at least 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary sewage facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
floodproofed to at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation. This is
known as the "regulatory flood elevation (RFE)." The floodproofing
§ 345-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 345-3
1:140
measures shall satisfy the requirements of the W1-W2 classes in the
publication referenced in § 345-14B(2), or an equivalent standard
approved by the Borough. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect which states that the
proposed design and methods of construction are in conformance with
the above referenced standards.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of more than 50% of its
market value shall be considered a substantial improvement and shall
be elevated or floodproofed to the regulatory flood elevation (RFE).
C. Existing structures located in a designated floodway shall not be
expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion or
enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying stream
improvements.
D. Space below the lowest floor:
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is
prohibited.
(2) Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle,
building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "partially
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated to floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
§ 345-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-3
1:141
§ 345-4. Effect of destruction of existing structure. [Amended
12-4-1996 by Ord. No. 436]
§ 345-5. Fill.
If fill is used to raise the finished surface of the lowest floor 1 1/2 feet above
the base flood elevation:
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 600 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring and outlets will be at least 1 1/2 feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc. are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary sewage facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Structures located within the Floodplain Conservation District which
have sustained substantial damage may be rebuilt if destroyed by fire or
other catastrophe provided that the reconstruction shall be in
compliance with the floodproofing, elevation and other requirements of
this article and, if located in the floodway, shall not result in an increase
on the base flood elevation.
B. Substantial damage is defined as the damage from any cause sustained
in a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred, regardless of the
actual repair work performed.
§ 345-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 345-5
1:142
§ 345-6. Placement of buildings and structures.
§ 345-7. Anchoring.
§ 345-8. Floors, walls and ceilings.
Where located at or below the regulatory flood elevation (RFE):
A. Fill shall extend beyond a structure for a sufficient distance to provide
acceptable access. For residential structures, fill shall extend laterally
15 feet beyond the building line from all points. For nonresidential
structures, fill shall be place to provide access acceptable for the
intended use: at-grade access, with fill extending laterally 15 feet
beyond the minimum of 25% of the perimeter of a nonresidential
structure.
B. Fill shall consist of soil or rock materials only.
C. Fill material shall be compacted to provide the necessary stability and
resistance to erosion, scouring or settling.
D. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than one vertical on two horizontal,
unless substantiating data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to
and approved by the Borough.
E. Fill shall be used only to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
A. All buildings and structures shall be constructed and placed on the lot
so as to offer minimum obstruction to the flow of water. In so doing,
consideration shall be given to their effect upon the flow and height of
flood waters.
A. All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or other
movement, thus reducing the threat to life and property and decreasing
the possibility of the blockage of bridge openings and other restricted
sections of the watercourse.
B. All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks located at or below the base
flood elevation shall be firmly anchored in accordance with accepted
engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
A. Wood floorings shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of
the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain, without incurring
structural damage to the building.
B. Plywood shall be a "marine" grade or a water-resistant variety.
C. Walls and ceilings in nonresidential structures shall have sufficient wet
strength and be so installed as to withstand inundation.
§ 345-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-8
1:143
§ 345-9. Electrical systems.
§ 345-10. Plumbing.
§ 345-11. Paints and adhesives.
Where located at or below the regulatory flood elevation (RFE):
§ 345-12. Storage.
No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in time of flooding
could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, shall be stored below the
regulatory flood elevation.
D. Window frames, door frames, door jambs and other components shall
be made of metal or other water-resistant material.
A. All electric water heaters, electric furnaces, electric air conditioning
and ventilating systems, and other electrical equipment or apparatus
shall be permitted only at elevations above the regulatory flood
elevation (RFE).
B. No electrical distribution panels shall be allowed at an elevation less
than three feet above the base flood elevation.
C. Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above. All equipment which would be subject to flooding
shall be protected by ground fault circuits.
A. Water heaters, furnaces and other mechanical equipment or apparatus
shall be permitted only at elevations above the regulatory flood
elevation (RFE).
B. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to preclude the
infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that flood water infiltration
occurs.
C. On-site sewage disposal systems are prohibited in a floodplain.
D. All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems
shall be located, designed, and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damages and infiltration of flood waters.
A. Adhesives shall have a bonding strength that is unaffected by
inundation (i.e., "marine" or water-resistant quality).
B. All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be sealed with
a "marine" or water-resistant quality seal or similar product.
C. Paints or other finishes shall be capable of surviving inundation (i.e.,
"marine" or water-resistant quality).
§ 345-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 345-13
1:144
§ 345-13. Manufactured homes in Floodplain Conservation District.
Where permitted within any floodplain area, all manufactured homes and
any improvements thereto, shall be:
§ 345-14. Relief from strict compliance with requirements.
A. Placed on a permanent foundation.
B. Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is 1 1/2 feet
or more above the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
C. All manufactured homes and any additions thereto shall be anchored to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top
and frame ties to ground anchors in accordance with the following:
(1) Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the
manufactured home, with five additional ties per side at
intermediate locations for units 50 feet or more in length, and four
additional ties per side for units less than 50 feet in length.
(2) Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the manufactured
home with five additional ties per side at intermediate locations for
units 50 feet or more in length and four additional ties per side for
units less than 50 feet in length.
(3) All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds, and resisting a minimum wind
velocity of 90 miles per hour.
D. All manufactured homes and additions to them shall also be elevated in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill or on pilings
so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be at least
1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation.
(2) Adequate surface drainage is provided, as required by the
Collegeville Borough Subdivision and Land Development
regulations, as amended.26
(3) Where pilings are used for elevation, the lots shall be large enough
to permit steps; piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no
more than 10 feet apart; reinforcement shall be provided for piling
that will extend for six feet or more above the ground level.
E. Placement of a manufactured home on a lot shall require a building
permit as required by the building code.27
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 345-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-14
1:145
A. If compliance with the elevation or floodproofing requirements stated in
this article would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective
builder, developer, or landowner, Borough Council may upon request
grant relief from the strict application of the requirements.
B. Relief issued shall conform to the following general guidelines:
(1) Any new residential structure or substantial improvement of a
residential structure which cannot be elevated to 1 1/2 feet above
the base flood elevation shall be elevated to the maximum extent
possible.
(2) Any new nonresidential structures or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure which cannot be elevated or floodproofed
to the required specifications shall be elevated to the maximum
extent possible and floodproofed for the remaining height to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation, or floodproofed to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation. The W1-W2 classes
contained in the publication entitled "Flood Proofing Regulations,"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers,
Publication No. EP 1165 2 314, June, 1972, as amended March
1992, as subsequently amended.
C. Requests for relief from the strict application of the provisions of this
article may be granted by the Borough in accordance with the following
procedures and criteria:
(1) No relief shall be granted for any construction, development, use or
activity within any floodway that would cause an increase in the
base flood elevation.
(2) If granted, relief shall involve only the least modification necessary.
(3) In granting relief, the Borough may attach whatever reasonable
conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to achieve the
objectives of this article.
(4) Whenever relief is granted, the Borough shall notify the applicant
in writing that:
(a) The granting of the relief may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance;
(b) Such relief may increase the risks to life and property.
(5) In reviewing any request for relief, the Borough shall consider, but
not be limited to, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause;
(b) That failure to grant the relief would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant;
§ 345-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 345-14
1:146
(c) That the granting of the relief will not result in any
unacceptable or prohibited increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with any other applicable local or state ordinances and
regulations.
(6) A complete record of all requests for relief and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 345-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-14
1:147

ARTICLE II
Supplemental Provisions and Definitions
[Adopted 12-4-1996 by Ord. No. 436 (Part 6, Ch. 1, Art. B,
Subarticle 2, of the 1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 345-15. Administration.
To ensure that the aforementioned flood damage controls are being
employed in all new construction and improvements within the Floodplain
Conservation District, the Building Inspector shall provide the applicant
information concerning the location of the district boundaries relative to his
proposed construction or improvements and the water surface elevation of
the one-hundred-year flood at the proposed construction site. The source
of the information concerning the district boundary shall be the Flood
Insurance Study for the Borough of Collegeville prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration cited in
§ 680-194A(1) of the Floodplain Conservation District, Collegeville Borough.
The source for the information concerning the base flood elevation shall be
the Flood Insurance Study for those floodplains where this study contains
this information; for other floodplain areas, including the general floodplain
as delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map which accompanies the
Flood Insurance Study, the base flood elevation shall be determined as
specified in the definition of "base flood elevation" in § 345-20.
§ 345-16. Plan requirements.
In addition to the permit application requirements normally required under
the Borough of Collegeville building code,28 as amended, the Borough
Building Inspector shall require the following specific information to be
included as part of the application for a building permit:
A. For structures to be elevated:
(1) A plan showing the size of the proposed structure and its relation to
the lot where it is to be constructed.
(2) A determination of elevations of the existing ground, proposed
finished ground, and lowest floors certified by a registered
professional engineer, surveyor or architect.
(3) Plans showing the method of elevating the proposed structures,
including details of proposed fills, pile structures, retaining walls,
foundations, erosion protection measures, etc. When required by
the Building Inspector, these plans shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer or architect.
(4) Plans showing the methods used to protect utilities (including
sewer, water, telephone, electric, gas, etc.) from flooding to an
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 345-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-16
1:149
§ 345-17. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for construction or development in
the Floodplain Conservation District to be considered for approval shall be
submitted by the Borough Building Inspector to the Montgomery County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a
building permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall
be considered by the Borough Building Inspector for possible incorporation
into the proposed plan.
§ 345-18. Other permit issuance requirements.
Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Borough Building Inspector
shall review the application for a permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits such as those required by state and federal laws have
been obtained, including those required by Act 537, the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act,29 the Pennsylvania Water Obstruction Act of 1913,30
and the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Section
404, 33 U.S.C. § 1334. No permit shall be issued until this determination has
been made.
elevation at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation at the
building site.
B. For structures to be floodproofed:
(1) Plans showing details of all floodproofing measures, prepared by a
registered professional engineer or architect, and showing the size
of the proposed structure and its relation to the lot where it is to be
constructed.
(2) A determination of elevations of existing ground, proposed finished
ground, lowest floors, and floodproofing limits; certified by a
registered professional engineer, surveyor or architect.
(3) A certificate prepared by the registered professional engineer or
architect who prepared the plans in Subsection B(1), above, that
the structures in question, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, is designed so that:
(a) Below an elevation 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation,
the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water.
(b) The structure will withstand the hydrostatic, hydrodynamic
buoyant, impact, and other forces resulting from the flood
depths, velocities, pressures, and other factors associated with
the base flood.
29.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
30.Editor's Note: The Water Obstruction Act of 1913 was repealed October 23, 1979, by P.L.
204, No. 70, § 1(27). For current provisions, see now 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
§ 345-16 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 345-19
1:150
§ 345-19. Start of construction.
For purposes of implementation of these provisions, start of construction
shall be considered as defined in the definition of "start of construction" in
§ 345-20 of this article.
§ 345-20. Definitions.
The following are definitions which shall be used in making reasonable
interpretations of the provisions contained in the flood damage control
regulations:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this and other
ordinances have been prepared; for purposes of this article, the onehundred-
year flood, as referenced in the current Collegeville Borough Flood
Insurance Study, prepared by the Federal Insurance Administration,
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation, as
referenced in the Borough of Collegeville Flood Insurance Study, prepared
by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management
Agency. Within the general floodplain as delineated in the Flood Insurance
Study, the base flood elevation shall be established as described in the
definition of "base flood elevation" in § 680-193B of the Collegeville Borough
Zoning Ordinance, closest to the construction site in question.[Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of manufactured homes.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the
placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation or drilling operations, or the
storage of materials or equipment.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents. Such measures are set forth in
floodproofing regulations published by the Office of the Chief Engineers,
United States Army, publication number EP 1165 2 314 (June, 1972 and as
subsequently amended). Floodproofing measures for all new construction
§ 345-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-20
1:151
and substantial improvements of structures shall satisfy the requirements
of the Completely Dry Spaces (W1) and Essentially Dry Spaces (W2) classes
referenced in these regulations. In said publication where reference is made
to below (or above) the BFD (Base Flood Datum), it shall be interpreted as
meaning below (or above) the base flood elevation.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this article or of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family
dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly,
contained in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which
arrives at a site completed and ready for occupancy except for minor or
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it
may be used with or without a permanent foundation. The term includes
park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other similar vehicles which
are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
NEW CONSTRUCTIONS — Structures for which the start of construction as
herein defined commenced on or after the effective date of this article. This
term does not apply to any work on a structure existing before the effective
date of this article.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 345-20 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 345-20
1:152
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100 or a
one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one year. For the
purposes of this article, the one-hundred-year flood (base flood) as defined
by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management
Agency in the Flood Insurance Study, Collegeville Borough.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on the site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways;
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds,
cabins, manufactured homes, modular homes and other similar items.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, as defined herein, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
§ 345-21. Inspection. [Added 6-4-2003 by Ord. No. 495]
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's contained designation as a historic
structure.
B.
§ 345-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-21
1:153
A. Inspection.
(1) After the date of adoption of this section, before the occupancy of
any real estate that had been previously occupied, an inspection by
the Collegeville-Trappe Joint Public Works Department shall be
held and a duly issued approval shall be required before the
purchaser can occupy the property; except that, as long as the
premises remain under the same ownership, no inspection or
approval shall be required when a single unit in a multifamily
building, or a single room in a rooming house, or a single office or
store in a multi-leased premises, is reoccupied. No inspection is
required if tenancy on any rental unit is changed.
(2) The required inspection shall be made by an employee of the
Collegeville-Trappe Joint Public Works Department, or other
authorized agent of the Public Works Department, upon application
of the former owner, new owner or agent.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the seller to advise prospective
buyers that an inspection and approval by the Collegeville-Trappe
Joint Public Works Department are required before the premises
can be occupied or used.
(4) A fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by
resolution of the Collegeville-Trappe Municipal Authority shall be
required upon the filing of an application for inspection.
B. Conditions of inspection.
(1) The following conditions must be complied with prior to the
approval by the Collegeville-Trappe Municipal Authority:
(a) A representative from the Collegeville-Trappe Joint Public
Works Department shall inspect sump pumps to insure proper
connection and that all surface water is properly directed from
the sump area in a manner approved by the Borough.
(b) Sump pumps and other stormwater control facilities may not
be drained into the sanitary sewer system. All exterior sewer
vents and cleanouts will be inspected and shall be repaired if
found to be deficient.
C. Procedure.
(1) All applications shall be made on a form provided by the Borough of
Collegeville and shall be filed in the Borough office during normal
Borough office business hours.
(2) The Collegeville-Trappe Joint Public Works Department
representative shall conduct the required inspection within 30 days
of the receipt of the application, and shall file findings on a form for
such purpose with the Director of the Collegeville-Trappe Joint
Public Works Department with a copy to the applicant.
§ 345-21 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 345-21
1:154
(3) Occupancy will not be authorized until all of the discrepancies
noted in the inspection report dealing with the sump pump have
been corrected to CTMA standards.
D. Issuance and validity of permit.
(1) After the completion of the required inspection, an applicant shall
have 30 days to take corrective actions to bring the discrepancies
noted on the inspection report into conformance with applicable
Borough ordinances or codes. Reinspection of the corrected
discrepancies may be made within that period without need to file a
new application.
(2) Once approval has been issued, it shall remain valid for the purpose
for a period of 180 days from the date of authorization. Failure to
occupy the residential property within the 180 days will require the
applicant to file for a new inspection.
E. Violations and penalties.
(1) Upon the sale of a any property, it shall be unlawful for any person
or persons to occupy as a dwelling any building, structure or
premises situated within the corporate limits of Collegeville
Borough without having first obtained authorization to do so issued
by the Public Works Department.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale or rent any
residential structure situated within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Collegeville without informing the potential buyer of
the requirement of the Borough of Collegeville for the need for
inspection by the Collegeville-Trappe Joint Public Works
Department and approval being granted by that Department before
the property can be occupied.
(3) Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this inspection and authorization shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs, and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 345-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-21
1:155
Chapter 353
GROUP RESIDENCE FACILITIES
§ 353-1. Conditions for maintaining group residence facilities.
Group residence facilities are permitted in residentially zoned, commercial
and light industrial zoned districts in the Borough when authorized as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, and only when such uses
comply with the conditions listed below.
§ 353-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GROUP RESIDENCE FACILITY — An establishment that provides a home,
including room and board, to persons who are residents by virtue of
receiving supervised specialized services limited to health, social and/or
rehabilitative services that are provided by a governmental agency, their
licensed or certified agents or responsible, nonprofit social service
corporation. These services shall be provided in a family environment and
only to persons who are physically or mentally handicapped, or who are
in need of supervision and specialized services. This category shall not
include persons released from or under the jurisdiction of a government
bureau of corrections or similar institution. The number of residents shall
not exceed eight persons or the occupancy capacity of a dwelling as defined
by the Pennsylvania Department of Human Services, whichever is less.
Supervision shall be provided by responsible adults (professionals) whose
number shall be determined as certified by the supporting agency. One
responsible adult shall be available for the residence on a twenty-four-houra-
day basis.
§ 353-3. Conditions for eligibility for special exception.
All of the following conditions shall be met to be eligible for a special
exception:
A. There shall be twenty-four-hour resident supervision by people
qualified by training and experience in the field for which the group
residence is intended.
B. The use shall be licensed under applicable state programs.
C. Any medical or counselling services provided shall be done so only for
residents.
D. The lot on which a group residence facility is located shall be at least
1,000 feet from the lot on which another group residence facility is
located (such distance shall be measured to the nearest point on the
other lot). This spacing control may be waived or reduced by Council for
facilities established prior to the enactment of this regulation.
§ 345-21 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 353-3
1:156
Chapter 367
INSURANCE AND COST RECOVERY
E. For group residence facilities, one off-street parking space shall be
provided for each employee and one off-street parking space shall be
provided for every four clients.
F. All other applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance,31 building
code,32 fire code,33 and all other applicable Borough and state
ordinances shall be met.
G. All group residence facilities will be available for reasonable
inspections by appropriate Borough officials.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Uniform Construction Codes.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 330, Fire Prevention.
§ 353-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 353-3
1:157

ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 2-3-1993 by Ord. No. 399 (Part 10, Ch. 1, Art. C, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 367-1. Background and findings.
§ 367-2. Designated officer to carry out responsibilities and duties.
The Borough Secretary or such official's designee is hereby appointed as
the designated officer who is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and
duties stated herein.
§ 367-3. Certain fire insurance proceeds transferred to Borough as
security.
A. Whereas, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has enacted Act 98 of
1992 effective on September 7, 1992, amending the Insurance
Company Law of 192134 to provide procedures for the payment of
certain fire loss claims; and
B. Whereas, it is the purpose of said legislation to deter the commission of
arson and related crimes, to discourage the abandonment of property,
and to prevent urban blight and deterioration; and
C. Whereas, the Borough of Collegeville desires to adopt an ordinance
pursuant to Section 508 of the Insurance Company Law of 1921 to
provide for the payment of proceeds from certain fire loss claims to the
municipality.
A. No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the
"insuring agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure
located within the Borough of Collegeville (hereinafter the
"municipality") where the amount recoverable for the fire loss to the
structure under all policies exceeds $5,000, unless the named insured
or insuring agent is furnished by the Municipal Treasurer with a
municipal certificate pursuant to Section 508(B) of Act 98 of 199235 and
unless there is compliance with Section 508(C) and (D) of Act 98 of
199236 and the provisions of this article.
B. Where pursuant to Section 508(D)(1)(I) of Act 98 of 1992, the Municipal
Treasurer issues a certificate indicating that there are no delinquent
taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against real property, the
insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided,
however, that if the loss is agreed upon by the named insured and the
insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability
34.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 341 et seq.
35.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(b).
36.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638(c) and (d).
§ 367-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-3
1:159
on all fire policies covering the building restructure, the following
procedures must be followed:
(1) The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to
the designated officer of the municipality in the aggregate of
$1,000 for each $20,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that
amount of a claim, this section to be applied such that if the claim is
$20,000 or less, the amount transferred to the municipality shall be
$1,000; or
(2) If, at the time of a proof of loss agreed to between the named
insured and the insuring agent, the named insured has submitted a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure, the insuring agency shall
transfer to the municipality from the insurance proceeds the
amount specified in the estimate.
(3) The transfer of proceeds shall be on a prorate basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure.
(4) After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's
signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the
building or other structure, and the designated officer shall return
the amount of the funds transferred to the municipality in excess of
the estimate of the named insured, if the municipality has not
commenced to remove, repair or secure the building or other
structure.
(5) Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the municipality shall
do the following:
(a) The designated officer shall place the proceeds in the separate
fund to be used solely as security against the total costs of
removing, repairing, or securing the building or structure
which are incurred by the municipality. Such costs shall
include, without limitation, any engineering, legal or
administrative costs incurred by the municipality in connection
with such removal, repair or securing of the building or any
proceedings related thereto; and
(b) It is the obligation of the insuring agent when transferring the
proceeds to provide the municipality with the name and
address of the named insured. Upon receipt of the transferred
funds and the names and address of the named insured, the
designated officer shall contact the named insured, certify that
the proceeds have been received by the municipality and notify
the insured that the procedures under this subsection shall be
followed; and
(c) When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with all
§ 367-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 367-3
1:160
§ 367-4. Authority for adoption of implementing procedures and
regulations; fees.
The Borough may by resolution adopt procedures and regulations to
implement Act 98 of 1992 and this article and may by resolution fix
reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities of certificates and
bills, performance of inspections and opening separate fund accounts.
§ 367-5. Violations and penalties.
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insuring agent who
violates this article shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation.
§ 367-6. Severability.
The provisions of this article shall be severable and, if any of the provisions
hereof shall be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions shall
remain in effect.
applicable regulations and orders of the municipality and the
required proof of such completion received by the designated
officer, and if the municipality has not incurred any costs for
repairs, removal or securing, the fund shall be returned to
the named insured. If the municipality has incurred costs for
repairs, removal or securing of the building or other structure,
the cost shall be paid from the fund and if excess funds remain,
the municipality shall transfer the remaining funds to the
named insured; and
(d) To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
municipality pursuant to this section, and not returned to the
named insured, such interest shall belong to the municipality.
To the extent that proceeds are returned to the named insured,
interest earned on such proceeds shall be distributed to the
named insured at the time that the proceeds are returned.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the
municipality to recover any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this
subsection shall be construed to prohibit the municipality and the
named insured from entering into an agreement that permits the
transfer of funds to the named insured of some other reasonable
disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
§ 367-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-6
1:161

ARTICLE II
Emergency Cost Reimbursement
[Adopted 12-7-2005 by Ord. No. 517 (Part 10, Ch. 1, Art. D, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 367-7. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Collegeville Borough Emergency Service
Cost Reimbursement Ordinance."
§ 367-8. Authority, findings, and purpose.
§ 367-9. Recovery of costs.
A. Authority. Under Section 1202 of the Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46202,37
and the Hazardous Material Emergency Planning and Response Act, 35
P.S. § 6022.101 et seq., the Borough has the authority to make rules and
regulations for the government of fire companies located within the
Borough.
B. Findings. The Borough recognizes that the duties of volunteer fire
companies require specialized emergency rescue tools and equipment,
and hazardous abatement materials during emergency responses. The
Borough recognizes that such tools and equipment place a financial
burden on volunteer fire companies, and the replacement of such
materials and specialized training add to the additional financial
burden for volunteer fire companies.
C. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to grant the fire company
operating in Collegeville Borough the authority to seek reimbursement
for the reasonable cost of responding to such incidents, either directly
or in coordination with the Borough's Office of Emergency
Management, as provided below.
A. The Borough authorizes the Fire Department to recover the reasonable
cost of emergency rescue tools, equipment, and materials; hazardous
material abatement tools, equipment, and materials; and incurred
third-party expenses involving any hazardous material, environmental,
fire safety, and/or rescue incident or operation, including vehicular
accidents.
B. The reasonable costs outlined above may be recovered directly by the
Fire Department or through a third-party billing service as an
authorized agent for the collection of such costs.
C. The Fire Department or third-party billing service shall only have the
authority to recover the aforementioned costs from the applicable
insurance company/carrier, or in the case of a self-insured corporate/
partnership entity, from the corporation or partnership.
37.Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1202.
§ 367-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-9
1:163
§ 367-10. Responsibility of Borough.
The Borough shall not be responsible for any aspect of the recovery of costs
under this article. The Borough shall not take any steps to assist the Fire
Department or any third-party billing service in recovery of costs under this
article.
§ 367-11. Revocation of grant of authority.
Any attempt by a Fire Department or third-party billing service to recover
costs from any individual/entity other than the appropriate insurance
company/carrier shall result in the immediate revocation of the authority to
recover such costs granted under this article.
D. The reimbursement rates for the aforementioned tools, equipment, and
materials shall be set by the Fire Department from time to time. These
rates shall be approved by Collegeville Borough Council and shall be
kept on file in the Borough Building.
E. In addition to the aforementioned reasonable costs, the Fire
Department or third-party billing service shall be authorized to collect
reasonable interest, as well as a reasonable administrative fee for
collecting the same, and any and all additional fees as may be
authorized by the Hazardous Material and Emergency Planning and
Response Act38 or authorized by any other statute or law.
38.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6022.101 et seq.
§ 367-9 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 367-11
1:164
Chapter 401
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS AND LIENS
§ 401-1. Appointment.
In addition to the authorization for the collection of taxes and the institution
of tax sales authorized by the Real Estate Tax Sale Law (RETSL), 72 P.S.
§ 5860.101 et seq., the Montgomery County Tax Claim Bureau is hereby
appointed as alternative collector and is authorized and directed to file
liens for existing delinquent real estate taxes with the Prothonotary of
Montgomery County in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Tax Liens Act (MCTLA), 53 P.S. § 7101, et seq.
§ 401-2. Interest.
In accordance with the MCTLA and the RETSL, interest shall be charged on
taxes so returned from and after, but not before, the first day of the month
following the return. Interest shall be charged at the rate of 9% per annum.
§ 401-3. Charges and attorney's fees.
Pursuant to Section 7106 of the MCTLA,39 it is hereby established that
the reasonable charges, expenses and fees incurred in the collection of
any delinquent account under the MCTLA are hereby fixed at 5% of the
total amount of the delinquent taxes (including interest and penalties),
and that additional reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the collection
of any delinquent taxes shall be fixed at 1% of the total amount of the
delinquent taxes (including interest and penalties), and that said charges
for attorney's fees and for all charges, expenses and fees set forth herein,
shall be paid to the County of Montgomery through the Montgomery County
Tax Claim Bureau in lieu of payment of commission pursuant to Section 207
of RETSL.40
§ 401-4. Additional action authorized.
The Borough Manager of the Borough of Collegeville is hereby authorized
and empowered to take such additional action as may be deemed necessary
or appropriate to implement this chapter.
§ 401-5. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any section, sentence,
clause, part or provision hereof shall be held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections, sentences, clauses,
parts or provisions of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intent of
39.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7106.
40.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5860.207.
§ 367-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 401-5
1:165
the Council that this chapter would have been adopted even if such illegal,
invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part or provision had
not been included herein.
Chapter 419
NEWS DISPENSING BOXES AND KIOSKS
§ 419-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISPENSER DEVICES — Are those mechanical devices utilized to dispense
newspapers, pamphlets, leaflets, magazines, advertisements, guides,
publications, and other printed information and media, but do not require
the payment of money and are generally distributed free of charge and
available to the public without cost.
HONOR BOXES — Are those coin/cash operated mechanical devices utilized
to dispense newspapers, pamphlets, leaflets, magazines, advertisements,
guides, publications, and other similar printed information and media, and
involve or require the payment of money in exchange for the materials.
KIOSKS — Are those devices or structures utilized to dispense information,
newspapers, pamphlets, leaflets, magazines, advertisements, guides,
publications, forms and other printed media, they may either be for free,
without cost, or dispensed for a fee.
§ 419-2. License and registration required; applicability.
§ 419-3. Requirements and fees.
The Council of the Borough of Collegeville shall determine the registration
requirements, the imposition of any fees, and the standards and conditions
for granting of licenses by appropriate Council resolution as needed from
time to time. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, entity, business,
distributor, or agent, after having been granted a license, to violate or
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, entity, business, distributor
or agent, to place, locate, operate or maintain any honor box, kiosk, or
dispenser devices for newspapers, pamphlets, leaflets, magazines, or
other similar printed material on public property and in the public
right-of-way, including all public sidewalks and areas adjoining such
sidewalks without having first obtained the appropriate licenses and
registration approvals from the Borough of Collegeville and pursuant to
the provisions of this article.
B. This article shall not apply to honor boxes, kiosks, or dispenser devices
located on private commercial property and not in the public right-ofway
or on Borough property.
§ 401-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 419-3
1:166
disregard the Borough's regulations and rules regarding honor boxes,
kiosks, and dispenser devices.41
§ 419-4. Administration.
The administration of the registration and licensing program and
enforcement thereof shall be under the direct supervision and control of the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer and/or Borough Manager. All appeals
as to the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Borough
Manager in granting or refusing to grant a license, or in the revocation of a
license, shall be to the Council of the Borough of Collegeville and pursuant
to the rules and regulations enacted by Council from time to time.
§ 419-5. Litter and vandalism.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, tamper, destroy,
damage, vandalize, or move any honor box, kiosk or dispenser device from
its proper location if said box or device has been validly licensed by the
Borough. It shall further be unlawful for any person to cause the dumping
or littering of materials contained in the boxes and devices onto the public
areas and rights-of-way, including streets and sidewalks in the Borough.
§ 419-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, as defined in this article, or any officer, agent, servant, or
employee thereof, who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with any of
the terms or provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before
a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine or penalty of up to
$1,000 and costs of prosecution for such offense.
Chapter 427
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 495. Weeds and other vegetation — See Ch. 667.
§ 427-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-3-2003 by Ord. No. 497; 9-6-2006
by Ord. No. 521]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NUISANCE — Any use of property within the Borough, or any condition
upon property within the Borough that, other than infrequently, causes,
tends to cause or results in annoyance or discomfort to persons beyond the
41.Editor's Note: Said regulations and rules (Exhibit A) are included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 419-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-1
1:167
boundaries of that property, interference with the health and/or safety of
persons beyond the boundaries of that property or of persons who might
reasonably be expected to enter upon or be in that property, substantial
diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which
such premises are located, and/or disturbance to or interference with the
peaceful use of the property of others within the Borough, in any case
taking into consideration the location of the use or condition and the
nature and condition of the surrounding neighborhood. Specifically, the
word "nuisance" shall include but shall not be limited to the following:
Loud playing of radios, television sets, jukeboxes, amplifiers and other
sound devices so as to be heard beyond the premises from which the
sound emanates;
A.
Keeping or harboring any dog or animal or fowl which, by creation of
odor or by frequent howling or barking or other noise, particularly by
barking after 10:00 p.m. or before 6:00 a.m., annoys or disturbs the
neighborhood or a number of persons;
B.
Maintaining or permitting the maintenance of any of the following
dangerous conditions, structures or premises:
(1) Open wells or cisterns.
(2) Open excavations.
(3) Unfinished buildings, foundations or other structures.
(4) Dangerous placement of materials or equipment.
(5) Lakes, ponds or swimming pools not property safeguarded.
Stagnant water in pools in which mosquitoes, flies or insects
multiply.
(6)
C.
The commencement of construction work, the collection of trash and/
or recyclable items and the commencing of landscape work (including
but not limited to residential lawn mowing) shall not commence prior to
6:00 a.m. on weekdays (Monday through Friday) and before 8:00 a.m.
on weekends (Saturdays and/or Sundays) and holidays (to be named by
Borough resolution).
D.
Carrying on construction work in such a manner that dirt is carried by
wind onto adjacent properties or that mud is tracked or drained into
streets adjacent to the project.
E.
Washing, tracking or otherwise depositing dirt, mud, soil, stone or
debris upon or onto the pavement of any street, without removing
the material before 5:00 p.m. of the day on which the material was
deposited.
F.
Using any property or operating any business or other activity so
as to permit or cause smoke, soot, cinders, fly ash, dust, mud, dirt,
G.
§ 427-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 427-1
1:168
§ 427-2. Unlawful to create and maintain nuisance. [Amended
3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 391]
It shall be unlawful for any purpose to create a nuisance as defined in
§ 427-1 or to maintain said nuisance after receiving notice to remove or
abate the nuisance, as provided in § 427-3.
§ 427-3. Removal or abatement of nuisances.
Any person who creates, continues, causes, maintains or permits to exist
any nuisance at any place within the Borough shall, within 10 days after
notice from Council to do so, remove or abate that nuisance. If that person
fails, neglects or refuses to abate the nuisance within the time limit, Council
shall have authority, in person or by its agents and/or employees, to remove
or abate the nuisance, and, in so doing, shall have authority to enter upon
the property of the person in default. Thereupon, Council shall collect the
cost and expense of the abatement or removal from the person who created,
continued, caused or maintained the nuisance and/or permitted it to exist,
that person having failed, neglected or refused to remove or abate the
nuisance, with an additional amount of 10%, in the manner provided for the
collection of municipal claims, or by an action in assumpsit. Provided, the
cost and expense may be in addition to any penalty imposed under § 427-4.
§ 427-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, for every such
violation, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty prescribed in § 1-2.
acid, noxious or offensive fumes, gases or odors to be carried off
the premises, or to cause any water to become polluted by sewage,
industrial wastes, acid or other substance, or to cause a glare from
lights, or noise of such character as to cause annoyance to residents or
interference with the normal use of adjacent properties.
Creation or maintenance of attractive nuisances, which is the leaving
of a dangerous instrumentality which by its character is dangerous and
attractive to children and in a place frequented by children.
H.
Maintaining or causing to be maintained upon any unenclosed porch
or the exterior of any premises, adjoining a public thoroughfare,
appliances or household furnishings, as defined in Sections 5-2002(2)
and 5-2002(5) of the Code of Ordinances of the Borough of
Collegeville,42 but excluding furniture or appliances designed for
exterior use.
I.
42.Editor's Note: Original Sections 5-2001 through 5-2004 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances
were superseded by Ord. No. 552 and no longer exist in the Code. See now Ch. 495,
Property Maintenance, Art. II.
§ 427-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-5
1:169
§ 427-5. Remedies not exclusive.
This chapter shall not be construed to be the sole means for abatement
of nuisances within the Borough, and nothing shall preclude any person
from proceeding individually or with other injured persons to effect the
abatement of a private nuisance. Furthermore, in the exercise of the powers
conferred in this chapter, the Borough may institute proceedings in equity.
Chapter 449
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 449-1. Passive recreation and open space areas designated.
The Karn property located on Ninth Avenue to the Borough line, between
Route 29 and the Perkiomen Creek, and the Mill property and dam located
on the east side of Route 29, including the dam and 1,740 feet by irregular
on the Lower Providence side of the creek, have been designated as passive
recreation and open space for use by the citizens of Collegeville.
§ 449-2. Active recreation areas designated.
The ballpark and playground, located on Park Avenue between Third and
Fourth Avenues, and the Scout Cabin, located on Clamer Avenue, have been
designated as active recreation areas.
§ 449-3. Opening and closing times; prohibited acts when
recreation and open space areas closed. [Amended 12-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 384]
A. Passive recreation. The passive recreation areas designated in § 449-1
are open throughout the year to all Borough residents and their guests,
when accompanied by Borough residents. They are open between 7:00
a.m. and darkness.
B. Active recreation. The active recreation area is open throughout the
year to all Borough residents and their guests when accompanied by
Borough residents. The ballpark and playground are open between 7:00
a.m. and 9:30 p.m. Areas within the ballpark and playground which
receive lighting from within the park will be considered to be open
while the lights are on.
C. No person shall be within the passive recreation and open spaces or
active recreation areas between the time of darkness or the time when
the lights are extinguished at 9:30 p.m. and until 7:00 a.m. except
during fishing and hunting seasons, when licensed individuals for those
purposes will be permitted in passive recreation areas. Parking along
the park property on Fourth Avenue after 9:30 p.m. is prohibited, and
persons so illegally parked shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in
§ 640-26.
§ 427-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 449-3
1:170
§ 449-4. Unlawful to injure or tamper with property.
No person shall damage, injure, deface, remove, cut or change any of the
trees, plants, shrubs, turf, building structures or fixtures therein, or any
property of the Borough located within the park areas.
§ 449-5. Unlawful to remove Borough property.
No person shall remove any Borough property from the Borough parks.
§ 449-6. Annoying, immoral and indecent conduct, and obscene
language prohibited.
No conduct shall be permitted within any park which causes annoyance to
any other person, nor shall obscene language be used, nor shall conduct of
any immoral or indecent nature be permitted.
§ 449-7. Unlawful to sell within park area without consent.
No person shall sell, or set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any
article within the limits of any of the park areas without the consent of
the Borough Park and Recreation Committee, which shall have authority to
refuse such consent in any instance.
§ 449-8. Waste disposal.
No person shall dispose of any waste or garbage in the park lands, except in
a receptacle designated for the respective purposes; and, all persons using
any of the park areas shall dispose of all waste and garbage left in proper
receptacles.
§ 449-9. Unlawful to tamper with posted notices or to post unofficial
signs or notices.
No person shall injure, deface or destroy any notice, rule or regulation,
posted any place within the park area, nor shall any person post any place
within such park lands any notice or placard other than official signs and
notices posted by and under the authority of the Park and Recreation
Committee or Borough Council.
§ 449-10. Unlawful to bring any alcoholic beverage or drug into
park area.
No person shall bring any alcoholic beverage or any drug to any of the park
areas either for his own use, or for the use of any other person.
D. Darkness shall be specifically defined to mean 1/2 hour after sunset and
1/2 hour before sun-up during the prevailing time legally established
and in effect under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 449-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 449-11
1:171
§ 449-11. Hunting prohibited in Borough parks. [Amended
4-21-1997 by Ord. No. 440; 1-5-1998 by Ord. No. 446]
No person shall hunt (or do any form of hunting) with any instrument used
therefor within the boundaries of any Borough park, it being the intent of
the Borough to create in the public parks conditions favorable to birds, bird
life, and animals for the benefit and enjoyment of the public to whom the
parks will be open.
§ 449-12. Restrictions on motor vehicles and motor-powered
vehicles.
§ 449-13. Restrictions on lighting fires.
No fires shall be made, tended or maintained within any park area, except
that authorized scouting groups may light fires in park areas during scout
merit badge training programs after having received a permit from Borough
Council.
§ 449-14. Gambling prohibited in park areas.
Gambling of any kind is not permitted within any park area.
§ 449-15. Camping prohibited in park areas.
No camping shall be permitted in the park area.
§ 449-16. Restraint of pets.
Pets must be on a leash which shall measure less than six feet in length, and
such pets must not be permitted to annoy any person or other animal within
a park area.
§ 449-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter (except for the parking
prohibitions in § 449-3C) shall, upon conviction by a Magisterial District
Judge, within the magisterial district of which the Borough is a part, pay
a fine of not more than $600, and upon default in the payment of the fine
and costs of prosecution, be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of not
more than 10 days.
A. No person shall operate any motor-powered vehicle within any of the
park lands except as required by an emergency. Minibikes, motorbikes,
go-carts, snowmobiles, or any other like vehicle propelled by gasoline
internal combustion engine or propelled by any other kind of fuel are
expressly prohibited in park areas.
B. Motor vehicles will be permitted within the park lands for firefighting
purposes as well as for diving training purposes.
§ 449-11 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 449-17
1:172
Chapter 461
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING; TRANSIENT VENDORS
§ 461-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm,
organization or corporation.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — Includes the following five separate
classifications:
SOLICITING — The seeking or taking of contracts or orders for
any goods, wares, services or merchandise for future delivery; the
seeking or taking of subscriptions or contributions on any of the
streets or sidewalks or from house to house or by visitation to
private residences or by entering in or upon private property within
the Borough of Collegeville; or the seeking or taking of contracts
or orders for home or other building repairs, improvements and
alterations, including orders or contracts for any mechanical,
electrical, plumbing or heating device or equipment for house or
other building improvements or repairs, upon or from the places
aforesaid within the Borough.
(1)
PEDDLING — The selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares,
services and/or merchandise, including but not limited to flowers,
shrubs and shrubbery, farm products and produce, for immediate
delivery, which the person selling or offering for sale carries with
him/her in traveling or has in his/her possession or control upon
any of the streets or sidewalks or from house to house or by
visitation to private residences or by entering in or upon private
property within the Borough.
(2)
DISTRIBUTION OF ADVERTISING MATERIALS — The distribution
of advertising materials for any goods, wares, services or
merchandise on public or private property shall be subject to the
regulations and requirements specified under this chapter
pertaining to peddling and soliciting.
(3)
TRANSIENT VENDOR — A person who is engaged in the selling or
offering for sale of any goods, wares, services and/or merchandise,
including but not limited to flowers, shrubs and shrubbery, farm
products and produce for immediate delivery or taking orders for
sale for future delivery, at any fixed outdoor location, on a seasonal
or temporary basis, not in conjunction with and operating
simultaneously with a Borough-authorized special event within the
limits of private property with the permission of the property
owner, provided that the use of such private property complies
with the provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the
(4)
§ 449-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 461-1
1:173
§ 461-2. Permit required.
No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the Borough
of Collegeville without first having obtained a permit as herein provided.
§ 461-3. Permit application.
Collegeville Borough Zoning Ordinance.43 Unless otherwise
specified in this chapter, transient vendors shall be subject to
the regulations and requirements pertaining to transient retail
businesses as set forth in this chapter. [Added 11-6-2013 by Ord.
No. 560]
SPECIAL EVENTS VENDOR — A person who is engaged in the
selling or offering for sale of any goods, wares, services and/or
merchandise, including but not limited to flowers, shrubs and
shrubbery, farm products and produce for immediate delivery or
taking orders for future delivery, at any fixed outdoor location in
conjunction with and operating simultaneously with a Boroughauthorized
special event, such as but not limited to a car show,
parade, farmer's market, race, benefit, block party or other
Borough-authorized special event. [Added 11-6-2013 by Ord. No.
560]
(5)
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. Every person desiring to engage in soliciting or peddling and the
distribution of advertising material upon private property in the
Borough of Collegeville shall first make application to the Collegeville
Police Department, 491 East Main Street, Collegeville, Pennsylvania,
for a permit. If such person shall also be required to obtain a permit
from any commonwealth or county officer, he/she shall, on making such
application, exhibit a valid commonwealth and/or county permit. Said
application shall be upon a form provided by the Collegeville Police
Department and shall contain at least the following information verified
by oath or affirmation:
(1) The full name of the applicant and local address, if any.
(2) Permanent address.
(3) The address at which the applicant will receive notices under this
chapter.
(4) The name of the employer or other persons with whom the
applicant is affiliated or a statement that such applicant is selfemployed
and/or is not affiliated with any other individuals in
engaging in the activity for which a permit is being sought.
[Amended 11-6-2013 by Ord. No. 560]
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 461-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 461-3
1:174
§ 461-4. Permanent locations prohibited.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to allow peddling or soliciting at
a permanent location in the Borough for the purpose of more than one sale
at one location.
§ 461-5. Fees.
No permit shall be issued under this chapter until the fee, if applicable,
is paid to Collegeville Borough for transmittal to the Borough Treasurer
for the general use of the Borough. All fees shall be set by resolution of
the Borough Council from time to time. A separate permit fee shall be
paid by each individual who shall actually conduct soliciting or peddling in
(5) The nature of the goods, wares, services or merchandise involved
or other purpose for the permit.
(6) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of a crime, and if the answer is in the affirmative, the
nature of the crime and punishment imposed therefor.
(7) The type of vehicle to be used, if any.
(8) The applicant shall also submit a photograph of himself, provided
that where a person makes application for himself and one or more
helpers, the applicable personal information specified above shall
be given for each helper and verified by oath or affirmation by him/
her, and an individual permit shall be required for each helper. No
permit under this chapter shall be transferable from one person to
another.
(9) Dates and locations within the Borough where peddling or
soliciting activities are to take place. If a person is making
application on behalf of a political, charitable, religious or taxexempt
organization, for one or more other individuals within the
organization, names shall be provided for each day that activities
are to take place. Should the names or dates change after the
application is filed, those changes shall be provided before any
activities take place.
B. Placement of materials.
(1) No advertising materials shall be placed by any person, whether
permitted under this chapter or not, upon any parked motor vehicle
within the Borough in the interest of preventing the accumulation
of litter upon private and public properties within the Borough.
(2) No advertising materials shall be thrown, dropped, placed, posted,
deposited or caused to be thrown, dropped, placed, posted or
deposited upon any of the streets, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds,
parking lots or other public properties within the Borough.
§ 461-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 461-5
1:175
the situation where a principal or employer desires to secure permits for
agents, employees or servants.
§ 461-6. Permit duration and renewal fee. [Amended 11-6-2013 by
Ord. No. 560]
Any permit issued for the purpose of engaging in soliciting, peddling and
distribution of advertising material shall be valid and remain in force and
effect for a period of 30 days after issuance. Any permit issued to a transient
vendor shall be valid and remain in force and effect for a period of two
weeks after issuance. A permit may be renewed at expiration only one
time by the permittee by the payment of an additional permit fee as set
by resolution of the Borough Council from time to time. At the time of any
said permit renewal, the permittee shall file an amendment to the original
application to reflect any changes necessary in the information therein
contained. There shall be no more than two permits or one permit and one
renewal per calendar year, per applicant. A permit may be renewed no more
than one time.
§ 461-7. Suspension or revocation of permit.
Any permit issued for the purpose of engaging in soliciting and peddling
may be denied, suspended or revoked at any time upon proof that:
§ 461-8. Time for granting or denying permits.
Any application for a permit made to the Collegeville Police Department
shall be granted or denied within 72 hours.
§ 461-9. Rules of conduct. [Amended 11-6-2013 by Ord. No. 560]
Any person to whom a permit has been issued hereunder shall comply with
the following rules of conduct:
A. The application for the permit contains false information;
B. The permittee has been convicted of a crime of fraud or a felony or a
crime involving moral turpitude; or
C. The permittee has failed to comply with any rules of conduct prescribed
in this chapter.
A. The permittee shall have in his/her possession at all times the permit
issued to him/her and shall exhibit it upon request.
B. A permittee shall not engage in soliciting or peddling involving a
product or service not set forth in the permit application.
C. The permittee shall not allow any other person or individual to have
possession of the permit issued to him/her and shall immediately report
the loss of any permit to the Borough.
D. The permittee shall not permit the permit to be altered or defaced.
§ 461-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 461-9
1:176
§ 461-10. Permit exemptions.
E. Any permittee engaged in soliciting or peddling shall do so only
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day of the week.
F. No permittee shall park any vehicle upon any street, alley or roadway
within the Borough for a period of time longer than is reasonably
necessary to sell therefrom to persons residing in the immediate
vicinity.
G. No permittee shall enter or attempt to enter any dwelling or residence
without invitation or permission of the occupant, and the permittee
shall immediately leave any premises upon request.
H. No permittee shall represent that the permit issued to him/her is in any
way an endorsement by Collegeville Borough of the permittee or the
goods or services which he/she sells, solicits or peddles.
I. Under no circumstances may a person peddling or soliciting do so
within any highway or highway right-of-way within the Borough of
Collegeville.
J. All notices posted in accordance with § 461-11 shall be strictly obeyed.
K. All permittees shall wear a visible tag or otherwise display the name of
the organization for which they are soliciting or peddling and their
name, the tag to be displayed on the left lapel or chest and the tag to be
secured from the Collegeville Police Department.
L. All advertising materials distributed by a permittee upon private
property shall be securely placed on a porch or doorway (without the
use of tape, tacks or nails or other materials which could damage
property) so that the materials will not be carried from the building or
residence by the elements.
M. Transient vendors shall be permitted to conduct business only in those
zoning districts in the Borough of Collegeville which permit retail
sales.44 Additional conditions may be attached to permits issued to
transient vendors at the discretion of the Borough for the protection of
the public health, safety and welfare.
A. The following persons shall be exempt from the obligation to apply for
and receive a permit as otherwise required by this chapter:
(1) Persons, groups, their employees, agents and representatives who
engage in door-to-door soliciting and/or peddling on behalf of
nonprofit and/or exempt organizations and causes that are in
compliance with the provisions set forth by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of State, Bureau of Charitable
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 461-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 461-10
1:177
§ 461-11. Notice regulating soliciting or peddling.
Any Borough resident or person desiring to limit or protect his/her privacy
in regards to door-to-door soliciting or peddling may do so by complying
with the following requirements:
Organizations, are exempt from the requirement to obtain a permit
and to pay any fee to peddle or solicit.
(2) Persons operating a roadside stand for the sale of farm products,
foodstuffs and produce by the producers or growers of such items
or for the taking of orders for the sale of such farm products,
foodstuffs and produce grown or produced on their own land in the
Collegeville Borough. The Borough Council of the Borough of
Collegeville may establish from time to time by resolution, rules
and regulations for the sale of farm products, foodstuffs and
produce at a roadside stand for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. [Amended 11-6-2013 by Ord. No. 560]
(3) Persons who have prior invitation of the property owner to come
upon their property for the purpose of seeking or taking orders by
any manufacturer, producer or distributor for the sale of bread and
bakery products, meat and meat products or milk and milk
products as part of an established and recognized delivery route.
(4) Persons taking orders for merchandise from dealers, merchants or
manufacturers at their regular place of business and for business
use.
(5) Special events vendors operating a stand or vendor booth who are
duly registered vendors in conjunction with and during the hours
specified and approved by the Borough of Collegeville for the
purpose of operating and promoting a special event, such as but
not limited to a car show, parade, farmer's market, race, benefit,
block party or other duly authorized special event in the Borough of
Collegeville at the time, location and in the manner prescribed by
the Borough of Collegeville. The Borough Council of the Borough of
Collegeville may establish from time to time by resolution, rules
and regulations for the sale of farm products, foodstuffs, produce
and any other goods or wares sold by a special events vendor for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. [Added
11-6-2013 by Ord. No. 560]
B. All persons, groups, their employees, agents and representatives who
engage in door-to-door soliciting and/or peddling on behalf of nonprofit
and/or exempt organizations and causes are required to provide proof
of their nonprofit and/or exemption if requested by the Borough.
A. Notice of the determination by any occupant of any residence within the
Borough of a refusal of invitation to solicitors or peddlers shall be given
by notice posted on the premises in one of the two following manners:
§ 461-10 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 461-11
1:178
§ 461-12. Violations and penalties.
(1) NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS.
(2) NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS AFTER _____ P.M.
B. Any occupant desiring to limit solicitation or peddling to hours earlier
than the 9:00 p.m. limit set forth under Subsection E shall do so by
entering the appropriate time within the notice authorized under
Subsection A(2) hereinabove.
C. The letters utilized in the notice shall be at least one-inch in height. For
the purpose of uniformity, the notice cards shall be provided by the
Borough to persons requesting them at the cost thereof.
D. Such notice so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor or peddler of the determination by the occupant of the
residence of the information contained thereon.
E. It shall be the duty of every solicitor or peddler, upon going onto any
premises in the Borough on which a residence is located, to examine
and look for the notice provided for in Subsection A above, if any is
posted, and be governed by the statement contained on the notice. If
the notice states NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS, then the solicitor or
peddler shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. If
the notice states NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS AFTER _____ P.M.,
then the solicitor or peddler shall immediately and peacefully depart
from the premises if the time of day is after that indicated in the notice.
F. In any residential development where there exists a lawfully constituted
homeowners' association whose membership consists of all owners of
dwelling units within the development, it shall be lawful for the
association, upon the consent of a majority of its members, to post the
notice authorized under Subsection A hereinabove upon signs posted
conspicuously at all entrances to the development, subject to the sign
requirements of Article XXIII, Zoning,45 in lieu of posting of notices at
each residence. It shall be the duty of every solicitor or peddler, upon
entering a development, to examine and look for such notice at the
entrance thereto and be governed accordingly as set forth under
Subsection E hereinabove.
G. It shall be a violation of this chapter if any solicitor or peddler refuses to
comply with any notice so posted in accordance with this chapter.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Collegeville
Police Department who shall have the power to determine in each
instance whether a violation has occurred. Any person who shall violate
or permit the violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction of a summary offense before a Magisterial District Judge, be
sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $1,000 per violation with costs of
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning, Art. XXIII, Signs.
§ 461-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 461-12
1:179
Chapter 472
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 345.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
600.
Water — See Ch. 659.
Zoning — See Ch. 680.
prosecution and, in default of the payment of such fine and costs, be
sentenced to undergo imprisonment to the extent allowed by law for
the punishment of summary criminal offenses. A separate offense under
this chapter shall be deemed to occur for each day or portion thereof
in which a violation is found to exist or for each section of this chapter
which is found to have been violated. All fines and penalties collected
for the violation of this chapter shall be paid to the Borough Treasurer.
B. In addition to the penalty provisions hereinabove, the Borough
Manager or his/her designee may institute proceedings in equity to
compel compliance with this chapter.
§ 461-12 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 461-12
1:180
ARTICLE I
Water Conservation Requirements for Plumbing Fixtures
[Adopted 11-7-1984 by Ord. No. 325 (Part 6, Ch. 1, Art. D, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 472-1. Declaration of legislative intent.
The purpose of this article is to protect threatened ground water supplies to
ensure the continued availability and service of water to Borough residents,
and to minimize the treatment loads of on-site sewage treatment systems
and existing or proposed sewage treatment plants.
§ 472-2. Legal authority for enactment.
This article is ordained pursuant to Section 1102(24) of the Borough Code
(Act of February 1, 1966) (1965 P.L. 1656 No. 581, as amended).46
§ 472-3. Applicability.
No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any building which
is constructed or remodeled, and:
§ 472-4. Specifications. [Amended 7-1-1992 by Ord. No. 395]
Buildings or structures which are subject to the application of this article
shall be bound by the following specifications:
A. In which plumbing, water piping or water fixtures are to be installed,
extended or altered in any way; and
B. For which a building permit is required to be obtained from the
Borough (or would be required but for an exemption from a permit
requirement for public or governmental agencies), unless the new,
extended or altered plumbing, water piping and other water -using
fixtures therein conform to the requirements and standards of § 472-4.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any building or similar
structure of any kind, regardless of whether its intended use is
residential, commercial, office, industrial, agricultural, recreational,
institutional, governmental or other, on or after the date of adoption of
this article. Each resident or property owner of the Borough not subject
to the application of this article is encouraged to install fixtures which
will reduce the quantity of water required to flush toilets and to reduce
the flow rates of showers and faucets by employing the measures and
observing the standards set forth in § 472-4.
A. Water closets operated by flush tanks. Water closet water consumption
shall not exceed an average of 1.6 gallons per flushing cycle when
tested in accordance with the hydraulic performance requirements of
ANSI A112.19.2M and ANSI A112.19.6M.
46.Editor's Note: See now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 32A01 et seq.
§ 472-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-4
1:181
B. Water closets and urinals operated by flushometers:
(1) Water closet water consumption shall not exceed an average of 1.6
gallons per flushing cycle when tested in accordance with the
hydraulic performance requirements of ANSI A112.19.2M and
ANSI A112.19.6M.
(2) Urinal water consumption shall not exceed an average of 1.0
gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
psig, or a maximum of 1.5 gallons per flush cycle at any one test
pressure. The flushometer shall be adjusted according to
manufacturer's specifications. The fixture shall perform in
accordance with the flushing test requirements cited in the ANSI
112.19.2, Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures standard.
C. Shower heads. Shower head discharge rates shall not exceed 2.75
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
psig. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements
cited in the ANSI 112.18.1, Finished Rough Brass Plumbing Fixture
Fittings standard.
D. Sink faucets.
(1) Kitchen and utility sink faucet discharge rates shall not exceed 2.78
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20
to 80 psig. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test
requirements cited in the ANSI 112.18.1, Finished Rough Brass
Plumbing Fixture Fittings standard.
(2) Residential lavatory sink faucet discharge rates shall not exceed
2.75 gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures
from 20 to 80 psig. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the
test requirements cited in the ANSI 112.18.1, Finished Rough
Brass Plumbing Fixture Fittings standard.
(3) Nonresidential lavatory faucets shall be metering faucets.
Metering faucets shall be field adjusted and set so that the
discharge quantity shall not exceed 0.5 gallons of water per cycle.
E. Blowout toilets and urinals. Replacement of blowout toilet and urinal
fixtures with like type fixtures may be granted by the Building Inspector
upon request (as specified in § 472-6) where adequate justification of
special need is provided.
F. Pressure reducing valve. Where the service water pressure to a
building is expected to exceed 60 psig, a water pressure reading valve
with strainer shall be installed just down stream of the building's main
valve, so as to be accessible. The valve shall provide for pressure
adjustments within the range of 50 to 60 psi. The valve shall conform to
the requirements of product standard ASSE 1003. Exemptions to this
article are service lines to sill cocks, outside hydrants and main supply
§ 472-4 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 472-4
1:182
§ 472-5. Prevention of waste of water discharged from outside
hoses.
Outside hoses shall have an automatic shut-off nozzle so as not to permit
water to run to waste in a gutter or other impervious surface.47
§ 472-6. Exceptions.
Any person may apply to the Borough for an exception to the terms of this
article, which exception may be granted at the discretion of the Building
Inspector upon proof that some device, system, or procedure will save as
much or more water as those set forth in this article or that those set forth
in this article cannot be complied with, without undue hardship.
§ 472-7. Modifications.
Council may, from time to time, modify, add to or remove from the standards
and regulations in this article.
§ 472-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any person who uses or applies water contrary to or in violation of any of
the restrictions contained in this article shall be guilty of an offense, and
for every such offense, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $1,000 and costs. Provided, each day on which a violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
risers to buildings where pressure from the mains does not exceed 60
psi as the fixture branches or at individual fixtures.
47.Editor's Note: Original Section 6-1156, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 5-16-1990 by Ord. No. 374.
§ 472-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-8
1:183

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 2-4-1998 by Ord. No. 447 (Part 6, Ch. 1, Art. C, of the 1985
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 472-9. Adoption of standards.
A. International Plumbing Code. For the purposes of regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection,
installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
additions to, use or maintenance of all plumbing systems in the
Borough of Collegeville; governing certain conditions hazardous to
health, life and property by reason thereof; relating to water supply and
distribution, sewage and sewage disposal and drains (including storm
drains and similar and related items); providing for administrative,
procedural, organizational, and enforcement matters; and providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, the Borough
adopts the 1997 Edition of the International Plumbing Code, published
by the International Code Council, Inc., the Building Officials and Code
Administrators International, Inc., the International Conference of
Building Officials, and the Southern Building Code Congress
International, Inc. Copies of that code have been placed on file with the
Borough Secretary, and will remain on file with her. That entire
plumbing code, as affected by the deletion, amendment or modification
of certain portions of that code in the following sections of this article,
is adopted, and is incorporated herein as fully as if set out verbatim in
this article and, from the date on which this article takes effect, the
provisions of that plumbing code, as so amended, shall be in effect
within the limits of the Borough of Collegeville. In this article, the said
International Plumbing Code may be referred to as "the code" or "this
code."
B. Amendments and changes in the published Plumbing Code. All
amendments, changes, additions and deletions in the published 1997
Edition of the said International Plumbing Code referred to in
Subsection A of this section, as made by the publishers of the code and
transmitted to the Borough prior to the publication of a new edition of
the code, shall be considered as part of this article and effective in the
Borough, provided that copies of the publishers' changes and
modifications are kept on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
preferably with notations of those changes made by the Plumbing
Official of the Borough in the proper and pertinent places in the file
copies of the published plumbing code referred to in Subsection A of
this section. When any complete new edition of the published code
becomes available to the Borough in place of the 1997 or later edition,
that newer edition may be adopted by the Borough in place of the
edition then current, either by a new ordinance or by an amendment of
this article, serving to adopt the new edition and to make necessary or
desired changes in material contained in § 472-10.
§ 472-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-10
1:185
§ 472-10. Amendments and modifications. [Amended 5-3-2001 by
Ord. No. 478]
A. The code is amended and modified in the following respects:
(1) Wherever the words "name of jurisdiction" appear in brackets in
the code, the words "Borough of Collegeville" shall be inserted in
place of those bracketed words. Likewise, the words "Borough of
Collegeville" shall be substituted for the word "jurisdiction," where
the latter word appears singly in the code, without being preceded
by the words "under the."
(2) The term "chief appointing authority of the jurisdiction" and the
term "chief authority of the jurisdiction," as used in the code, shall
mean the Borough Council.
(3) The term "legal counsel of the jurisdiction" and the term "legal
officer of the jurisdiction" shall mean the Borough Solicitor.
(4) The term "Code Official," as used in the code, shall mean and refer
to the person designated elsewhere in this article as the Plumbing
Official, or an authorized representative of the Plumbing Official
acting for him/her under this Plumbing Code. Provided, at the
discretion of Borough Council, the individual serving as "Building
Official" under the Borough's building code may be appointed to
serve as Plumbing Official under this article. [See also Subsection
A(9) of this section.]
(5) The term "department" and the term "department of plumbing
inspection," as used in the code, shall mean and refer to the office
of the Plumbing Official in his/her official capacity under this code,
and any of his/her subordinates in the performance of functions
under this code.
(6) Section 101.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Plumbing
Code of the Borough of Collegeville," hereinafter referred to as "the
code" or "this code."
(7) Section 101.4 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"101.4 Severability: If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause
or word of this code, or of the ordinance adopting this code, is
declared to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, that decision
shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
the code or of the ordinance adopting the code. It is declared as a
legislative intent that the said code and ordinance would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid provision not
been included therein."
(8) The following new section is added directly after Section 102.9 of
the code:
§ 472-10 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 472-10
1:186
"102.10 Validity of other laws, regulations and ordinances:
Nothing in this code shall be construed to prevent the enforcement
of other laws, State regulations and ordinances of this Borough
which prescribe more restrictive or stricter requirements or
limitations on any subject covered in this code. When any provision
specified in the code pertaining to health, safety and/or welfare
is more restrictive than any such other provisions, this code shall
control, but in any case, the most rigid requirements of either this
code or other laws, regulations or ordinances shall apply wherever
they may be in conflict."
(9) Section 103.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"103.2 Appointment of Plumbing Official; qualifications and
tenure: The Plumbing Official shall be appointed by Borough
Council and shall serve at the pleasure of Council. The
requirements for eligibility for appointment as Plumbing Official
shall be determined by Borough Council through oral and/or
written examinations, interviews or such other means as deemed
appropriate by Council. As determined by Council, and from time
to time, an individual appointed to and holding another Borough
appointment may be designated Plumbing Official under this code
as well. Furthermore, the Plumbing Official under this code may be
designated by Council, or by a specific ordinance, to concurrently
hold a comparable office or position, often designated as "Code
Official" or "Building Official" under one or more other codes or
ordinances in effect in the Borough. During the temporary absence
or disability of the Plumbing Official, Council shall designate an
acting Plumbing Official."
(10) Section 103.4 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"103.4 Restriction of employees: An official or employee
connected with the enforcement of this code shall not be engaged
in, or directly or indirectly connected with, the furnishing of labor,
materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or
maintenance of a structure where work is to be done under this
code, or the preparation of construction documents thereof, unless
that person is the owner of the structure; nor shall that officer or
employee engage in any work that conflicts with official duties or
with the interests of the office of Plumbing Official."
(11) Section 104.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
§ 472-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-10
1:187
"104.1 General:
(a) The Plumbing Official shall administer and enforce all
provisions of this code, and shall have authority to take
whatever action is deemed reasonably necessary to enforce
the provisions of this code. He/she shall act on any question
relative to the installation, alteration, repair, maintenance or
operation of all plumbing systems, devices and equipment,
except as otherwise specifically provided for in Sections 104.2
through 104.8.
(b) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the Plumbing
Official under this code may appeal from that order or decision
to the Board of Appeals established under Subsection 24 of this
section. The appeal shall be filed with the Borough, in writing,
within 10 days of the order or decision of the Plumbing Official
referred to in this code."
(12) Section 104.2 of the code, dealing with rule-making authority, is
amended by adding the following sentence at the end thereof:
"Furthermore, Borough Council shall have authority, at its
discretion, to abrogate any such rule or regulation, or part thereof,
in which case that rule or regulation or part thereof shall cease to
be in effect in the Borough."
(13) Section 105.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"105.1 Modifications: Whenever there are practical difficulties
involved in carrying out any provision of this code, and upon
application in writing by an owner of the property involved, or his
representative, which application shall be kept on file in the office
of the Borough Secretary, the Plumbing Official shall have power
to authorize modifications of specific provisions and requirements
of this code. Such modifications may involve alternative methods
or materials, or other types of modifications. Such authorization
shall be granted where there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the code, providing that the spirit of
the code is observed, public safety secured and substantial justice
done. The particulars of every such modification, when granted or
allowed, and the decision of the Plumbing Official on the matter
shall be submitted to Council and kept on file with the Borough
Secretary, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant."
(14) The title of Section 106 of the code shall be amended to read as
follows:
"SECTION 106
PERMITS AND LICENSES"
(15) Section 106.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
§ 472-10 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 472-10
1:188
"106.1 Permit required:
1. No plumbing work shall be commenced until a permit for the
work has been issued by the Borough Secretary, following
authorization by the Plumbing Official; provided, however, a
permit is not required for repairs that involve only the working
parts of a faucet or valve, the clearance of stoppages, or the
repairing or replacement of defective faucets or valves,
provided that alterations are not made in existing piping or
fixtures.
2. Permits are issued only to master or registered plumbers in all
cases except the following:
(a) Any permit required by this code may be issued to any
person to do work required or regulated by this code on
property used exclusively for living purposes, including the
usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with
that building, provided that such person is the bona fide
owner of that dwelling, and that the owner shall personally
purchase all material and perform all labor in connection
with work authorized by the permit; provided, however,
such plumbing work shall be inspected by the Plumbing
Official, as is the case with other permits under this article.
(b) Institutions and manufacturing plants that employ
qualified maintenance crews and which designate one
individual, who shall be selected to function in lieu of
the master plumber and shall be responsible for securing
permits, supervising the work, and paying fees provided in
Section 106.5.2."
(16) Section 106.3 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"Application for permit: Application for a permit shall be made
to the Borough Secretary on forms provided by the Secretary, and
shall be accompanied by an adequate description of the proposed
plumbing work and its location, and the required fee as prescribed
in Section 106.5.2. The application shall be signed by the owner
of the property or an authorized agent, and shall indicate the
proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion
of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure,
and any other information required by the Plumbing Official."
(17) Section 106.4 of the code is amended to read as follows:
§ 472-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-10
1:189
"106.4 Action on application:
1. The Plumbing Official shall examine or cause to be examined
every application for a permit, and amendments thereto, and,
within 15 days after the filing of the application, shall either
approve or reject the application. If the application or the
construction documents do not conform to the requirements
of this code and all pertinent laws and ordinances, he/she
shall reject that application in writing, stating the reasons for
rejection. If he/she is satisfied that the proposed work will
conform to the requirements of this code and all laws and
ordinances applicable thereto, he/she shall issue a permit as
soon as practicable.
2. If a permit is denied, the applicant may submit revised
construction documents without payment of any additional fee.
3. If, in the course of the work, it is found necessary to make
any changes from the application and construction documents
on which a permit has been issued, an amended application
and/or construction documents shall be submitted, and a
supplemental permit, subject to the same conditions applicable
to the original application for permit, shall be issued to cover
this change.
4. A plumbing permit shall not be transferable unless approved
by Borough Council and the Plumbing Official."
(18) Section 106.5.2 of the code, "Fee Schedule," is deleted.
(19) Section 106.5.3 of the code, "Fee Refunds," is deleted.
(20) The following two new sections are added directly after Section
106.6:
"106.7 Plumbers' qualifications and examinations:
1. Every application for a Master Plumber's Certificate or
Journeyman Plumber's Certificate shall submit to an
examination as to his qualifications at such time and place as
the Plumbing Official may direct, except that:
(a) All master plumbers duly registered and licensed, having a
bona fide place of business in this Borough at the time of
passage of this ordinance shall not be required to undergo
an examination, and they shall be entitled to register for the
current year and annually thereafter before the 31st day of
December of each year.
§ 472-10 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 472-10
1:190
(b) All master plumbers who do not have a bona fide place
of business in the Borough and who desire to engage in
the business of plumbing and/or building drainage in the
Borough shall apply to the Plumbing Official for
registration. If any such master plumber is duly registered
and licensed in any municipality approved by the Plumbing
Official, he/she will be entitled to be registered without
undergoing an examination.
(c) All journeyman plumbers duly registered and licensed as
such shall not be required to undergo an examination to
work in this Borough, and they shall be entitled to register
for the current year and annually thereafter before the 31st
day of December of each year.
(d) All journeyman plumbers who are not registered as such in
this Borough, who desire to become journeyman plumbers
in the Borough, shall apply to the Plumbing Official for
registration. If any such journeyman plumber is duly
registered and licensed in any municipality approved by the
Plumbing Official, he/she will be entitled to be registered
without undergoing an examination.
2. The examination shall be in writing unless the Board shall
otherwise direct as hereinafter provided. Such examination
shall be designed to test the applicant's knowledge of proper
construction or practical plumbing, ventilating and drainage
work; and the proper and safe methods of supplying water to
buildings and of removing water and sewage therefrom.
3. The applicant shall be required to demonstrate his ability to
comprehend and interpret the plans and drawings shown in the
arrangement of plumbing fixtures, etc.
4. He/she shall be expected to be familiar with the provisions of
this Plumbing Code, ordinances and regulations dealing with
health and sanitation, water supply, and sanitary sewers, and
the statutes, rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania applicable to plumbing."
106.8 of the code, "Plumbers' fees," is deleted."
(21) The first paragraph of Section 107.1 of the code is amended to read
as follows, and the three subparagraphs, 1, 2, and 3, shall be
retained without change:
"107.1 Required inspections and testing: The Plumbing Official
shall conduct inspections during and upon completion of the work
for which a permit is issued. A record of all such examinations and
inspections and of all violations of this code shall be maintained
by the Plumbing Official. In order to facilitate the making of
inspections, every person to whom a permit is issued under this
code, or his agents, shall notify the Plumbing Official that work
§ 472-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-10
1:191
is to commence under the permit, within 24 hours prior to the
commencement of that work."
(22) Section 108.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"108.2 Notice of violation: The Plumbing Official shall serve
a notice of violation or order to the person responsible for the
erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or
demolition of plumbing work in violation of any provision of this
code, or in violation of a detailed statement or the approved
construction documents thereunder, or in violation of a permit or
certificate issued under this code. The notice of a violation or order
shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and
the abatement of the violation, and shall allow a reasonable time
for the initiation and correction or the remedial action required,
except where emergency conditions exist which require immediate
corrective action."
(23) Section 108.3 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"108.3 Prosecution of violation: If the notice of violation is not
complied with within the time stated in the notice, the Plumbing
Official shall request the Borough Solicitor to institute the
appropriate proceeding by law or in equity to restrain, correct or
abate the violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of this code or of
the order or direction made pursuant thereto."
(24) Section 108.4 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"108.4 Violation penalties: Any person who violates any
provision of this code or who fails to comply with any requirement
of this code or who erects, installs, alters or repairs plumbing
work in violation of the approved construction documents, or of
a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code,
shall be guilty of an offense; and, for every such offense, shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50
or more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution; and, in default of
payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more
than 30 days. Provided: The imposition of one penalty for any such
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue;
and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy every
such violation or defect within a reasonable time; and, when not
otherwise specified, each 10 days that such prohibited conditions
are maintained shall constitute a separate offense."
(25) Section 108.5 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"108.5 Stop-work orders: Upon notice from the Plumbing
Official, work on any plumbing system that is being done contrary
to the provisions of this code, or is being done in a dangerous
or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. That notice shall be
§ 472-10 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 472-10
1:192
in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to
the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. The notice
shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to be
resumed. Where an emergency exists, the Plumbing Official shall
not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work.
Any person who continues any work in or about a structure after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200 or more
than $1,000, and costs, and, in default of payment of fine and costs,
to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days."
(26) Section 109 of the code, "Means of Appeal," and its subsections,
Sections 109.1 through 109.7, are deleted, and the following new
Section 109 is substituted for that deleted material.
"SECTION 109
MEANS OF APPEAL
109.1 Right of appeal: Any person shall have the right to
appeal a decision of the Plumbing Official to the Board of
Plumbing Appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a
claim that the true intent of this code or of any rule legally
adopted thereunder has been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of the code do not apply, or an equally good or better
form of construction is proposed.
109.2 Board of Appeals:
1. There is hereby created a Board of Plumbing Appeals
consisting of three members of Council. One member shall be
appointed for one year; one member shall be appointed for
two years; and one member shall be appointed for three years.
Annually thereafter in the month of January, a member of the
Board of Plumbing Appeals shall be appointed for a term of
three years, which term shall commence on the first day of
January and terminate on the 31st day of December, three
years thereafter. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be for
the unexpired portion of the term only. Provided: Since the
purpose of the above-stated appointments shall be to establish
overlapping rather than coinciding terms of office, if the said
board has already been established when this ordinance takes
effect, the individuals now in office shall be entitled to
complete their present terms just as if the ordinance had not
been enacted, with appointments to fill vacancies to be made
for the unexpired portion of the term for which their
appointment had been made.
2. The powers, duties and responsibilities of the Board of
Plumbing Appeals shall be as follows:
§ 472-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-10
1:193
(a) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by the Plumbing Official in the enforcement of this
ordinance.
(b) To reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or modify, the order,
requirement, decision or determination appealed from; to
make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as ought to be made; and, to that end, to exercise all the
powers of the Plumbing Official.
(c) To adopt rules of procedure in accordance with the several
provisions of this ordinance as to matters of filing appeals.
3. Appeals from any decision of the Plumbing Official may be
made to the Board of Plumbing Appeals by any person
aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of
the Borough affected by any decision of the Plumbing Official.
109.3 Records: The Borough Secretary shall serve as secretary
of the Board of Appeals and, in the absence of the Secretary, the
Assistant Secretary shall so serve. The minutes of each meeting of
Council, serving as a Board of Appeals, shall clearly state the basis
for each decision made by the Board."
(27) Section 305.6 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"305.6 Freezing: A water, soil or waste pipe shall not be installed
outside of a building, in attics or crawl spaces, concealed in outside
walls or in any place subjected to freezing temperature, unless
adequate provision is made to protect them from freezing by
insulation or heat or both. Water service piping shall be installed
below recorded frost penetration but not less than two feet 10
inches below grade for water piping and two feet 10 inches below
grade for sewers."
(28) Section 305.6.1 of the code is amended to insert the desired
minimum inches in the blanks:
"305.6.1 Sewer death: Building sewers shall be a minimum of 30
inches below grade. No on-lot private sewers shall be permitted
within the Borough."
(29) Section 309 of the code, comprising Sections 309.1 and 309.2,
dealing with floodproofing, shall be enforced along with the
Borough's damage control regulations (Ordinance No. 295, as
amended)48 with stricter provisions to be applied where there is
conflict, and more specific or detailed provisions to be adhered to
as against generalized provisions.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 345, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 472-10 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 472-10
1:194
§ 472-11. Interpretation.
In interpreting any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted, the
following principles shall be governing:
§ 472-12. Saving clause.
Nothing in this article or in the plumbing code adopted by this article shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
accrued or existing, under any prior ordinance wholly or partially repealed
or superseded by this article, nor shall any legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this article.
(30) References to "individual water supply" in Section 602 of the code
shall be deleted, and in place of those provisions, the Borough
incorporates by reference the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection pertaining
to individual water supply.
(31) Section 904.1 of the code is amended to insert the desired numbers
of inches and millimeters:
"Section 904.1 Roof extension: All open vent pipes that extend
through a roof shall be terminated at least 12 inches above the roof,
except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than
weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least seven
feet above the roof."
A. The said code shall not supersede any provision of any law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or of any regulation promulgated by
any department or agency of the commonwealth by authority of law,
where such law or regulation is in conflict with or identical to a
provision of the said code; provided, however, any provision of the said
code that is stricter than or in addition to any state law or regulation
governing a particular subject or activity shall be in effect and shall be
enforced within the Borough of Collegeville, subject to the penalties
prescribed in the code.
B. Mention in or regulation by the code hereby adopted of any specific use
of property, or of any business or industry, shall not in itself authorize
such use of property or the establishment or carrying on of any such
business or industry in the Borough. It is hereby declared that the
intent of the Borough Council is that permitted and prohibited uses of
property in the Borough shall be governed by the Borough's zoning
ordinance, its amendments and supplements.49
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 472-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-12
1:195
Chapter 481
POLES, WIRES AND MANHOLE COVERS
§ 481-1. Wires and cables not to endanger public safety.
No wire or cable shall be erected on or over any street so as to endanger
public safety and any so erected shall be changed in position or removed
entirely by their owners as may be directed by Council or its agents in whom
from time to time jurisdiction over these matters is vested.
§ 481-2. Inspection of wires and cables.
There shall be an annual inspection of all wires and cables now or in the
future erected and maintained upon the streets, alleys or public places
in the Borough. Any insecurity in any pole or wires, or cables, shall be
reported to the owner and the Borough Engineer and any fire hazard shall
be reported to the Chief of the Fire Department. This inspection shall be
done under the jurisdiction of the Streets and Roads Committee.
§ 481-3. Inspection of wooden poles; replacement of unsafe and
unsound poles.
All wooden poles upon the streets, alleys or public places in the Borough
carrying electrically charged wires or cables shall be inspected as required
by Council. Unsafe or unsound wooden poles, shall be reported to the
Engineer who shall at once notify the individual or corporation owning,
using, or in control of those poles to forthwith replace them with safe
and sound poles. Notice may be served upon corporations by their local
superintendent, manager, clerk or other accessible employee.
§ 481-4. Regulations applicable to wooden poles.
As a police regulation every individual and every corporation maintaining,
using or controlling upon the streets, alleys or public places in the Borough,
wooden poles carrying electrically charged wires or cables now or in the
future erected and maintained upon the streets, alleys or public places in
the Borough, are required to adhere to the following rules and regulations:
A. To plainly stencil or mark every pole with the name or initials of the
corporation owning, maintaining or using such pole and upon erecting
other poles to likewise immediately designate them, and to keep such
name and initials always legible from the sidewalk;
B. To submit to regular official inspection of every pole;
C. To remove defective or dangerous poles from the public streets
immediately upon written notice so to do duly served by the Streets and
Roads Committee.
§ 472-12 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 481-5
1:196
§ 481-5. Relocation of wooden poles; permit fee.
Wooden poles may be relocated by the individual or corporation owning or
controlling those poles only after notice to the Secretary who shall issue a
permit for the relocation of the poles upon the payment of a fee of $1 for
each pole to be relocated.
§ 481-6. Relocation of disturbed pavement or sidewalk.
In the case of any disturbance of any pavement or sidewalk caused by the
erection, relocation or maintenance of any poles, that disturbance shall not
be patched but the individual or corporation causing the disturbance shall
at his or its own cost and expense, replace and restore the disturbed area of
pavement or sidewalk with an entire concrete slab. In case of construction
of underground facilities, the curb shall be restored and poured at the same
time that the pavement or sidewalk is replaced.
§ 481-7. Inspection of manhole covers.
There shall be an annual inspection of all manhole covers for the purpose
of ascertaining that those installations are maintained in safe condition
and that the covers are tight and constructed and maintained in such
manner that the traveling public may be protected from danger with respect
thereto. Any insecurity in such manholes and manhole covers shall be
reported to the owner and to the Borough Engineer. The inspection shall be
done under the jurisdiction of the Streets and Roads Committee.
§ 481-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any person convicted in a summary proceeding of violating any provision
of this chapter, or of failing, neglecting or refusing to pay any fee imposed
under this chapter shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
and costs of prosecution for each offense. Provided, each separate offense
or violation of any provision of this chapter or any repeated violations of any
provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, and penalized
as such.
Chapter 495
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 427. Weeds and other vegetation — See Ch. 667.
§ 481-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 481-8
1:197

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 2-4-1998 by Ord. No. 449 (Part 6, Ch. 1, Art. F, of the 1985
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 495-1. Adoption of property maintenance code.
§ 495-2. Modifications made in BOCA National Property
Maintenance Code.
A. BOCA National Property Maintenance Code. For the purpose of
establishing minimum regulations governing the conditions and
maintenance of property, buildings and structures in the Borough of
Collegeville, by providing standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to insure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and for the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy
and the demolition of such structures, the Borough adopts as its
property maintenance code, the BOCA National Property Maintenance
Code/1996, Fifth Edition, as published by the Building Officials and
Code Administrators International, Inc. That entire property
maintenance code, as affected by the deletion, amendment or
modification of certain portions in the following sections of this article,
is adopted, and is incorporated in the Borough's Code of Ordinances as
fully as if set out verbatim in this article. From the date on which this
article takes effect, the provisions of that property maintenance code,
as affected by this article, shall be in effect within the limits of the
Borough of Collegeville. In this article, the BOCA National Property
Maintenance Code may be referred to as "the code" or "this code."
B. Amendments and changes in the published property maintenance code.
All amendments, changes, additions and deletions in the published
1996 Fifth Edition of the property maintenance code referred to in
Subsection A of this section, as made by the publisher of the code and
transmitted to the Borough, prior to publication of a new code that is to
supplant this code, shall be considered as part of this article and
effective in the Borough, provided that copies of the publisher's
modifications are kept on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
preferably with notations made by the code official of those changes
inserted in the proper and pertinent places in the file copies of the
published property maintenance code that is referred to in Subsection
A of this section.
A. The property maintenance code adopted by § 495-1 of this article is
amended and changed in the following respects:
(1) Whenever the words "name of jurisdiction" appear in brackets in
the code, the words "Borough of Collegeville" shall be in place of
those bracketed words. Likewise, the words "Borough of
Collegeville" shall be substituted for the word "jurisdiction"
§ 495-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-2
1:199
whenever that word appears singly in the code without being
preceded by the words "under the."
(2) The term "Code Official," as used in the code, shall mean not only
the individual known and referred to as the "Code Official," but the
same individual when referred to as "Building Official," "Building
Inspector," or "Building Permit Officer," or an authorized
representative of an individual known and referred to by any of
those titles.
(3) The terms "appointing authority," "chief appointing authority,"
"governing body," "Chief Administrative Officer," or "legislative
authority of the jurisdiction," as used in the code, shall mean
Borough Council.
(4) The terms, "legal counsel of the jurisdiction," "the jurisdiction's
legal representative," and "the legal representative of the
jurisdiction" shall mean the Borough Solicitor.
(5) Section PM-101.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"PM-101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the
"Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Collegeville,"
hereinafter referred to as "the code" or "this code."
(6) Section PM 102.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"PM-102.2 Saving clause: Nothing in this code or in the
ordinance adopting it by reference shall be construed to affect any
suit or proceeding pending in any court at the time of enacting that
ordinance, or any rights acquired, liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action accrued or existing, under any ordinance repealed
by that ordinance. No right or remedy of any character shall be
lost, impaired or affected by that Code or ordinance."
(7) The following new section is inserted directly after Section 102.2 of
the code:
"PM-102.3 Validity of other laws, regulations and
ordinances: Nothing in this code shall be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other laws, state regulations and ordinances of this
Borough which prescribe more restrictive or stricter requirements
or limitations. When the provisions specified in this code for health,
safety and welfare are more restrictive than other provisions, this
code shall control, but in any case, the most rigid requirements of
either this code or other laws, regulations or ordinances shall apply
whenever they may be in conflict."
(8) Section PM-104.2.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"PM-104.2.1 Records: the application for modification and the
final decisions of the code official shall be in writing and shall
be officially recorded in the permanent records of the Borough
§ 495-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 495-2
1:200
pertaining to this code, with special reference to the building or
premises to which the modification would apply."
(9) The following sentence shall be inserted at the end of Section
PM-104.4, Alternative methods and equipment: "Information in
adequate detail, describing the approved alternative material or
method, shall be inserted in the permanent records of the code
official dealing with this code."
(10) Section PM-105.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"PM-105.1 Enforcement officer: It shall be the duty and
responsibility of the code official to enforce the provisions of this
code. Where, in the course of his enforcement duties, the code
official finds a violation in the strict provisions or application of this
code which violation, if corrected, would not substantially serve to
further the purpose of this code in protecting the public health,
safety and welfare, and where the elimination of that violation
would constitute a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, the
code official shall recommend to the appeal board that a variance
be granted. In considering such recommendations, the appeal
board shall give consideration to the special physical
characteristics of existing older dwellings in the Borough which
would require extensive structural alterations to conform to the
strict provisions or applications of this code."
(11) Section PM-105.6 of the code is amended to read as follow:
"PM-105.6 Coordination of enforcement: Inspection of
premises, and the issuance and enforcement of notices and orders
shall be the responsibility of the code official. Whenever, in the
opinion of the code official initiating an inspection under this code,
it is deemed necessary or desirable to have inspections by another
department or officer of Borough government, the code official
shall make reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of such
inspections so as to minimize the number of visits by inspectors,
and to confer with the other department or officer for the purpose
of eliminating conflicting orders before any are issued. A
department or officer shall not, however, delay the issuance of any
emergency orders which it determines must be issued."
(12) Section PM-105.7 of the code is amended to add the following
sentence at the end of that section:
"Furthermore, Borough Council shall have authority, at its
discretion, to abrogate any rule or regulation, or part thereof, in
which case that rule or regulation or part thereof shall cease to be
in effect in the Borough."
(13) Section PM-106.2 of the code is amended to read as follows:
§ 495-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-2
1:201
"PM-106.2 Penalty for violation: Any person who fails to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who builds in violation of
any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and
approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who
fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the
appeal board or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the
time fixed herein, shall severally, for each and every such violation
and noncompliance, respectively, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $200 or more than $1,000, and costs of prosecution, and,
in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment
for not more than 30 days. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue,
and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not
otherwise specified, each 10 days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense."
(14) Section PM-108.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"PM-108.1 General: When a structure or part thereof is found by
the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure or part thereof is
found unfit for human occupancy or use, or is found unlawful, and
the procedures prescribed by the Building Code under the heading
"Unsafe Buildings and Structures" shall be found inapplicable as
a remedy of the situation, as provided in Section PM-101.5 of this
code, that structure or part thereof may be condemned pursuant
to the provisions of this code and may be placarded and vacated.
It shall not be re-occupied without approval of the code official.
Unsafe equipment shall be placarded and placed out of service."
(15) Section PM-110.1 of the code is amended to add the following
sentence at the end thereof:
"Provided: The intent of this Section PM-110.0 Demolition is to
provide a procedure to be available for use in cases where the
procedures prescribed by the Building Code under the heading
"Unsafe Buildings and Structures" or under the heading
"Demolition" shall be found to be inadequate or unsuitable to
remedy the situation."
(16) Section PM-111.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"PM-111.1 Appeals: Any person affected by any notice which has
been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision
of this code, or of any rule or regulation adopted by authority of
this code, shall have the right to appeal and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the Board of Appeals established
by the BOCA National Building Code, which shall be composed
of the Borough Council, ex officio, and shall be the appeal board
as referred to in this code. The appeal shall proceed in the same
§ 495-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 495-2
1:202
manner and subject to the same limitations as prescribed in the
Building Code for appeals from the orders and/or decisions of the
Building Official under that Code. The appeal shall be filed with the
Borough Secretary, in writing, within 30 days of the rendition of the
order or decision of the code official being appealed from."
(17) Sections PM-111.2 and PM-111.2.2 through PM 111.2.4 are
deleted.
(18) Section PM-111.2.5 is amended to read as follows:
"PM-111.2.5 Records: The Borough Secretary shall serve as the
secretary of the appeals board, and, in the absence of the
Secretary, the Assistant Secretary shall so serve. The minutes of
each meeting shall clearly show the basis for each decision made
by the Board."
(19) Sections PM-111.3 through PM-111.7 shall be deleted, the subject
matter of Sections 121.3 through 121.7 of the Building Code, with
certain changes in the Building Code Ordinance being applicable to
the same material and procedures.
(20) Section PM-201.3 is amended to read as follows:
"PM-201.3 Terms defined in other codes: Where terms are
not defined in this code and are defined in the BOCA National
Building Code, the ICC International Plumbing Code or the ICC
International Mechanical Code, those terms shall have the same
meanings as ascribed to them in those codes, including terms
amended by any ordinance adopting by reference any of those
three codes."
(21) Section PM-201.4 is amended to read as follows:
"PM-201.4 Terms not defined: Where terms are not defined
under the terms of this code or under the provisions of the building,
plumbing and/or mechanical code as referred to in Section
PM-201.3, they shall have prescribed to them their ordinarily
accepted meanings or such as the context herein as may apply."
(22) The following definitions in Section PM-202.0 are amended to read
as follows:
"Building Code: The building code adopted by ordinance of this
Borough with amendments, deletions, additions and modifications
incorporated into that ordinance."
"Code official: (See Subsection 2 of this section.)"
(23) Section PM-303.4 of the code, on weeds, shall be enforced by
correlation with the provisions of Chapter 667 of this Code, entitled
"Weeds and Other Vegetation."
§ 495-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-2
1:203
(24) Section PM-303.8, "Motor Vehicles," is deleted, because the subject
matter and procedures are covered in Chapter 648 of this Code,
entitled "Storage of Vehicles."
(25) Section PM-304.15 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"PM-304.15 Insect screens: During the period from May 1 to
October 31 of each year, every door, window and other outside
opening utilized or required for ventilation purposes serving any
structure containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, or
any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for
human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or
stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of
not less than 16 mesh per inch, and every swinging door shall have
a self-closing device in good working condition. Provided: Screen
doors shall not be required where other approved means, such as
air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed."
(26) Section PM-304.18 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"PM-304.18 Guards for basement windows: Where the code
official has evidence which leads him/her to believe that a rodent
infestation problem exists in a building, every basement or cellar
window in that building that is openable shall be supplied with
corrosion-resistive rodentproof shields of not less than No. 22 U.S.
gage perforated steel sheets, or No. 20 B & S gage aluminum, or
No. 16 U.S. gage expanded metal or wire mesh screens, with not
more than 1/2 inch mesh openings; or with other material affording
equivalent protection against the entry of rodents, including storm
windows."
(27) Section PM-305.7 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"PM-305.7 Handrails and guardrails: Where the code official
has evidence which leads him/her to believe that a handrail is
required for safety purposes, every stairwell and every flight of
stairs which is more than two risers high shall have handrails or
railings located in accordance with the provisions of the Building
Code. Every handrail or guardrail shall be firmly fastened and must
be maintained in good condition. Properly balustraded guardrails,
capable of bearing normally imposed loads as required by the
Building Code, shall be placed on the open portions of stairs,
balconies, landings and stairwells."
(28) The following new section is added to the code directly after
Section PM-305.7:
"PM-305.8 Protective coating for certain surfaces: All exterior
and interior surfaces of a structure that are not of a species
inherently resistant to decay, rust, tarnish or other form of
deterioration shall be treated periodically with paint, preservative
or other suitable protective coating, to prevent or control such
§ 495-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 495-2
1:204
forms of deterioration. Surfaces shall be deemed to be in need of
such a protective coating if there is evidence of excessive peeling of
paint, chipping or scaling of plaster, or weathering or deterioration
of any protective coating previously applied."
(29) Section PM-504.1 of the code is amended to read as follows:
"PM-504.1 Privacy: Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide
privacy and shall not be used as the only passageway to a hall or
other space, or to the exterior. Wherever possible without creating
a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, in the opinion of the
code official, no residential building or dwelling unit containing two
or more sleeping rooms shall have such a room arrangement that
access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use
by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by
going though another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet
compartment. No bathroom shall be so located that access thereto
is solely through a kitchen."
(30) Sections PM-602.2.1 and 602.3 of the code are amended to
substitute in each case for the words "from [DATE] to [DATE]" the
following: "from October 1 to May 15 of the following year."
(31) Section PM-702.3 of the code is amended by adding the following
sentence at the end thereof:
"Every exit required by this section shall have a minimum head
room of six feet, six inches."
§ 495-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-2
1:205

ARTICLE II
Storage of Junked or Discarded Articles
[Adopted 11-2-2011 by Ord. No. 552]
§ 495-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
ABANDONED ITEM — Any vehicle, trailer or boat to which one or more of
the following applies:
APPLIANCES — A stove, refrigerator, television set, furnace, water heater,
water softener, washer, dryer or mangle, any household article used to
perform any of the necessary work in a household, and any article used in
business to increase production or to speed, ease or eliminate work.
BOAT — Any vessel capable of transporting a person on any river, stream,
creek, lake or ocean.
A certificate of salvage has been issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
or any other department of the of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
for the vehicle, trailer or boat.
A.
The engine or any essential or material part thereof has been removed
from the vehicle, trailer or boat for more than seven days, except if
stored at a repair agency or garage licensed to work on or repair the
dismantled vehicle, trailer or boat.
B.
One or more tires has been flat or one or more wheels has been
removed for more than seven days from the vehicle or trailer.
C.
A vehicle, trailer or boat having a Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
registration or license tag (or to which no registration or license tag
is affixed) which does not bear a Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
inspection sticker or which does not meet the inspection requirements
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
D.
A vehicle, trailer or boat to which no current registration or license tag
is affixed, except if stored on the premises of a repair agency licensed
to work on or repair the vehicle, trailer or boat.
E.
A vehicle, trailer or boat which has been damaged by collision or some
other means to such an extent that it is inoperable, except if stored at a
repair agency licensed to work on or repair the vehicle, trailer or boat.
F.
A vehicle, trailer or boat on which one or more of the doors or windows
are not intact or cannot be securely closed.
G.
A vehicle, trailer or boat in such condition or situated in such
circumstances as to cause the vehicle, trailer or boat reasonably to
appear to have been abandoned.
H.
§ 495-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 495-3
1:207
DISCARDED — An item resting for 96 hours or more with no known
apparent owner.
HOUSEHOLD FURNISHINGS — All items normally found and used in a
home.
JUNKED — An item sold or to be sold for scrap, being stripped or being
used or sold for parts.
TRAILER — A wheeled device used as a means of carrying, hauling or
conveying any vehicle, person, animal, object or boat.
VEHICLE — An automobile, motorcycle, motorbike, minibike, bicycle, gocart,
truck or other wheeled means of conveyance, motorized or selfpropelled.
§ 495-4. Unlawful to accumulate or store certain junked, abandoned
or discarded property.
§ 495-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, upon summary conviction for violation of any provision of this
article, shall, for the first offense, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $10 or more than $30 and costs of prosecution, and for each and every
subsequent offense, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25
or more than $1,000 and costs, and in default of payment of fine and costs,
shall undergo imprisonment for not less than five days or more than 30
days. Each day that a person is in violation of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or store any appliance
or household furnishing outdoors on private or public property within
the Borough for seven days or more.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or store any
abandoned item outdoors on private or public property within the
Borough.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or store any junked or
discarded vehicle, trailer, boat, appliance or household furnishings on
private or public property within the Borough.
D. Nothing in this article shall apply to vehicles lawfully stored or parked
on private land under the terms of §§ 648-1 through 648-6 of the Code
of Ordinances of Collegeville Borough.
§ 495-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 495-5
1:208
Chapter 502
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 502-1. Unlawful to tamper with public property or property on
street, alley, sidewalk or public ground.
No person shall destroy or injure in any way whatsoever, or tamper with or
deface any public property of the Borough or of any authority created by
the Borough or by the Borough jointly with any other municipality, within
or without the Borough, or any grass, shrub, tree, walk, lamp, ornamental
work, building, streetlight, fire hydrant or gas or water stop box on or in
any street, sidewalk or public ground in the Borough. Provided, defacement
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the making of graffiti or other
markings upon any of the property above referred to or upon the surface of
any street, alley, sidewalk or curb in the Borough.
§ 502-2. Unlawful to tamper with stakes, posts or monuments.
No person shall in any manner interfere with or meddle with or pull, drive,
change, alter or destroy any stake, posts, monument or other evidence of
any elevation, grade, line, location, corner or angle in the Borough, made,
placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or set, or caused to be done by the
authorities of the Borough in any survey of or in any street, alley or public
ground in the Borough, to evidence the location, elevation, line, grade,
corner or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, drain or
other public work, matter or thing.
§ 502-3. Unlawful to tamper with warning lamps, signs or
barricades.
No person shall willfully or maliciously destroy, remove, deface, obliterate
or cover up any lamp, warning sign or barricade erected by the authorities
of the Borough or by any person doing work by permission of the authorities
of the Borough on any street, alley, sidewalk or bridge in the Borough or
on any public ground of the Borough, within or without the Borough as a
warning of danger.
§ 502-4. Unlawful to take earth, stone or other material from street,
alley or public ground.
No person shall take any earth, stone or other material from any street,
alley or public ground in the Borough.
§ 502-5. Certain activities not prohibited.
This chapter shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public ground and the structures and fixtures located thereon or therein or
§ 495-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 502-5
1:209
to incidental results of work done thereon or therein upon permit from or
by authority of the Borough.
Chapter 523
RENTAL PROPERTY
§ 502-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 502-5
1:210
ARTICLE I
Rental Dwelling Occupancy Reports
[Adopted 3-5-1980 by Ord. No. 301 (Part 6, Ch. 2, Art. D, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 523-1. Owner or manager reports rental dwelling occupancy.
The owner or manager of any dwelling, housing unit or apartment situated
in the Borough which is or contains a rental unit shall notify the Borough
Secretary on forms supplied to them by the municipality, the name,
occupation, social security number and the name and address of the
employer of each and every occupant of each and every rental unit. That
notification shall be made on or before the first day of April, 1980, or, for
rental units established after April 1, 1980, it shall be made within 15 days
after establishment of the rental unit.
§ 523-2. Updating of report upon change of occupancy.
After April 1, 1980, the owner or manager shall update the notification
referred to in § 523-1 and shall file the update with the Secretary on or
before March 15 of the year of update or within 15 days of the time when
the occupant leaves and/or a new occupant enters into possession of a
portion of the premises.
§ 523-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RENTAL UNIT — A building designed or used for continuous human
occupancy.
§ 523-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, violating any of the
provisions of this article or of any regulations promulgated shall, upon
conviction under this article, pay a fine of not less than $25 or more than
$600 for each offense and in default of payment of fine and costs shall be
imprisoned for not more than 10 days.
§ 523-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 523-4
1:211
Chapter 537
SELF-SERVICE GASOLINE STATIONS
§ 537-1. Enactment, scope and purpose of regulations.
In the interest of promoting the public health, safety and general welfare
of the community imposed within the territorial limits of the Borough of
Collegeville, the following regulations are enacted for the protection of
the public health, providing regulations of retail filling or service stations
dispensing gasoline or other flammable liquids, providing penalties for the
violation of the terms of this chapter for the purpose of enforcing the
regulations as follows:
§ 537-2. Regulations for self-service gasoline stations.
The following regulations for the operation of self-service gasoline stations,
in addition to those regulations of statewide application, are adopted to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this Borough:
A. Dispensing of flammable or combustible liquids into motor vehicles at
self-service gasoline stations with 10 or less positions (places for
vehicles to receive fuel) available for the dispensing of flammable or
combustible liquids into motor vehicles is permitted when the following
conditions are met:
(1) There is at least one attendant on duty while the station is open to
the public. This attendant shall be required to remain within 15 feet
of the main power shutoff switch or switches at all time when
flammable or combustible liquid is being dispensed.
(2) Shutoff buttons shall be installed in the place where the cashier is
located controlling any single dispenser or all station dispensers.
(3) Each dispenser island shall be equipped with a fire suppression
system which has been approved by the Borough Fire Marshal.
(4) Food may not be sold at the service station unless it is sold in
vending machines except, as provided in Subsection C of this
section.
(5) All dispensers shall be made visible to the attendant on duty at all
times by means of optical or electronic devices, regardless of the
nature of the vehicle parked at the dispenser.
(6) If the attendant on duty is stationed in a control booth or control
room, no gasoline may be dispensed when the attendant is outside
of that booth or room.
(7) The service station shall post signs stating that there is to be no
smoking and that all motors should be shut off.
§ 523-4 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 537-2
1:212
§ 537-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable, upon
conviction by summary proceedings, to a fine of not less than $100 and not
more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of fine and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 550
SEWERS
B. Dispensing of flammable or combustible liquids into motor vehicles at
self-service stations with more than 10 positions available for the
dispensing of flammable or combustible liquids into motor vehicles is
permitted when the conditions set forth in Subsections A(1) through (7)
of this section are met, and the following additional conditions are met:
(1) In addition to the attendant being required to be on duty at all time
pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section, there shall be at least
one attendant on duty at all times while the station is open to the
public for each additional 10 positions available for the dispensing
of flammable or combustible liquids.
C. Food may be sold at the self-service station, other than through a
vending machine, provided it is prepackaged by the manufacturer or
wholesale distributor of the food, at a location away from that of the
station, and that an attendant is never more than 15 feet from the main
power shutoff switch or switches at the time of the sale; otherwise, the
self-service station shall employ an attendant for the dispensing of food
only, in addition to the attendant or attendants required to be on duty
under Subsection A(1) of this section.
D. For the purpose of the regulations set forth above, the number of
positions shall be determined by the maximum number of motor
vehicles which can be parked to receive flammable or combustible
liquid dispensed into each vehicle at any one time. The number of
positions shall not be determined by the number of dispensing nozzles.
§ 537-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 537-3
1:213

ARTICLE I
Sewer Use and Connections
[Adopted 12-1-1971 by Ord. No. 238 (Part 11, Ch. 1, Arts. A through
E, of the 1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 550-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Collegeville-Trappe Municipal Authority, a municipality
authority of the Commonwealth.
BOROUGH — This Borough, a municipal corporation of the Commonwealth,
acting by and through its Council or, in appropriate cases, acting by and
through its authorized representatives.
BOROUGHS — Collectively, the boroughs of Collegeville and Trappe, both
located in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, municipal corporations of the
Commonwealth.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewage drainage system of
any structure to the lateral of a sewer.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within this Borough upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any improved property located in this
Borough used or intended for use, wholly or in part, for the manufacturing,
processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling of any product, commodity
or article or any other improved property located in this Borough from
which wastes, in addition to or other than sanitary sewage, shall be
discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any and all wastes discharged from an industrial
establishment, other than sanitary sewage;
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the
curbline or, if there shall be no curbline, to the property line or, if no such
lateral shall be provided, then "lateral" shall mean that portion of, or place
in, a sewer which is provided for connection of any building sewer.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation or other group or entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from any improved property.
§ 550-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-1
1:215
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping and transporting sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes, situate
in or adjacent to either of the boroughs and owned by the authority; and
STREET — Any street, road, lane, court, cul-de-sac, alley, public way or
public square.
§ 550-2. Use of public sewers required. [Amended 11-7-1990 by
Ord. No. 383]
A. Time limit for connection of improved property to sewer. The owner of
any improved property benefited, improved or accommodated by a
sewer shall connect that improved property with that sewer, in such
manner as this Borough may require, within 90 days after notice to that
owner from this Borough to make the connection, for the purpose of all
sanitary sewage and industrial waste from that improved property;
subject, however, to such limitations and restrictions as shall be
established in this section of this article or otherwise shall be
established by this Borough, from time to time.
B. Sanitary sewage and industrial wastes to be disposed of through sewer.
All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property,
after connection of such improved property with a sewer shall be
required under Subsection A, shall be conducted into a sewer; subject,
however, to such limitations and restrictions as shall be established
herein or otherwise shall be established by this Borough, from time to
time.
C. Unlawful discharges into sewers.
(1) No person shall place, shall deposit, or shall permit to be placed or
to be deposited upon public or private property within this Borough
any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in violation of Subsection
A.
(2) No person shall discharge or shall permit to be discharged to any
natural outlet within this Borough any sanitary sewage or
industrial wastes in violation of Subsection A, except where
suitable treatment has been provided which is satisfactory to this
Borough.
D. Privy vaults, cesspools and certain other receptacles not to be used
after sewer connection; abandonment of such receptacles.
(1) No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used or shall be maintained at any time upon any improved
property which has been connected to a sewer or which shall be
required under Subsection A to be connected to a sewer.
§ 550-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-2
1:216
§ 550-3. Building sewers and connections. [Amended 11-7-1990 by
Ord. No. 383]
(2) Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle in existence shall be abandoned and at the discretion of
this Borough, shall be cleansed and shall be filled, at the expense of
the owner of such improved property, under the discretion and
supervision of this Borough; and any such privy vault, cesspool,
sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle not so abandoned and, if
required by this Borough, not cleansed and filled, shall constitute a
nuisance, and such nuisance may be abated, as provided by law, at
the expense of the owner of such improved property.
E. Privy vaults, cesspools and certain other receptacles not to be
connected to sewer. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or
similar receptacle at any time shall be connected with a sewer.
F. Notice to connect improved property to sewer. The notice to make a
connection to a sewer, referred to in Subsection A, shall consist of a
copy of this article of the Code of Ordinances of the Borough of
Collegeville, Pennsylvania, including any amendments and/or
supplements at the time in effect, or a summary thereof and a written or
printed document requiring the connection in accordance with the
same specifying that the connection shall be made within 90 days from
the date the notice is given. The notice may be given at any time when a
sewer is in place which can receive and convey sanitary sewage and
industrial waste for treatment and disposal from the particular
improved property. The notice shall be served in accordance with the
law.
A. Permit required to connect with or disturb sewer. No person shall
uncover, shall connect with, shall may any opening into or shall use,
shall alter or shall disturb, in any manner, any sewer or any part of the
sewer system located in this Borough without first obtaining a permit,
in writing, from this Borough.
B. Application for permit. Application for a permit required under
Subsection A shall be made by the owner of the improved property
served or to be served or by the duly authorized agent of that owner.
C. Conditions for connecting improved property to sewer. No person shall
make or shall cause to be made a connection of any improved property
with a sewer until that person shall have fulfilled each of the following
conditions:
(1) That person shall have notified the secretary of this Borough of the
desire and intention to connect that improved property to a sewer;
(2) That person shall have applied for and shall have obtained a permit
as required in Subsection A;
§ 550-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-3
1:217
(3) That person shall have given the secretary of this Borough at least
24 hours' notice of the time when such connection will be made so
that the Borough may supervise and inspect or may cause to be
supervised and inspected the work of connection and necessary
testing; and
(4) If applicable, that person shall have furnished satisfactory evidence
to the secretary of this Borough that any tapping (or connection)
fee which may be charged and imposed by the authority against the
owner of each improved property who connects that improved
property to a sewer has been paid.
D. Separate and independent connections required; exception. Except as
otherwise provided in this section, each improved property shall be
connected separately and independently with a sewer through a
building sewer. Grouping of more than one improved property on one
building sewer shall not be permitted, except under special
circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good cause
shown, but then only after special permission of this Borough, in
writing, shall have been secured and only subject to such rules,
regulations and conditions as may be prescribed by this Borough.
E. Property owner responsible for certain costs; nonliability of Borough
and authority. All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer
and all costs and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer
shall be borne by the owner of the improved property to be connected;
and that owner shall indemnify and shall save harmless this Borough
and the authority from all loss or damage that may be occasioned,
directly or indirectly, as a result of construction of a building sewer or of
connection of a building sewer to a sewer.
F. Place and manner of connection of building sewer.
(1) A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the place
designated by this Borough or by the authority and where, if
applicable, the lateral is provided.
(2) The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection shall be at
the same or a higher elevation than the invert of the sewer. A
smooth, neat joint shall be made and the connection of a building
sewer to the lateral shall be made secure and watertight.
G. Connection by Borough at expense of defaulting property owner. If the
owner of any improved property benefitted, improved or
accommodated by a sewer, after 90 days' notice requiring the
connection of that improved property with a sewer, in accordance with
§ 550-2A, shall fail to connect that improved property, as required, this
Borough may make the connection and may collect from that owner the
costs and expenses thereof by a municipal claim an action in assumpsit
or other legal proceeding as may be permitted by law.
§ 550-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-4
1:218
§ 550-4. Rules and regulations governing building sewers and
connections to sewers.
§ 550-5. Enforcement and purpose. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
A. Use of existing house sewer line as building sewer. Where an improved
property, at the time connection to a sewer is required, shall be served
by its own sewage disposal system or sewage disposal device, the
existing house sewer line shall be broken on the structure side of such
sewage disposal system or sewage disposal device and attachment shall
be made, with proper fittings, to continue such house sewer line as a
building sewer.
B. Building sewer not to be covered until inspected and approved. No
building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by this Borough. If any part of a building sewer is covered
before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for
inspection, at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved
property to be connected to a sewer.
C. Property owner responsible for maintenance of building sewer. Every
building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of that improved
property.
D. Guarding of excavations; restoration following excavation. Every
excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury.
Any street, sidewalk and other public property disturbed in the course
of installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and
expense of the owner of the improved property being connected, in a
manner satisfactory to this Borough.
E. Effect of failure to remedy unsatisfactory conditions. If any person shall
fail or shall refuse, upon receipt of a notice of this Borough or the
authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with
respect to a building sewer, within 45 days of receipt of this notice, this
Borough or the authority may refuse to permit that person to discharge
sanitary sewage and industrial wastes into the sewer system until such
unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction of
this Borough and the authority.
F. Additional rules and regulations authorized. This Borough reserves the
right to adopt, from time to time, additional rules and regulations as it
shall deem necessary and proper relating to connections with a sewer
and with the sewer system, which additional rules and regulations, to
the extent appropriate, shall be and shall be construed as part of
Ordinance No. 238.
§ 550-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-5
1:219
A. Penalty for violation. Any person who violates any provision of this
article shall be liable, upon summary conviction for a first offense and
upon summary conviction for each subsequent offense, to a fine of not
less than $15 nor more than $1,000, together with costs of prosecution
in each case. Each day that a violation shall continue shall be deemed
and shall be taken to be a separate offense and shall be punishable as
such.
B. Enforcement and recovery of fines and penalties. Fines and costs
imposed under provisions of this article shall be enforceable and
recoverable in the manner at the time provided by applicable law.
C. Necessity for enactment. It is declared that enactment of Ordinance No.
238 is necessary for the protection, benefit and preservation of the
health, safety and welfare of inhabitants of this Borough.
§ 550-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-5
1:220
ARTICLE II
Holding Tanks
[Adopted 9-3-1980 by Ord. No. 279 (Part 5, Ch. 5, of the 1985 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 550-6. Use of holding tanks limited to certain areas.
The use of holding tanks in the Borough shall be limited to areas where a
sewer line is presently in the road bed and said sewer line being unusable
at the present time shall be made available in the foreseeable future for the
use of the property in question.
§ 550-7. Design criteria for holding tanks.
The design criteria shall be as follows:
A. The capacity of the collection unit must be large enough to contain all
plumbing waste for minimum of three days.
B. The collection unit must be approved construction and free from leaks.
C. The collection unit must be equipped with an automatic warning device
to indicate when unit is two-thirds of capacity. That warning device
must be in an area where it will be noticed.
D. The principal party must supply information upon which the collection
unit's internal capacity can be determined; i.e., size of storage tank.
E. The principal party must supply written information concerning the
sanitary removal, transportation and disposal of all wastes removed
from the collection unit.
F. The principal party must supply a written statement from a reputable
waste removal firm that has been contracted with for the sanitary
removal, transportation and disposal of collection unit wastes.
G. The principal party must supply a written statement from the
management of an approved sewage treatment plan stating that all
collected wastes will be properly treated and disposed.
H. Drawings showing the location, construction and other details outlined
above for the proposed unit must be submitted with permit for approval
prior to starting construction.
I. The principal party must have available for periodic inspection, written
information (receipts, etc.) concerning the sanitary removal,
transportation and disposal of all wastes removed from the collection
unit.
§ 550-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-7
1:221

ARTICLE III
Discharge Information
[Adopted 4-1-1987 by Ord. No. 343 (Part 4, Ch. 3, § 4-3003, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 550-8. Penalty for failure to supply information. [Amended
3-1-1989 by Ord. No. 363]
It shall be a violation of the Collegeville Borough Code whenever any
property owner, be it an individual or business entity, fails to supply
information concerning the various discharges into the Authority sewer
system after notice. The violator(s) of this provision, shall, upon conviction
on charges brought by the Collegeville-Trappe Municipal Authority, for
every such violation, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 or
more than $600 and costs of prosecution, or, in default of payment of fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Provided:
each day's violation of any such provisions of this section shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 550-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-8
1:223

ARTICLE IV
Wastewater Pretreatment
[Adopted 9-3-2008 by Ord. No. 536]
§ 550-9. General provisions.
A. Purpose and policy. This article sets forth uniform requirements for
users of the wastewater collection and treatment system of the Lower
Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control authority and
enables the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority to
comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean
Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW and
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW and
wastewater system which will pass-through the system
inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who
may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;
(4) To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewaters and
sludges from the system;
(5) To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW and
wastewater system; and
(6) To enable the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as
control authority to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the
publicly owned treatment works is subject.
B. Administration.
(1) This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the POTW and wastewater system through the
issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through
enforcement of general requirements for users, authorizes
monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities requires user
reporting; assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be
preempted and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
§ 550-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-9
1:225
(2) This article shall apply to all users of the POTW. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this article, as the control authority.
C. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms and phrases as used in this article shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator of the EPA.
AUTHORIZED OR DULY REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER —
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision-making
functions for the corporation; or
(a)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the
regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty
of making major capital investment recommendations, and
initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations, can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate
information for wastewater discharge permit requirements,
and where authority to sign documents has been assigned
or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
(b)
(1)
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or proprietor, respectively.
(2)
If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or their designee.
(3)
The individuals described in Subsections (1) through (3) of this
definition, above, may designate another duly authorized
representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization
specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall
operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, and the written authorization is submitted to Lower
Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority.
(4)
§ 550-9 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-9
1:226
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in
§ 550-10A and B [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, for five days at 20° C., expressed in terms of
concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)].
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the public sanitary sewer system of the POTW.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS or CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARDS — National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, being
any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in
40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD — A measure of the oxygen
required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — Shall refer to Lower Perkiomen Valley
Regional Sewer Authority.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for
a pollutant collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit
of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass
discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the
arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived
from all measurements taken that day.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the
term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other
§ 550-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-9
1:227
duly authorized official of said agency, including the Regional Water
Management Division Director.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge that is not a new source.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The discharge or the
introduction of pollution from any nondomestic source regulated under
Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW
(including holding tank waste discharge into the system).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant
to Section 402 of the Act.50 In addition, "industrial user" shall also be
defined as an establishment which discharges or introduces industrial
wastes into the POTW.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in the
Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as the "Clean Streams
Law"51 and the regulations adopted thereunder.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT — The
maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at
any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited
sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the
duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, causes the inhibition or
disruption of the POTW treatment process or operations or its sludge
processes, use or disposal, and therefore is the cause of a violation of
the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority's NPDES permit
or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits
issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations:
Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title
II, commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA)"; any state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste
Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and
the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.52
50.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
51.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
52.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1345, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq., 15
U.S.C. § 2601 et seq., and 33 U.S.C. § 1401 et seq., respectively.
§ 550-9 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-9
1:228
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by
the control authority upon industrial or commercial facilities to
implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40
CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all daily discharges measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges
measured during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number
of daily discharges measured during that month.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the
EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users, as set
forth in 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of 307(b) of the Act53 and 40 CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is, or may be, a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of the proposed pretreatment
standards pursuant to the Section 307(c) of the Act,54 which will
be applicable to such source if the standards are thereafter
promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
(a)
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
(c)
(1)
53.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b).
54.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c).
§ 550-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-9
1:229
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which
does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate
product, waste product, or finished product.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into the waters
of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or
in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is
a cause of a violation of the POTW's National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit, including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERMITTEE — Shall refer to the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority as control authority.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source should be considered.
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction
does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation
meeting the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) of this definition,
above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or
production equipment.
(2)
Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program;
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
[1]
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly,
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial losses, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this subsection.
(b)
(3)
§ 550-9 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-9
1:230
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated
by the context. This definition includes all federal, state, and local
governmental entities.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. A measure of
the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical
wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
industrial, municipal, and agricultural wastes, and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity,
color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu
of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW.
The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except
by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment
standard, imposed on an user. Any substantive or procedural provision
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (62 Stat. 115, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) or the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known
as the "Clean Streams Law,"55 or any rule or regulation, ordinance
or term or condition of a permit or order adopted or issued by the
commonwealth or a POTW for the implementation or enforcement of an
industrial waste pretreatment program established under the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act or the Clean Streams Law.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES — Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in § 550-10A and B of this article.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which
55.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 550-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-9
1:231
is owned and operated by the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer
Authority. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater
to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or
other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For
the purposes of this article, "POTW" shall also include any sewers
that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons who are users of
the POTW. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage
or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which
convey wastewater to a treatment plant. As used herein, POTW refers
to the wastewater treatment plant owned by Lower Perkiomen Valley
Regional Sewer Authority.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dish washing operations, etc.).
SHALL — Is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Except as provided in
Subsections (3) and (4) of this definition, a significant industrial user is:
An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
or
(1)
An industrial user that:
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(a)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW treatment plant; or
(b)
Is designated as such by the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority on the basis that it has a reasonable potential
for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating
any pretreatment standard or requirement.
(c)
(2)
The control authority may determine that an industrial user subject
to categorical pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant
categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user
on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than
100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment
standard) and the following conditions are met:
The industrial user, prior to control authority's finding, has
consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements;
(a)
(3)
§ 550-9 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-9
1:232
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — An industrial user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the specific criteria
set forth in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii). For purposes of this definition, an
industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one
or more of the following criteria:
The industrial user annually submits the certification
statement required in § 550-14N(2) [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)],
together with any additional information necessary to support
the certification statement; and
(b)
The industrial user never discharges any untreated
concentrated wastewater.
(c)
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection
(2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement, the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with
procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should
not be considered a significant industrial user.
(4)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for
the same parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits as defined in § 550-10;
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those
in which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits as defined in § 550-10, multiplied by
the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease,
and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement,
as defined in § 550-10 (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit or narrative standard) that the control
authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, interference or pass-through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or
has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority
under of this article to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 30 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in this article or in an
enforcement order.
(5)
§ 550-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-9
1:233
SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge at a flow rate
or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited
discharge standards in § 550-10 of this article. A slug discharge is any
discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited
to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has
a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in
any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit
conditions.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
United States Office of Management and Budget.
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom, including snow melt.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the control authority
to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in,
water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by
laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a)56
or other Acts.
USER or INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person who contributes, causes or
permits the indirect discharge of wastewater into the POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial and domestic
wastes and sewage from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the control authority determines will
adversely effect the operation or implementation of the
pretreatment program.
(8)
56.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a).
§ 550-9 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-9
1:234
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of
municipal sewage and industrial waste.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
D. Abbreviation and acronyms. The following abbreviations or acronyms
shall have the designated meanings:
AO Administrative Order
BAT Best Available Treatment
BATEA Best Available Technology Economically Achievable
BCT Best Control Technology
BMP Best Management Practices
BMR Baseline Monitoring Report
B/N Base/Neutral
BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand
BPJ Best Professional Judgment
BPT Best Professional Technology
CERCLA Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CIU Categorical Industrial User
COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
CSO Combined Sewer Overflow
CWA Clean Water Act
CWF Combined Waste Stream Formula
DMR Discharge Monitoring Report
DSS Domestic Sewage Study
EMS Enforcement Management System
EP Extraction Procedure
EPA Environmental Protection Agency of the United States
FDF Fundamentally Different Factor
FOV Finding of Violation
FOG Fats, Oil, and Grease
FR Federal Register
§ 550-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-9
1:235
FWA Flow-Weighted Averaging
FWPCA Federal Water Pollution Control Act
GC/MS Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrophotometry
gpd Gallons Per Day
I + I Infiltration and Inflow
IU Industrial User
IWS Industrial Waste Survey
MAHL Maximum Allowable Headworks Loading
MGD Million Gallons Per Day
mg/l Milligrams Per Liter
MOU Memorandum of Understanding
MSDS Material Safety Data Sheet
NIOSH National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
NMP National Municipal Policy
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NON Notice of Noncompliance
NOV Notice of Violation
OCPSF Organic Chemicals, Plastics, and Synthetic Fibers
O&G Oil and Grease
O&M Operations and Maintenance
OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration
OWEC Office of Water Enforcement and Compliance
PAD Proportioned Actual Domestic Flow
PAH Polynuclear Aromatic Hydrocarbons
PAI Proportioned Actual Industrial Flow
PASS Pretreatment Audit Summary System
PCB Polychlorinated Biphenols
PCI Pretreatment Compliance Inspection
PCME Pretreatment Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement
PCS Permit Compliance System
PIRT Pretreatment Implementation Review Task Force
POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works
ppd Pounds Per Day
ppm Parts Per Million
ppb Parts Per Billion
PPETS Pretreatment Permits Enforcement Tracking System
PQR Permit Quality Review
§ 550-9 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-9
1:236
§ 550-10. General sewer use requirements.
PSNS Pretreatment Standards for New Sources
PSES Pretreatment Standards for Existing Sources
QA/QC Quality Assurance/Quality Control
QNCR Quarterly Noncompliance Report
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
RNC Reportable Noncompliance
SARA Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SRI Significant Industrial User
SMP Solvent Management Plan
SNC Significant Noncompliance
SPCC Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasures
SPMS Strategic Planning and Management System
STP Sewage Treatment Plant
STLC Soluble Threshold Limit Concentration
SUO Sewer Use Ordinance
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act
TCLP Toxicity Characteristic Leachate Procedure
TDS Total Dissolved Solids
TICH Total Identifiable Chlorinated Hydrocarbons
TOMP Toxic Organic Management Plan
TRC Technical Review Criteria
TRE Toxicity Reduction Evaluations
TSS Total Suspended Solids
TTO Total Toxic Organics
TTLC Total Threshold Limit Concentration
USC United States Code
VOA Volatile Organic Analysis
VOC Volatile Organic Compounds
VSS Volatile Suspended Solids
WENDB Water Enforcement National Data Base
WQA Water Quality Act
WQS Water Quality Standards
WWTP Wastewater Treatment Plant
§ 550-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-10
1:237
A. General discharge prohibitions and standards. No user shall contribute,
introduce or cause to be contributed or introduced, directly or
indirectly, into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes
pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all
users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to categorical
pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. Specific prohibitions.
(1) No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW
the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
(a) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flash point of less than 140° F. (60° C.) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(b) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 10.0 or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment.
(c) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference
(but in no case solids greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension).
The following substances are also prohibited: ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, metal, glass, bones, rags, feather, tar, plastic,
wood, paunch manure, whole blood or blood products, lye,
building materials, rubber, hair, shavings, leather, china,
ceramic wastes, asphalt, paint, waxes, butcher offal, porcelain,
and bentonite.
(d) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW.
(e) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 104° F. (40°
C.), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment
plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater
which causes the temperature at the introduction into the
treatment plant to exceed 104° F. (40° C.).
(f) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass-through.
(g) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors,
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.
(h) Trucked or hauled pollutants or wastewater.
§ 550-10 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-10
1:238
(i) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to
life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or
repair.
(j) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts
color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the
Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority's NPDES
permit.
(k) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes.
(l) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage,
condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and
unpolluted wastewater.
(m) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment
of industrial wastes.
(n) Medical wastes.
(o) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test.
(p) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which
may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
(q) Wastewater causing an explosive hazard at the point of
discharge or at any point in the sewer interceptor system or
the POTW.
(r) Any substance or condition which will cause the POTW to
violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit, the
receiving water quality standards, or any statute, rule, or
regulation of any public agency.
(s) In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain
concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed any time
period longer than 15 minutes or contain more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration of flow during
normal operation, or otherwise constitutes a slug discharge.
(t) The discharge of toxic or hazardous wastes, as defined in the
Act or RCRA.
(u) Total solids of such character or quantity as to require unusual
attention or expense in treatment.
(v) Discharges prohibited by state or federal regulations.
§ 550-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-10
1:239
(w) Fats, oils, or greases of an animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l.
(2) When the control authority determines that a user(s) is
contributing to the POTW any of the above enumerated substances
in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the
control authority shall:
(a) Advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the
POTW;
(b) Develop effluent limitation(s) for such user to correct the
interference with the POTW; and
(c) Proceed with enforcement pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
(3) Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section
shall not be processed or stored in a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.
C. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The categorical
pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N,
Parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated in this article by
reference as though set forth in full.
(1) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the control authority may impose equivalent
concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(2) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
control authority shall impose an alternate limit using the
combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(3) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered
by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
(4) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
D. Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards. Where the
Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority's wastewater
treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by
national pretreatment standards, the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority as control authority may apply to the approval
authority for modification of specific limits in the national pretreatment
standards. "Consistent Removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of
a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater
§ 550-10 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-10
1:240
treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which
is achieved by the system in 95% of the samples taken when measured
according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(b)(2) of 40 CFR
403, General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources
of Pollution, promulgated pursuant to the Act. The Lower Perkiomen
Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control authority may then modify
pollutant discharge limits in the national pretreatment standards if the
requirements contained in 40 CFR 403, Section 403.7, are fulfilled and
prior approval from the approval authority is obtained.
E. State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this article.
F. Right of revision. The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer
Authority as control authority reserves the right to establish by
resolution more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to
the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in § 550-9A of this article.
G. Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any
way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation
unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The control authority may impose mass limitations on
users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards
or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate.
H. Accidental discharges. Each user shall provide protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances
regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or
user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to
the control authority for review, and shall be approved by the control
authority before construction of the facility. All existing users shall
complete such a plan by January 1, 1994. No user shall be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge
procedures have been approved by the control authority. Review and
approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the
industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as
necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an
accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
notify the control authority of the incident. The notification shall
include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume,
and corrective actions.
(1) Written notice. Within five days followings an accidental discharge;
the user shall submit to the control authority a detailed written
report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to
§ 550-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-10
1:241
be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such
notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage,
or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to
the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other
applicable law.
(2) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees
whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers
shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such an
accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedures.
I. Local limits.
(1) The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control
authority is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5(c).
(2) The following pollutant limits are established to protect against
pass-through, interference, and sludge contamination. No person
shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following
limits:
Parameter
Daily Maximum
(mg/l)
Arsenic 0.425
Cadmium 0.05
Chromium 3.5
Copper 1.0
Cyanide 1.0
Lead 1.0
Mercury 0.002
Nickel 1.1
Oil and grease and fats of animal
or vegetable origin
100
Oil and grease of petroleum
origin, nonbiodegradable cutting
oil, mineral oil
25
Silver 0.35
Zinc 3.0
§ 550-10 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-10
1:242
§ 550-11. Pretreatment of wastewater.
(3) The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the sewer. All concentrations from metallic
substances are for total metal unless otherwise indicated. The
above local limits are based on maximum allowable headworks
loadings (MAHL) as approved by EPA. The Lower Perkiomen Valley
Regional Sewer Authority as control authority, through the
issuance of an industrial waste discharge permit, may establish
other effluent limits consistent with the approved MAHL. No such
permits, however, shall waive or abrogate federal or state
categorical pretreatment standards or regulations. Categorical
concentrations apply at the end of the process waste stream. No
person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of
allowable discharge limits as established by the Lower Perkiomen
Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control authority. The Lower
Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control authority,
may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the
concentration based limitations.
(4) The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control
authority, may develop best management practices (BMPs), by
resolution or in wastewater discharge permits, to implement local
limits and the requirements of this section.
A. Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with
all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the
prohibitions set out in § 550-10 of this article within the time limitations
specified by EPA, the state, or the control authority, whichever is more
stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the control authority for review, and shall be acceptable to the
control authority before such facilities are constructed. The review of
such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to
produce a discharge acceptable to the control authority under the
provisions of this article.
B. Additional pretreatment measures.
(1) Whenever deemed necessary, the control authority may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods,
designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific
sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate
sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such
other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this
article.
§ 550-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-11
1:243
§ 550-12. Wastewater discharge permit application.
(2) The control authority may require any person discharging into the
POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their
expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued
solely for flow equalization.
(3) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided by the user
when, in the opinion of the control authority, they are necessary for
the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of
grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type
and capacity approved by the control authority and shall be so
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as
needed, by the user at their expense.
(4) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas
detection meter.
C. Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans. The control
authority shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs
an accidental discharge/slug control plan or other action to control slug
discharges. The control authority may require any user to develop,
submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the
control authority may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental
discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the
following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the control authority of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by this article; and
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer
of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site
runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants,
including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
D. Hauled wastewater. The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer
Authority does not accept septic tank waste or industrial waste from
haulers or RCRA hazardous wastes.
§ 550-11 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-12
1:244
A. Wastewater dischargers. It shall be unlawful to discharge to the POTW
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the control authority, and/or to
the POTW, any wastewater except as authorized by the control
authority in accordance with the provisions of this article, subject to
state and federal laws and regulations.
B. Wastewater analysis. When requested by the control authority, a user
must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater within 30 days of the request. The control authority is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically
require users to update this information.
C. Wastewater discharge permit requirement.
(1) No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from
the control authority. A permitted user may discharge for the time
period specified in the permit.
(2) The control authority may require other users to obtain wastewater
discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this
article.
(3) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this
article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a
permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of federal, state, and local law.
D. Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging
wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and
who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall within 30
days after said date, apply to the control authority for a wastewater
discharge permit in accordance with this article. Said user shall not
cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 30 days of the
effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater
discharge permit issued by the control authority.
E. Wastewater discharge permitting; new connections. Any user required
to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit from
the control authority prior to the beginning or recommencing of such
discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in
accordance with this article, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the
date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
F. Wastewater discharge permit application contents.
§ 550-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-12
1:245
(1) Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
complete and file with the control authority, an application in the
form prescribed in this article. The control authority may require
users to submit all or some of the following information as part of a
permit:
(a) Identifying information.
[1] The name and address of the facility, including the name of
the operator and owner.
[2] Contact information, description of activities, facilities,
and plant production processes on the premises.
(b) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
(c) Description of operations.
[1] A brief description of the nature, average rate of
production (including each product produced by type,
amount, processes, and rate of production), and standard
industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by
such user. This description should include a schematic
process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to
the POTW from the regulated processes.
[2] Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials
and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or
could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the
POTW.
[3] Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation.
[4] Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
[5] Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans,
and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and
appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all
points of discharge.
(d) Time and duration of discharges.
(e) The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit.
(f) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to
the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams,
as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream
formula set out in § 550-10B(1)(c) [40 CFR 403.6(e)].
(g) Measurement of pollutants.
§ 550-12 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-12
1:246
[1] The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated
processes for existing sources.
[2] The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
standard or by the control authority, of regulated
pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
[3] Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be
reported.
[4] The sample shall be representative of daily operations and
shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
§ 550-14I of this article. Where the standard requires
compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention
alternative, the user shall submit documentation as
required by the control authority or the applicable
standards to determine compliance with the standard.
[5] Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 550-14J of this article.
[6] Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an
approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither
present nor expected to be present in the discharge based
on § 550-14D(2) [40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)].
(h) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
control authority to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application.
(2) Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and
will be returned to the user for revision.
G. Application signatories and certification.
(1) All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the certification statement
in § 550-14N(1).
(2) If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new
written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section
must be submitted to the control authority prior to or together with
any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(3) A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial
user by the control authority pursuant to Subsection (3) of the
§ 550-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-12
1:247
§ 550-13. Wastewater discharge permit issuance process.
definition of "significant industrial user" in § 550-9C must annually
submit the signed certification statement in § 550-14N(2).
H. Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The control authority will
evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, the control authority will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The control
authority may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
A. Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit
shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from
the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be
issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the control
authority. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific
date upon which it will expire.
B. Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit
shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by
the control authority to prevent pass-through or interference, protect
the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and
disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(a) A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit
issuance date, expiration date and effective date;
(b) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the control
authority in accordance with Subsections C and E of this
section, and provisions for furnishing the new owners or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge
permit;
(c) Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;
(d) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include
an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling
location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on
federal, state, and local law;
(e) The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a
pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the
discharge in accordance with § 550-14D(2);
§ 550-12 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-13
1:248
(f) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not
extend the time for compliance beyond that required by
applicable federal, state or local law;
(g) Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
control authority to be necessary; and
(h) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the control authority
[§ 550-14D(2)] must be included as a condition in the user's
permit.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited
to, the following conditions:
(a) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time
of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;
(b) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
(c) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions, including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
(d) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans
to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(e) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(f) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities and equipment;
(g) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for
compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the
term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
(h) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the control
authority to ensure compliance with this article, and state and
federal laws, rules, and regulations.
C. Wastewater discharge permit appeals. The control authority shall
provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit.
Any person, including the user, may petition the control authority to
§ 550-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-13
1:249
reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days
of notice of its issuance.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the administrative appeal.
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in
the wastewater discharge permit.
(3) The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
(4) If the control authority fails to act within 30 days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a
wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater
discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions
for purposes of judicial review.
(5) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County
within 30 days of the final administrative wastewater discharge
permit decision.
D. Wastewater discharge permit modification. The control authority may
modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but
not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the
time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the POTW, Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority
personnel, or the receiving waters;
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;
§ 550-13 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-13
1:250
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; or
(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator.
E. Wastewater discharge permit transfer.
(1) Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a
specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user,
different premises, or a new or changed operation without approval
of the control authority. Any succeeding owner or user shall also
comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit, as well
as any additional terms and conditions which may be required as a
result of the proposed transfer.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner
or operator only if the permittee gives at least 90 days' advance
notice to the control authority and it approves the wastewater
discharge permit transfer. The notice to the control authority must
include a written certification by the new owner or operator which:
(a) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate
intent to change the facility's operations and processes;
(b) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur;
and
(c) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing wastewater discharge permit.
(3) The new owner and/or operator shall provide a completed
application pursuant to § 550-12 of this article.
(4) Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
F. Wastewater discharge permit revocation.
(1) The control authority may revoke a wastewater discharge permit
for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(a) Failure to notify the control authority of significant changes to
the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
(b) Failure to provide prior notification to the control authority of
changed conditions pursuant to § 550-14E of this article;
(c) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
§ 550-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-13
1:251
(d) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(e) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(f) Refusing to allow the control authority or its designated
representative timely access to the facility premises and
records;
(g) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(h) Failure to pay fines;
(i) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(j) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(k) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
(l) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
(m) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article.
(2) Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater
discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the
issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user.
G. Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. A user with an expiring
wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application to the
control authority, in accordance with § 550-12F of this article, a
minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of user's existing
wastewater discharge permit. It is the responsibility of the user to
request a permit application form no less than 120 days prior to the
expiration of the existing permit. The application shall include
calibration reports on flow monitoring devices used during the term of
the prior permit.
H. Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.
(1) If a municipality, or user located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Lower Perkiomen Valley
Regional Sewer Authority as control authority shall enter into an
intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
(2) Prior to entering into an agreement required by Subsection H(1)
above, the control authority shall request the following information
from the contributing municipality:
(a) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater
discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
§ 550-13 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-13
1:252
(b) An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
(c) Such other information as the control authority may deem
necessary.
(3) An intermunicipal agreement, as required by Subsection H(1),
above, shall contain the following conditions:
(a) A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a
sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this
article and local limits, including baseline monitoring reports
(BMRs), which are at least as stringent as those set out in
§ 550-10I of this article. The requirement shall specify that
such ordinance and local limits must be revised as necessary to
reflect changes made to the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority's resolution or local limits;
(b) A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a
revised user inventory on at least an annual basis;
(c) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be conducted
by the contributing municipality, which of these activities will
be conducted by the control authority, and which of these
activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing
municipality and the control authority;
(d) A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
control authority with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment
activities;
(e) Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to
the POTW;
(f) Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
(g) A provision ensuring the control authority, or its designated
representative, access to the facilities of users located within
the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for
the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties
deemed necessary by the control authority; and
(h) A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the
terms of the intermunicipal agreement, and authorizing the
Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control
authority to take legal action to enforce the terms of the
§ 550-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-13
1:253
§ 550-14. Reporting requirements.
contributing municipality's ordinance or impose and enforce
pretreatment standards.
A. Baseline monitoring reports.
(1) Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is
later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to
or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the control
authority a report which contains the information listed in
Subsection A(2) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of
their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical
industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall submit to the control authority a report
which contains the information listed in Subsection A(2), below. A
new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to
use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also
shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
pollutants to be discharged.
(2) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
(a) All information required in § 550-12F(1)(a)[1], (a)[2] and (c)[1],
and § 550-12F(1)(f).
(b) Measurement of pollutants.
[1] The user shall provide the information required in
§ 550-12F(1)(g)[1] through [4].
[2] The user shall take a minimum of one representative
sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the
requirements of this subsection.
[3] Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should
measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow
use of the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR
403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment
standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit
has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e)
this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be
submitted to the control authority.
[4] Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance
with § 550-14J.
§ 550-13 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-14
1:254
[5] The control authority may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long
as the data provides information sufficient to determine
the need for industrial pretreatment measures.
[6] The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place
of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that
such sampling and analysis is representative of normal
work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the
POTW.
(c) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative as defined in § 550-9C57 and certified to by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.
(d) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the
shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must
meet the requirements set out in § 550-14B of this article.
(e) Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with § 550-14N(1)
of this article and signed by an authorized representative as
defined in § 550-9C.58
B. Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall
apply to the schedule required by § 550-14A(2)(d) of this article:
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments (milestones) in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited
to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and
completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine
operation);
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed six months;
57.Editor's Note: See the definition of the term "authorized or duly representative of the
user" in said section.
58.Editor's Note: See the definition of the term "authorized or duly representative of the
user" in said section.
§ 550-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-14
1:255
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the control authority no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final
date for compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay,
and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return the
construction to the established schedule; and
(4) In no event shall more than one month elapse between such
progress reports to the control authority.
C. Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and
requirements shall submit to the control authority a report containing
the information described in § 550-12F(1)(f) and (g) and
§ 550-14A(2)(b) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in
40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of
operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during
the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with § 550-12G of this article.
D. Periodic compliance reports. All SIUs are required to submit periodic
compliance reports even if they have been designated a nonsignificant
categorical industrial user under the provisions of § 550-14D(3).
(1) Except as specified in § 550-14D(3), all significant industrial users
must, at a frequency determined by the control authority submit no
less than twice per year [June and December (or on dates
specified)] reports indicating the nature, concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment
standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum
daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best
management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative,
the user must submit documentation required by the control
authority or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the
compliance status of the user.
(2) The control authority may authorize an industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a
pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the
industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other
technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected
to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background
levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant
§ 550-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-14
1:256
due to activities of the industrial user [see 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)].
This authorization is subject to the following conditions:
(a) The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined
to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged
from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not
regulated by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise
includes no process wastewater.
(b) The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit,
but in no case longer than five years. The user must submit a
new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted
for each subsequent individual wastewater discharge permit.
See § 550-12F(1)(g)[6].
(c) In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of
the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment
present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater
from all processes.
(d) The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in
accordance with the definition of "authorized or duly
representative of the user" in § 550-9C, and include the
certification statement in § 550-14N(1) [40 CFR
403.6(a)(2)(ii)].
(e) Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a
demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPAapproved
method from 40 CFR 136 with the lowest minimum
detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis.
(f) Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the control authority
must be included as a condition in the user's permit. The
reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted
by the user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by
the control authority for three years after expiration of the
waiver.
(g) Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the
user's permit by the control authority, the industrial user must
certify on each report with the statement in § 550-14N(3)
below, that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its
waste stream due to activities of the industrial user.
(h) In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the
user's operations, the user must immediately comply with the
monitoring requirements of § 550-14D(1), or other more
frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the control
authority, and notify the control authority.
§ 550-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-14
1:257
(i) This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment
standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical
pretreatment standard.
(3) Eligibility for reduced reporting requirements.
(a) The control authority may reduce the requirement for periodic
compliance reports [see § 550-14D(1), (40 CFR 403.12(e)(1))]
to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year,
unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard
or by the EPA, where the industrial user's total categorical
wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following:
[1] One thousand two hundred eleven gallons per day [0.01%
of the POTW's design dry-weather hydraulic capacity
(12.11 mgd) of the POTW], or 5,000 gallons per day,
whichever is smaller, as measured by a continuous effluent
flow monitoring device unless the industrial user
discharges in batches.
[2] One and twenty-five hundredths pounds per day [0.01% of
the design dry-weather organic treatment capacity
(12,500 pounds per day) of the POTW]; and
[3] The loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable
categorical pretreatment standard for which approved
local limits were developed in accordance with § 550-10D
of this article shall be below 0.01% of the maximum
allowable headworks loading as set forth below:
Parameter
0.01% MAHL
(0.001 pounds per day)
Arsenic 0.140
Cadmium 0.040
Chromium 1.800
Copper 1.483
Cyanide 1.453
Lead 0.365
Mercury 0.032
Nickel 1.160
Silver 2.732
Zinc 2.400
(b) Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have
in the last two years been in significant noncompliance, as
§ 550-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-14
1:258
defined in § 550-17 of this article. In addition, reduced
reporting is not available to an industrial user with daily flow
rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so
significantly that, in the opinion of the control authority,
decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user
would result in data that are not representative of conditions
occurring during the reporting period.
(4) All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with § 550-12G of this article.
(5) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good
working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its
monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for
the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its
discharge.
(6) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling
location more frequently than required by the control authority,
using the procedures prescribed in § 550-14J of this article, the
results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
E. Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the control
authority of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or
system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its
wastewater at least 90 days before the change.
(1) The control authority may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge
permit application under § 550-12F of this article.
(2) The control authority may issue a wastewater discharge permit
under § 550-13G of this article or modify an existing wastewater
discharge permit under § 550-13D of this article in response to
changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
(3) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but
are not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the
discharge of any previously unreported pollutants.
F. Reports of potential problems.
(1) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug discharge or slug load,
that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the control authority of the
incident. This notification shall include the location of the
§ 550-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-14
1:259
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.
(2) Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the control authority, submit a detailed written report to
the control authority describing the cause(s) of the discharge and
the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a
result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other
damage to person or property nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this article.
(3) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the
event of a discharge described in Subsection F(1), above.
Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a
discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification
procedure.
(4) Significant industrial users are required to notify the control
authority immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a slug discharge.
G. Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the
control authority as the control authority may require.
H. Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the
control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
result of the repeat analysis to the control authority within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if
the control authority monitors at the user's facility at least once a
month, or if the control authority samples between the user's initial
sample and when the user receives the results of this sampling.
I. Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sample
techniques, to be submitted as a part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard.
If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for
the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part
136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by
using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling
and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
control authority or other parties approved by EPA.
§ 550-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-14
1:260
J. Sample collection. Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements
must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and
analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on
data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting
period.
(1) Except as indicated in Subsection J(2) and (3) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flowproportional
composite sampling techniques, unless timeproportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by
the control authority. Where time-proportional composite sampling
or grab sampling is authorized by the control authority, the samples
must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including
appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR 136 and appropriate
EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twentyfour-
hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be
composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics
and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the
laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by
the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies may be authorized by the control authority, as
appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show
compliance with instantaneous limits.
(2) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total
phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained
using grab collection techniques.
(3) For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
ninety-day compliance reports required in § 550-14A and C [40
CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be
used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and
volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical
sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical
sampling data are available, the control authority may authorize a
lower minimum. For the reports required by § 550-14D [40 CFR
403.12(e) and 403.12(h)], the industrial user is required to collect
the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure
compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
K. Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid,
into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date
or receipt of the report shall govern.
L. Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this
article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this article, any additional records of information obtained
§ 550-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-14
1:261
pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent
of such requirements, and documentation associated with Best
Management Practices established under § 550-10I. Records shall
include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the
name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were
performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall
remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall
be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning
the user or the control authority, or where the user has been specifically
notified of a longer retention period by the control authority.
M. Discharge of hazardous waste. The discharge of Hazardous Waste into
the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority system is strictly
prohibited.
N. Certification statements.
(1) Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial
monitoring waiver. The following certification statement is
required to be signed and submitted by users submitting permit
applications in accordance with § 550-12G; users submitting
baseline monitoring reports under § 550-14A(2)(e); users
submitting reports on compliance with the categorical
Pretreatment Standard deadlines under § 550-14C; users
submitting periodic compliance reports required by § 550-14D(1)
through (4) and users submitting an initial request to forego
sampling of a pollutant on the basis of § 550-14D(2)(d). The
following certification statement must be signed by an authorized
representative as defined in § 550-9C:59
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision
in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the
best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I
am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations.
(2) Annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users.
A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial
user by the control authority pursuant to Subsection (3) of the
definition of "significant industrial user" in § 550-9C and
§ 550-12G(3) must annually submit the following certification
59.Editor's Note: See the definition of the term "authorized or duly representative of the
user" in said section.
§ 550-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-14
1:262
§ 550-15. Compliance monitoring.
statement signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in
the definition of "authorized or duly representative of the user" in
§ 550-9C. This certification must accompany an alternative report
required by the control authority:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment
standards under 40 CFR _____, I certify that, to the best of my
knowledge and belief that during the period from __________,
__________ to __________, __________ [months, days, year]:
(a) The facility described as __________ [facility name] met the
definition of a nonsignificant categorical industrial user as
described in 1.3(48)(c);
(b) The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements during this reporting period; and
(c) The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting
period.
This compliance certification is based on the following
information.
(3) Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have an approved
monitoring waiver based on § 550-14D(2) must certify on each
report with the following statement that there has been no increase
in the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the user.
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40
CFR __________ [specify applicable National Pretreatment
Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, there has been no increase in the level of __________ [list
pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility
since filing of the last periodic report under § 550-14D(1).
A. Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The control authority or its
designated representative shall have the right to enter the premises of
any user to determine whether the user is complying with all
requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the control authority or its
designated representative ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying,
and the performance of any additional duties. A user shall not obstruct,
block or otherwise interfere with access to the sampling point(s).
§ 550-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-15
1:263
§ 550-16. Confidential information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, monitoring programs, and from the control
authority's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the
public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able
to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the control authority, that the release
of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of
(1) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the control
authority or its designated representative shall be permitted to
enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities.
(2) The control authority or its designated representative shall have
the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of,
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering
of the user's operations.
(3) The control authority or its designated representative may require
the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its
own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and
quality shall be calibrated semiannually to ensure their accuracy.
(4) Any temporary or permanent obstruction of safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the control
authority or its designated representative and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
user.
(5) Unreasonable delays in allowing the control authority or its
designated representative access to the user's premises shall be a
violation of this article.
B. Search warrants. If the control authority or its designated
representative has been refused access to a building, structure, or
property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause
to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and
sampling program of the control authority designed to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or
to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the control authority may seek issuance of a search
warrant from the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 550-15 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-16
1:264
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state
law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user
furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made
available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses
related to NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40
CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be
available to the public without restriction.
§ 550-17. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
The control authority shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions
served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the
previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant
noncompliance" shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any
other industrial user that violates Subsections C, D, or H of this section) and
shall mean:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in § 550-10;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by § 550-10, multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for
all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by § 550-10 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard) that the control authority determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or
the general public;
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the control
authority's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
§ 550-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-17
1:265
§ 550-18. Administrative enforcement remedies.
E. Failure to meet, within 30 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
H. Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the control authority determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
A. Notification of violation. When the control authority finds that a user
has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may serve
upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 30 days of the
receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the control authority.
Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the control authority
to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
B. Consent orders. The control authority may enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for
noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be
taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period
specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force
and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to § 550-18D
and E of this article.
C. Show cause hearing. The control authority may order a user which has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the control
authority and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should
not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and
place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for
such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
§ 550-17 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-18
1:266
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
receipt requested) at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice
may be served on any authorized representative of the user, as defined
in § 550-9C60 and required by § 550-12G(1). A show cause hearing shall
not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against
the user.
D. Compliance orders. When the control authority finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may issue
an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the
user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not
come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to
the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for
compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement,
nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any
violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
E. Cease-and-desist orders.
(1) When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past
violations are likely to recur, the control authority may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations
and directing the user to:
(a) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(b) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the
discharge.
(2) Issuance of a cease-and-desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
F. Administrative civil penalties.
60.Editor's Note: See the definition of the term "authorized or duly representative of the
user" in said section.
§ 550-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-18
1:267
(1) When the control authority finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater
discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may
fine such a user in an amount not to exceed $25,000 per day for
each violation regardless of jurisdictional boundaries. Such fines
shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of
monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, penalties
shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. The
foregoing administrative civil penalties shall be enforced in
accordance with the provisions of §§ 550-19B and 550-20D of this
article.
(2) A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges,
fines and penalties.
(3) Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for
the control authority to reconsider the fine along with full payment
of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine.
Where a request has merit, the control authority may convene a
hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful,
the payment, together with any interest accruing there on, shall be
returned to the user. The control authority may add the costs of
preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and
orders, to the fine.
(4) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
G. Emergency suspensions.
(1) The control authority may immediately suspend a user's discharge
after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The control
authority may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after
notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with
the operation of the POTW, or which represents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
(a) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a
user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the control authority may take such steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The
control authority may allow the user to recommence its
discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the control authority that the period of endangerment has
§ 550-18 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-18
1:268
§ 550-19. Judicial enforcement remedies.
passed, unless the termination proceedings in § 550-18H of
this article are initiated against the user.
(b) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
written statement, describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the control authority prior to the date of any
show cause or termination hearing under § 550-18C or H of
this article.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
H. Termination of discharge.
(1) In addition to the provisions in § 550-13F of this article, any user
who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
(a) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(b) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(c) Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to
discharge;
(d) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
(e) Violation of the pretreatment standards in § 550-10 of this
article.
(2) Such user will be notified of proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 550-18C of
this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise
of this option by the control authority shall not be a bar to, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
I. Notification to contributing jurisdictions. The control authority shall
provide to the contributing municipality a true and correct copy of any
administrative enforcement remedy, judicial enforcement remedy, or
supplemental enforcement action initiated by the control authority with
reference to an industrial user within the municipality, pursuant to
§§ 550-18, 550-19 and 550-20 of this article. The failure to provide a
copy to the contributing municipality shall not be a defense to any third
party who is a subject of an administrative enforcement remedy, judicial
enforcement remedy, or supplemental enforcement action.
§ 550-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-19
1:269
A. Injunctive relief. When the control authority finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may
petition the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania for appropriate legal and equitable relief, including the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which
restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater
discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article
on activities of the user. Relief requested may also include requirements
for environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a
user.
B. Civil penalties.
(1) A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
shall be liable to the control authority for a maximum civil penalty
of $25,000 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other
long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each
day during the period of the violation. Each violation for each
separate day shall constitute a separate and distinct offense under
this section.
(2) The control authority may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities,
including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any
actual damages incurred by the control authority.
(3) In determining the amount of civil liability, there shall be taken into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the
user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance
history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
(4) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
C. Criminal prosecution. A user who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, order issued
hereunder, any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or who
willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which
causes personal injury or property damage, or any user who knowingly
makes any false statements, representations or certifications in any
application, record, report, plan, or other document filed, or required to
be maintained pursuant to this article, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued under this article or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device of method
§ 550-19 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-19
1:270
§ 550-20. Supplemental enforcement action.
required under this article may be subject to criminal prosecution in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Crimes
Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
D. Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are
not exclusive. The control authority may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement
of pretreatment violations will generally he/she in accordance with the
control authority's enforcement response plan. However, the control
authority may take other action against any user when the
circumstances warrant. Further, the control authority is empowered to
take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
A. Performance bonds. The control authority may decline to issue or
reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to
comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond,
payable to the control authority, in a sum not to exceed a valued
determined by the control authority to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance.
B. Liability insurance. The control authority may decline to issue or
reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to
comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, unless the user submits proof that it has
obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to
the POTW caused by its discharge.
C. Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the control
authority. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to
the provisions of the Second Class Township Code or Borough Code,61
as the case may be, and applicable ordinances governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the control authority for any costs
incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
D. Assessment of civil penalties.
(1) Pursuant to the provisions of Act 9 of 1992, providing for enhanced
penalty authority for publicly owned treatment works which are
authorized to enforce industrial pretreatment standards for
industrial waste discharges, and in addition to proceeding under
any other remedy available at law or equity for violation of
61.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 550-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-20
1:271
pretreatment standards and/or requirements, the control authority,
as the operator of a publicly owned treatment works, may assess a
civil penalty upon an industrial user for violation of any of the terms
and provisions of this article. The penalty may be assessed whether
or not the violation was willful or negligent. The civil penalty
shall not exceed $25,000 per day for each violation, regardless
of jurisdictional boundaries. Each violation for each separate day
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense under this section.
(2) As part of any notice of assessment of civil penalties issued by the
control authority to an industrial user, there shall also be included a
description of the applicable appeals process to be followed,
including the name, address and telephone number of the person
responsible for accepting such appeal, on behalf of the control
authority.
(3) For purposes of this section, a single operational upset which leads
to simultaneous violations of more than one pretreatment standard
or requirement shall be treated as a single violation as required by
Federal Water Pollution Control Act.62 The control authority may,
however, recover its costs for reestablishing the operation of the
treatment works in addition to any civil penalty imposed under this
section.
(4) The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control
authority shall publicly adopt a formal, written civil penalty
assessment policy and make it publicly available. Each industrial
discharger participating in the pretreatment program shall be
given written notice of the policy. The penalty assessment policy
shall consider:
(a) Damage to air, water, land or other natural resources of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and their uses;
(b) Costs of restoration and abatement;
(c) Savings resulting to the person in consequence of the violation;
(d) History of past violations;
(e) Deterrence of future violations; and
(f) Other relevant factors.
(5) Uses for penalties. All civil penalties collected pursuant to this
section shall be placed by the control authority in a restricted
account and shall only be used by the control authority and the
publicly owned treatment works for the following uses:
62.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 550-20 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-20
1:272
(a) The repair of damage and any additional maintenance needed
or any additional costs imposed as a result of the violation for
which the penalty was imposed;
(b) Pay any penalties imposed on the Lower Perkiomen Valley
Regional Sewer Authority as control authority or the publicly
owned treatment works by the federal or state government for
violation of pretreatment standards;
(c) For the costs incurred by the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional
Sewer Authority as control authority or publicly owned
treatment works to investigate and take the enforcement
action that resulted in a penalty being imposed;
(d) For the monitoring of discharges in the pretreatment program
and for capital improvements to the treatment works,
including sewage collection lines, which may be required by
the pretreatment program; and
(e) Any remaining funds may be used for capital improvements to
the treatment works, including collection lines.
(6) Injunctive relief.
(a) The control authority shall have the power to obtain injunctive
relief to enforce compliance with or restrain any violation of
any pretreatment requirement or standard pursuant to and in
accordance with the provisions of Act 9 of 1992, and 40 CFR
403.8(f)(1)(vi)(A). Injunctive relief shall be available upon the
showing of one or more of the following:
[1] A discharge from an industrial user presents an imminent
danger or substantial harm to the POTW or the public;
[2] A discharge from an industrial user presents an imminent
or substantial endangerment to the environment;
[3] A discharge from an industrial user causes the POTW to
violate any condition of its discharge permit; or
[4] The industrial user has shown a lack of ability or intention
to comply with a pretreatment standard.
(b) Notwithstanding the preceding subsection, an injunction
affecting an industrial operation not directly related to the
condition or violation in question may be issued if the court
determines that other enforcement procedures would not be
adequate to affect prompt correction of the condition or
violation. In addition to an injunction, the court in any such
proceedings may levy civil penalties in accordance with Act 9
of 199263 and this article.
63.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 752.1 et seq.
§ 550-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-20
1:273
§ 550-21. Affirmative defenses to discharge violations.
(7) Appeal. An industrial user assessed with a civil penalty under the
terms of this section shall have 30 days to pay the proposed penalty
in full, or, if the industrial user wishes to contest either the amount
of the penalty or the fact of the violation, the industrial user must
file an appeal of the action within 30 days pursuant to 2 Pa.C.S.A.
(relating to administrative law and procedure). Failure to appeal
within this period shall result in a waiver of all legal rights to
contest the violation or the amount of the penalty.
(8) The penalty authorized in this section is intended to be concurrent
and cumulative, and the provisions of this section shall not abridge
or alter any right of action or remedy, now or hereafter existing in
equity, or under the common law or statutory law, criminal or civil,
available to a person, the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer
Authority as control authority, or the commonwealth.
E. Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false
statements, representation or certification in any application, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to this article, or wastewater discharge permit, or who
falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this article, shall be prosecuted in
accordance with the provisions of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code
pertaining to perjury and falsification in official matters pursuant to 18
Pa.C.S.A. § 4901 et seq.
A. Upset.
(1) For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does
not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational
error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
(2) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards if the requirements of Subsection A(3), below, are met.
(3) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
(a) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
§ 550-20 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-21
1:274
(b) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable
operation and maintenance procedures; and
(c) The user has submitted the following information to the control
authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if
this information is provided orally, a written submission must
be provided within five days):
[1] A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
[2] The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and
times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue; and
[3] Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate,
and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(4) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(5) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(6) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility
until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided. This requirement applies in situations where, among
other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility
is reduced, lost, or fails.
B. Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance
with the general prohibitions in § 550-10A of this article or the specific
prohibitions in § 550-10B of this article except § 550-10B(1)(a), (b) and
(h), if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its
discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources,
would cause pass-through or interference and that either:
(1) A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass-through or interference; or
(2) No local limits exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior
discharge when the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer
Authority as control authority was regularly in compliance with the
NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance
with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
§ 550-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-21
1:275
C. Bypass.
(1) For the purposes of this section:
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a user's treatment facility.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
(2) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if
it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation.
These bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections C(3)
and (4) of this section.
(3) Bypass notification.
(a) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the control authority at least 10 days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(b) A user shall submit oral notice to the control authority of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of
the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within
five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass.
The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause, the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and
steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass.
(4) Bypass.
(a) Bypass is prohibited, and the control authority may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
[1] Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
[2] There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods
of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate backup equipment should have been installed in
the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to
§ 550-21 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-21
1:276
§ 550-22. Fees.
§ 550-23. Authority to turn off water if sewer use charges not paid.
[Added 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 576]
Whereas, the Water Services Act, 53 P.S. § 3102.101 et seq., requires the
municipality to turn off water service to delinquent sewer rental accounts,
prevent a bypass which occurred during normal period of
equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
[3] The user submitted notices as required under Subsection
C(3) of this section.
(b) The control authority may approve an anticipated bypass after
considering its adverse effects if the control authority
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in
Subsection C(4)(a)of this section.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer
Authority's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the
program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set
forth in a schedule of charges and fees.
B. Charges and fees.
(1) The Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control
authority may adopt by resolution charges and fees which may
include:
(a) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the pretreatment program;
(b) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
(c) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
(d) Fees for permit applications;
(e) Fees for filing appeals;
(f) Fees for consistent removal of pollutants otherwise subject to
federal pretreatment standards; and
(g) Other fees as the control authority may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein.
(2) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and
are separate from all other fees or sewer rentals chargeable by the
Lower Perkiomen Valley Regional Sewer Authority as control
authority or any municipality contributing wastewater flows to the
POTW.
§ 550-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-23
1:277
when requested by the municipal authority. The Borough, or an authorized
agent, is authorized to consider such request upon the municipal authority
showing proof that notice of delinquency was posted at said property at
least 10 days prior to such requested shutoff. After all conditions are met,
including the notice requirements contained in § 659-11, and the sewer
charges are still not paid, authorization is hereby given to terminate the
water service, in accordance with § 659-9.
§ 550-23 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 550-23
1:278
Chapter 565
SOLID WASTE
§ 550-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 550-23
1:279

ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 3-5-1969 by Ord. No. 220 (Part 5, Ch. 6, Art. A, of the 1985
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 565-1. Definitions.
The following words when used in this article shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise.
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.
GARBAGE — The animal, fruit and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods and the residue
from fruit trees located on the premises. It shall not include more than a
minimum amount of free liquids. It shall not include food-processing wastes
from industries such as canneries or packing plants nor large quantities of
condemned food products.
PERSON — A natural person and shall also mean a firm, copartnership,
association, school, church, institution or corporation which would be
deemed a business establishment.
REFUSE — "Garbage," "ashes," "rubbish" and "riffraff," defined in this
section.
RIFFRAFF — All waste material which is too large for collection in a twentyone-
gallon container. Examples include: Christmas trees, furniture, tanks,
stoves, large dead animals, tree trimmings, etc.
RUBBISH — All waste material other than ashes or garbage which can
be collected in a twenty-one-gallon container such as paper, rags, street
sweepings, small animals, excelsior, straw, boxes, old clothes and shoes,
leather scraps, pieces of carpet, grass, hedge trimmings, cloth, grass, china,
wood, sand, brick, tile, etc.
§ 565-2. Administration. [Amended 4-3-1969 by Ord. No. 220-A]
A. All refuse accumulated in the Borough from residences; hotels,
restaurants, stores, institutions and garden apartments being excluded,
shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the Borough; provided,
however, that Council may require any person or persons owning or
occupying any premises whose accumulated refuse at each time of
collection is in the excess of three twenty-one-gallon containers or their
equivalent by weight or volume, each container to have a maximum
weight limitation of not more than 50 pounds per twenty-one-gallon
container, to personally collect, convey and dispose of that refuse in
accordance with all regulations for collection, conveyance, and disposal
prescribed in this article or made by Council.
§ 565-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-2
1:281
B. Council is authorized to contract for the performance of the service
provided by this article and to award a contract therefor from time to
time for such period of time as shall be determined by Council, which
contract shall require the contractor to assume all responsibility for the
provisions of this article and regulations, orders and specification
provided under the authority of this article, and to convey, dump and
dispose of all such refuse beyond and outside the boundaries of the
Borough and to fix and regulate, in a manner not inconsistent with the
terms of this article, and the manner, method and time of collecting and
conveying refuse, the type of equipment required for the purpose and
the price to be paid for the performance of the contract and the time or
times for the payment thereof.
C. The collection and disposal of refuse from residences in the Borough, as
provided in this section, shall be under the supervision of Council.
Council shall have authority to make regulations concerning the days of
collection, type and location of waste containers, and other such
matters pertaining to the collection and disposal as it may deem
advisable, and to change and modify those regulations after notice as
required by law, provided that these regulations are not contrary to the
provisions of this article. Any aggrieved person shall have the right to
appeal against any regulations or order made by the Council to the
Council, which may confirm, modify, or revoke any such regulation or
order; provided, however, that no such appeal to Council shall be
permitted as to any regulation covered by this article.
D. Council is authorized to arrange date schedules for the collection of
refuse in the various categories and sections of the Borough and shall
give public notice of those schedules. The schedules shall provide for
two collections for each and every week throughout the year. No
collections shall be made on Sundays or the following holidays: New
Year's Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving and Christmas. All collections shall be made between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., provided that collections may be made
after 6:00 p.m. to complete a day's schedule.
E. All persons within the Borough of Collegeville other than those
excluded under Subsection A of this section, shall dispose of refuse by
the municipal collection service only and no person shall transport or
dispose of refuse by any other means not approved by this article or by
the Council.
F. Council is authorized to make regulations concerning the hauling of
refuse collected outside of the Borough over the streets of the Borough.
No refuse shall be hauled over the streets of the Borough except in a
watertight vehicle provided with a tight cover so as to prevent offensive
odors escaping from the vehicle and refuse from being blown, dropped
or spilled from it. No refuse shall be dumped or disposed of within the
limits of the Borough.
§ 565-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 565-2
1:282
§ 565-3. Prohibited acts.
On and after the date of the award of a contract for collection service
pursuant to the authority contained in § 565-2B:
§ 565-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any person, whether as principal agent or employee, violating or assisting
in the violation of any of the provisions of this article or of any regulation
made by Council under the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction
thereof by a Magisterial District Judge within the Magisterial District of
which the Borough of Collegeville is a part pay a fine of not less than $5
or more than $1,000 and in default of payment of such fine and costs of
prosecution shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of not more
than 10 days. After notice, each day's neglect to comply with the provisions
of this article or any such regulation shall be deemed a separate offense
and be subject in all respects to the same penalty as the first offense, and
G. Ownership of refuse set out for collection from residences shall be
vested in the Borough.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, convey over any of the
streets or alleys of the Borough or dispose of any refuse accumulated in
said Borough in any manner not approved of in this article or
subsequent regulations.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any refuse in any street,
alley or other public place or upon private property, whether owned by
that person or not, within the Borough, except it be in proper
receptacles for collection. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse
in any stream or other body of water.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any accumulation of refuse
on any premises in the Borough other than for the purpose of collection
in the manner provided by this article, or by special regulation of
Council.
Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby
declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove
unauthorized accumulation of refuse within 15 days' notice to either the
occupant or owner shall be deemed a violation of this article.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the occupants of the
premises on which refuse receptacles are stored, or the collector, to
remove the covers of any of the refuse receptacles or to remove the
refuse stored in those containers.
E. It shall be unlawful to place in any containers provided for regular
collection any wearing apparel, bedding or refuse from premises where
highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed, or any highly
inflammable or explosive refuse.
§ 565-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-4
1:283
separate proceedings may be instituted and separate penalties imposed for
each day's offense after the first conviction.
§ 565-4 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 565-4
1:284
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 9-5-1990 by Ord. No. 378 (Part 5, Ch. 6, Art. B, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 565-5. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Collegeville Borough
Waste Reduction and Recycling Ordinance."
§ 565-6. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and
phrases used throughout the article shall have the following meanings:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
BIMETALLIC CONTAINERS — Empty food and beverage containers
constituting of steel and aluminum.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals that include, but are not limited to, fairs, bazaars,
socials, picnics, and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more
individuals per day.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone; the
product may be transparent, translucent, or colored, and may be used as a
container for packaging or bottling of various matter and all other material
commonly known as "glass." Excluded are ceramics, automotive glass, plate
glass, or heat-tempered glass.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — All white paper, bond paper, and computer
paper used in commercial, institutional, and municipal establishments and
in residences.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people such as hospitals, schools, day-care centers, universities,
and nursing homes.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery, and tree trimmings
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTIES — Any property having four or
more dwelling units per structure.
MUNICIPAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Public facilities operated by the
municipality and other governmental and quasi-governmental authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other materials, including liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
§ 565-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-6
1:285
material, resulting from the operation of residential, municipal, commercial,
or institutional establishments and from community activities. The term
does not include source separated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Collegeville.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as newsprint
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest, but not including magazines.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
federal government or agency, State institution or agency (including, but
not limited to, the Department of General Services and the Pennsylvania
Public School Building Authority), or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. In any
provisions of this article prescribing a fine, imprisonment, or penalty, or any
combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers
and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and
directors.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers.
Due to the large variety of types of plastic, the recycling regulations may
stipulate specific types of plastic which may be recycled.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials generated by business or
consumers which can be separated from municipal waste and returned to
commerce to be reused as a resource in the development of useful products.
Recyclables include the following: clear glass, colored glass, aluminum,
steel and bimetallic cans, high-grade office paper, newsprint, corrugated
paper, leaf waste, and plastics. Recyclable material must be free from
contamination that would affect its reuse.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery, and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, tree branches, plastics, and other materials
which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or
the mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than
through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable materials other
than fuel for the operation of energy.
RESIDENCE(S) — Any single-family attached or detached dwelling or
multiple dwellings having not more than four units from which the Borough
collects municipal waste.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials
separated at the point of origin for the purpose of being recycled.
STEEL CONTAINERS — Empty steel or tin-coated steel food or beverage
containers.
§ 565-6 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 565-7
1:286
§ 565-7. Establishment of program; grant of power.
The Borough of Collegeville hereby establishes a recycling program for
the mandatory separation and collection of recyclable municipal waste as
designated by resolution adopted by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Collegeville from all residences, businesses, or institutions in the Borough
as designated by resolution adopted by Council, for which waste collection
is provided by the Borough or any other collector. Collection of the materials
to be recycled shall be made periodically by the designated agent of the
Borough, or any other municipal waste collector operating in the Borough.
This article is ordained pursuant to the Act of July 28, 1988, No. 101, known
as the "Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act."64
§ 565-8. Establishment of collection guidelines.
By resolution adopted by Council, guidelines on the manner, days and times
of collections of recyclable materials, and the bundling, handling, location,
and time of placement of such materials for collection shall be established.
§ 565-9. Separation and collection.
A. All persons who are residents of the Borough of Collegeville shall
separate all municipal waste to be recycled from all other municipal
waste produced at their homes, apartments, and other residential
establishments as designated by resolution adopted by Borough
Council, and to store such material for collection, and shall place the
same for collection in accordance with the guidelines established in the
resolution.
(1) If required by resolution adopted by Council, an owner, landlord, or
agent of an owner or landlord of a multifamily rental housing
property with four or more units may comply with its recycling
responsibilities by establishing a collection system at each
property. The collection system must include suitable containers
for collecting and sorting materials, easily accessible locations for
the containers, and written instructions to the occupants
concerning the use and availability of the collection system.
Owners, landlords, and agents of owners or landlords who comply
with this section shall not be liable for noncompliance of occupants
of their buildings.
B. All persons must separate leaf waste from other municipal waste
generated at their houses, apartments, and other residential
establishments for collection unless those persons have otherwise
provided for composting of leaf waste.
C. Persons must separate high-grade office paper, aluminum, corrugated
paper and leaf waste (and other material deemed appropriate by the
municipality and established by resolution) generated at commercial,
64.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 565-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-9
1:287
§ 565-10. Ownership of recyclable materials.
All municipal waste to be recycled placed by the resident for collection by
the Borough's agent pursuant to this article and the resolution of Council,
shall, from time of pickup, become the property of the Borough, except as
otherwise provided in this article or a resolution.
§ 565-11. Unauthorized collections.
It shall be a violation of this article, for any person, firm or corporation,
other than the Borough of Collegeville or one authorized by Borough
Council, to collect municipal waste to be recycled placed by a resident for
collection by the Borough's agent, unless that person, firm, or corporation
has prior written permission to make such collection as set forth in this
article. Each unauthorized collection in violation hereof from one or more
residences on one calendar day shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 565-12. Other means of disposal.
Any resident may donate or sell municipal waste to be recycled to any
person, firm or corporation, whether operating for profit or not, provided
that the receiving person, firm or corporation shall not collect such donated
recyclable materials from the collection point of residence without prior
written permission from Council to make such collection.
§ 565-13. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
municipal or institutional establishments and from community activities
if required to recycle by resolution adopted by Council, and to store
the material until collection. A person may be exempted from this
subsection if the person submits documentation to the Borough
annually, indicating that designated recyclable materials are being
recycled in an appropriate manner.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of §§ 565-9
to 565-12 shall receive an official written warning of noncompliance for
the first and second offense. Thereafter, all such violations shall be
subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, any person, firm or corporation who
violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25, or more than $300, and
costs of prosecution, for each and every offense.
C. The Borough reserves the right not to collect municipal waste
containing recyclable materials in combination with nonrecyclable
materials.
§ 565-9 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 565-14
1:288
§ 565-14. Modifications authorized.
Council may, from time to time, add to or remove from the standards and
regulations in this article.
§ 565-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-14
1:289

ARTICLE III
County Waste Flow System
[Adopted 9-19-1990 by Ord. No. 380 (Part 5, Ch. 6, Art. C, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 565-15. Background and findings.
A. Whereas, the Solid Waste Management Act of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Act of July 7, 1980, P.L. 380, No. 97, 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et
seq., (Purdon Supp. 1990) ("Act 97"), was enacted to establish a
comprehensive planning and regulatory framework to deal with the
storage, collection, transportation, and processing of solid waste,
including municipal waste, as defined in Section 103 of Act 97, 35 P.S.
§ 6018.103 (Purdon Supp. 1990); and
B. Whereas, Act 97 made each municipality responsible for the collection,
transportation, processing and disposal of municipal waste generated
or present within its boundaries and authorized municipalities to
contract with any other person or municipality, including a county or an
authority, to carry out such responsibilities and authorized
municipalities to adopt ordinances, regulations and standards that
require disposal of all municipal waste generated within their
jurisdiction at a designated facility; and
C. Whereas, Act 97 required the preparation of municipal waste
management plans, 35 P.S. § 6018.201 (Purdon Supp. 1985); and
D. Whereas, Section 103 of Act 97 gave counties, cities, townships,
boroughs and authorities created by such municipalities concurrent
responsibility for the planning and regulation of municipal waste
collection, transportation and disposal by defining all such entities as
municipalities; and
E. Whereas, in 1982 and 1983, pursuant to the requirements of Act 97, the
several municipalities in the county adopted resolutions requesting the
County Board of Commissioners ("County Board") to prepare on the
municipalities' behalf a comprehensive municipal waste management
plan; and
F. Whereas, pursuant to the requests of the various municipalities and the
county's independent authority under Act 97, the County Board
developed a municipal waste management plan for solid waste disposal
(the plan) in which the County undertakes to assist such municipalities
with the disposal of acceptable waste (as hereinafter defined) so as to
enable the county and such municipalities to fulfill their responsibilities
as set forth in Act 97; and
G. Whereas, the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and Waste
Reduction Act of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act No. 101 of
July 28, 1988, P.L. 556 ("Act 101"),65 was enacted in 1988 to empower,
and assign the duty to, the county to develop municipal waste
§ 565-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-15
1:291
management plans and otherwise insure adequate capacity for
permitted processing and disposal of the municipal waste which is
generated within its boundaries and empowers, and assigns the duty
to, each municipality other than a county, to assure the proper and
adequate transportation, collection and storage of municipal waste
generated within its boundaries; and
H. Whereas, Act 101 was also enacted to provide for strategies to
encourage recycling and to confer various additional powers upon
counties and other municipalities; and
I. Whereas, the county supplemented the plan and submitted it to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) for
technical approval pursuant to Act 97 and Act 101; and
J. Whereas, on January 26, 1989, DEP advised that it had granted
technical approval of the plan; and
K. Whereas, Act 101 provides that the plan may serve as the county's basic
planning document for municipal waste, pending the later development
of a plan in accordance with the provisions of Act 101, upon approval by
a majority of the affected municipalities within the county representing
a majority of the county's population; and
L. Whereas, a majority of the municipalities, including each of the
municipalities (as hereinafter defined) representing a majority of the
county's population, timely adopted resolutions approving the plan; and
M. Whereas, the plan was thereafter declared by DEP to have been
grandfathered under the provisions of Act 101; and
N. Whereas, pursuant to Act 101, the County Board has subsequently
effectuated certain revisions to the municipal waste management plan
for solid waste disposal (the plan revision), which plan revision is to be
ratified by a majority of the affected municipalities within the county
representing a majority of the county's population; and
O. Whereas, prompt and effective action to implement the plan and the
plan revision is necessary in order to protect and save the public's
health, safety and welfare; and
P. Whereas, pursuant to the plan and the plan revision, the county has
enacted an ordinance (the County Waste Flow Ordinance) requiring the
disposal of all municipal waste (as hereinafter defined) generated
within the municipalities in former Municipal Waste Districts 4, 5, and
6, now referred to collectively as the "Western District," of the county
(the municipalities) at the facilities comprising the municipal waste
disposal system for the county applicable to the municipalities (the
Western County System), forbidding the collection and transportation
of municipal waste within the Western District of the county by
65.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 565-15 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 565-15
1:292
collectors or transporters of municipal waste not properly licensed to
dispose of waste at the Western County System and providing for the
development of additional necessary rules and regulations concerning
solid waste collection, transportation and disposal; and
Q. Whereas, the county, in consultation with its technical and financial
advisors, and in the implementation of the plan and the plan revision,
has created the Western County System whereby the municipal waste
to be generated within the Western District will be disposed of from and
after a certain future date; and
R. Whereas, the county has created the Waste System Authority of
Western Montgomery County (the Waste Authority) and has assigned
and delegated to the Waste Authority certain of its powers to operate
the Western County System; and
S. Whereas, in further implementation of the provisions of the plan and
the plan revision, the county plans to enter into an intergovernmental
agreement with the Waste Authority and the municipalities (the
municipalities signing such agreement are hereinafter referred to as
"municipalities") designated "Inter-Municipal Agreement for the
Disposal of Western Montgomery County Municipal Solid Waste" (the
IMA) providing, among other things, for the delivery of certain
acceptable waste (as hereinafter defined) from the municipalities to the
Western County System for disposal; and
T. Whereas, it is intended that the Western County System shall be
available to the municipalities and other users for the disposal of their
acceptable waste; and
U. Whereas, it is understood that the tipping fees (as hereinafter defined),
to be charged to users of the Western County System (including, where
appropriate, the municipalities) must be sufficient to pay the costs of
the Western County System; and
V. Whereas, the Borough of Collegeville, after due consideration of the
undertaking, and taking into account the long term waste disposal
services being provided by the Waste Authority pursuant to the plan
and the plan revision, regards the Western County System as necessary
to its long-term health, safety, and welfare and has determined that any
tipping fees to be charged by the Waste Authority are or will be
reasonable in light of the long-term services provided; and
W. Whereas, the Borough of Collegeville has determined that it is
appropriate and in its interest to enact this article (the municipal waste
flow ordinance) directing the flow of all acceptable waste generated
within its jurisdiction to the Western County System; and
X. Whereas, the municipalities have responsibility for collection and the
transportation of such acceptable waste to the Western County System
in accordance with Act 97 and Act 101; and
§ 565-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-15
1:293
§ 565-16. Definitions.
Y. Whereas, for all of the reasons herein set forth, it is in the public's
interest that this article be enacted and the Western County System be
established as provided in the county ordinance; and
Z. Whereas, the form of this article has been approved by the county.
A. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE — Municipal waste which is not unacceptable
waste or nonprocessable waste.
COUNTY — County of Montgomery, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY ORDINANCE or COUNTY WASTE FLOW ORDINANCE — An
ordinance enacted by the county creating the Western County System
in the Western District, providing for the licensure of various persons,
regulating waste flow and setting forth certain related provisions.
DATE OF WESTERN COUNTY SYSTEM OPERATION — That date on
which the Western County System shall be declared by the county to
be ready to commence the disposal of acceptable waste on a sustained
basis.
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
Any material or substance which, by reason of its composition or
characteristics, is:
Toxic or hazardous waste;
As defined in the Resource, Conservation and Recovery
Act of 1976, 42 U.S.C. § 6901, et seq.;
[1]
As defined in Section 6(e) of the Toxic Substances Control
Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2605(e);
[2]
[3] Under Act 97;66 or
Under any other applicable laws of similar purpose or
effect, including, but not limited to, with respect to each
of such items in Subsection A(1)(a)[1] through [4] of this
definition, any replacement, amendment, expansion or
supplement thereto and any rules, regulations, or policies
thereunder; or
[4]
(a)
Special nuclear or by-product materials within the meaning
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.,
and any replacement, amendment, expansion or supplement
thereto and any rules, regulations or policies thereunder; and
(b)
(1)
66.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 565-15 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 565-16
1:294
LANDFILL — A landfill with which the Waste Authority has contracted
to disposal of acceptable waste.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Collegeville, located within the
County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — "Municipal waste" as defined in Section 103 of
Act 9767 and Section 103 of Act 101,68 and any rules, regulations or
policies promulgated thereunder.
NONPROCESSABLE WASTE —
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, trust, municipal authority, federal
institution or agency, state institution or agency, municipality, other
governmental agency or any other legal entity or any group of such
persons whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties. In any provisions of this article prescribing a fine, penalty,
imprisonment or denial or grant of any license, or any combination of
the foregoing, the term "person" shall include the officers and directors
of any corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors.
PLAN — The countywide municipal waste management plan developed
by the county and approved by DEP, as such has been and may
hereafter be amended or revised in compliance with law.
PLAN REVISION — The revision dated June 1990, to the county
municipal waste management plan developed by the county, to be
submitted to DEP and approved by a majority of the affected
Any other material that any governmental agency or unit having
appropriate jurisdiction shall determine from time to time is
harmful, toxic, or dangerous, or otherwise ineligible for disposal in
the landfill.
(2)
(1) White goods;
(2) Automobile tires in quantity;
Noncombustible items, stumps, logs, brush and other waste which
either:
(a) Weighs in excess of 25 pounds; or
Exceeds one of the following dimensions: four feet in length,
four inches in diameter or four inches in thickness;
(b)
(3)
(4) Sludges;
(5) Construction and demolition debris; and
(6) Leaf waste beyond that permitted by Act 101.69
67.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.103.
68.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.103.
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 565-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-16
1:295
municipalities within the county representing a majority of the county's
population.
POINT OF ENTRY INTO THE WESTERN COUNTY SYSTEM — Any
delivery point within the Western County System designated by the
Waste Authority for delivery of acceptable waste.
PROCESSABLE WASTE — That portion of acceptable waste which is
not nonprocessable waste.
RECYCLING or RECYCLED — The collection, separation, recovery and
sale or reuse of metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other
materials which would otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal
waste or the mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste
(other than through combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable
materials other than a fuel for the operation of energy.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The segregation and collection, prior to the
point of entry into the Western County System for the purpose of
recycling of individual components of acceptable waste, such as
(without limitation) bottles, cans, and other materials in accordance
with Act 101.70
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE —
Any material that by reason of its composition, characteristics or
quantity is ineligible for disposal at the landfill pursuant to the
provisions of:
The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42
U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., and the regulations thereunder; or
(a)
Except for trace amounts normally found in household or
commercial solid waste, any other similarly applicable law
(including, but not limited to, the following laws and the
regulations, if any, promulgated under each: the Toxic
Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.; the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, 7 U.S.C. § 136 et
seq.; the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251
et seq.; the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. § 9601 et seq.; Act
97;71 the Hazardous Sites Cleanup Act, Act 108, enacted
October 18, 1988;72 and any similar or substituted legislation
or regulations or amendments to the foregoing, as well as any
other laws coextensive with the foregoing);
(b)
(1)
Any other materials that any governmental body or unit having or
claiming appropriate jurisdiction shall determine from time to time
(2)
70.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
71.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
72.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6020.101 et seq.
§ 565-16 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 565-16
1:296
WASTE AUTHORITY — The Waste System Authority of Western
Montgomery County created by the county for purposes relating to
municipal waste disposal and/or the IMA and the County Waste Flow
Ordinance.
WESTERN COUNTY SYSTEM or SYSTEM — The solid waste
management and disposal system created by the county for the Western
District and every aspect thereof, including, but not limited to,
equipment, transfer stations and resource recovery facilities, residue,
disposal sites, contractual arrangements or other rights, owned,
acquired, leased, placed under contract, constructed, or assumed,
operated, or to be owned, acquired, leased, placed under contract,
constructed, operated, or assumed by the Waste Authority, the county
or any agent, designee or contractor of either in connection with the
plan or the plan revision.
WHITE GOODS — Refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, window air
conditioners, hot-water heaters and other major home appliances.
to be harmful, toxic, dangerous, or otherwise ineligible for disposal
at the landfill;
Any waste that a landfill or other applicable facility is precluded
from accepting pursuant to any permit or governmental plan
governing such landfill or other applicable facility;
(3)
(4) Hazardous waste;
Residual waste as defined in Act 10173 (except as otherwise
provided in any landfill agreement to which the Waste Authority is
a party);
(5)
Special nuclear or by-product materials within the meaning of
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq., and
any similar or substituted legislation or regulation or amendments
to the foregoing, including, but not limited to, any other laws
coextensive with the foregoing;
(6)
Asbestos, sludge, infectious waste, chemotherapeutic waste, and
incinerator ash (except as otherwise provided in any landfill
agreement to which the Waste Authority is a party);
(7)
(8) White goods in quantity and/or automobile tires in quantity; and
Any other material that the Waste Authority reasonably concludes
would require special handling or present an endangerment to a
disposal facility, the public health or safety, or the environment.
(9)
B. All other capitalized words and phrases shall have the same meanings
as set forth in Act 9774 or Act 10175 as they may hereinafter be amended
73.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
74.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 565-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-16
1:297
§ 565-17. Operation by licensed collectors and transporters.
§ 565-18. Disposal of municipal waste.
or supplemented by legislation regarding municipal waste management
or planning, or as set forth in the IMA. To the extent that any definition
herein varies from the definition in the IMA, the definition in the IMA
shall control.
A. Licensing. No person who is not duly licensed or deemed to be licensed
by the Waste Authority may collect or transport municipal waste
located or generated within the municipality. This waste collection or
transportation license shall be a county license issued by the Waste
Authority.
B. Compliance with rules, regulations and ordinances. In carrying on
activities related to solid waste collection or transportation within this
municipality, all municipal waste collectors and all municipal waste
transporters shall comply with the county ordinance, this article and
the other municipal waste flow ordinances and all rules and regulations
pertaining to the collection, transportation, processing, and disposal of
solid waste as may be hereafter promulgated by the Waste Authority.
Delivery by such collectors or transporters to the Western County
System of unacceptable waste, nonprocessable waste (except for white
goods) and waste from unapproved sources is prohibited.
C. Administration. Licenses hereunder shall be issued and revoked by the
Waste Authority, and administered by it. Any collectors or transporters
who fail to comply with the provisions of this article shall be subject to
any applicable sanctions in addition to the revocation of their licenses.
A. Delivery to Western County System. Except as provided in Subsections
B and C below, all acceptable waste generated within this municipality
shall be delivered to the Western County System and all acceptable
waste collectors and transporters shall deliver to and dispose of all
acceptable waste collected or generated within municipality to solid
waste facilities designated in the plan or plan revision at one or more
points of entry into the Western County System as designated from time
to time by the Waste Authority.
B. Delivery at other sites. Disposal of municipal waste collected or
generated within municipality may occur at other sites only as
permitted by rule, regulation, ordinance or order duly issued by the
Waste Authority or by the written agreement of the Waste Authority.
C. Recycling. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit source
separation or recycling or to affect any sites at which source separation
or recycling may take place.
75.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 565-16 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 565-19
1:298
§ 565-19. Regulations.
§ 565-20. Annual survey.
All generators of municipal waste, and all municipal waste collectors and
municipal waste transporters, any landfill operators, any transfer station
operators, or any other parties involved in the collection, transportation,
processing or disposal of municipal waste of the municipality shall
cooperate in the taking and preparation of an annual survey to be
conducted by an engineering consultant designated by the Waste Authority.
§ 565-21. Certain prohibitions and requirements.
A. Compliance with waste authority regulations. The collection,
transportation, processing and disposal of municipal waste present or
generated within municipality shall be subject to such further
reasonable rules and regulations as may from time to time be
promulgated by the Waste Authority, including, without limitation,
regulations relating to the operation, management, and administration
of the Western County System, applications and standards for licensing
requirements for payment bonds or other payment security, including,
but not limited to meeting liability insurance requirements, fees to be
charged for such licensing, the terms of licenses, procedures, record
keeping, transportation routes, payment for services, billing for
shortfalls, sanctions for nonpayment, and other matters.
B. Adoption of regulations. Rules and regulations adopted by the Waste
Authority for the Western County System shall be deemed rules and
regulations adopted under this article.
C. Consistency of regulations with ordinance and other laws. No rules or
regulations adopted by the municipality pursuant to this article shall be
in violation of or inconsistent with the provisions of this article, the
other municipal waste flow ordinances, the County Waste Flow
Ordinance, the plan, the plan revision, the provisions and purposes of
Act 97,76 Act 101,77 or regulations adopted thereunder, or such other
laws, regulations or requirements as may be enacted by the United
States of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or the
Pennsylvania Environmental Quality Board governing municipal waste
planning, collection, storage, transportation, processing or disposal.
D. Enforcement of waste flow control. Enforcement of waste flow control
and the terms of and any duties established pursuant to the County
Waste Flow Ordinance, the other municipal waste flow ordinances and
this article will be the responsibility of the county or the Waste
Authority and if requested by the county or the Waste Authority, with
the cooperation of the municipalities.
76.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
77.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 565-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-21
1:299
§ 565-22. Creation of authority.
The county has created the Waste Authority to administer the terms of the
County Waste Flow Ordinance and to operate and administer the Western
County System.
§ 565-23. Unlawful activities; nuisance.
A. No person shall enter into any contract or conduct any other activity
concerning the collection, transportation, processing, or disposal of
municipal waste in municipality in contravention of the terms of the
County Waste Flow Ordinance, this article, or any rules and regulations
issued thereunder.
B. Recycling. Nothing contained in this article shall interfere with the
operation of any program for recycling.
C. This article shall be construed consistently with Act 9778 and Act 101.79
A. Unlawful conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of this
article, any rule, regulation or order promulgated hereunder, or
any rule, regulation or order promulgated by the Waste Authority
or the county consistent with this article;
(2) Transport, process, treat, transfer, or dispose of or cause to be
processed, treated, transferred or disposed municipal waste
generated within the municipality except as provided for in this
article;
(3) Collect or transport municipal waste present or generated within
the municipality without a valid license for collection or
transportation issued by the Waste Authority;
(4) Hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with the municipality, the
Waste Authority or the county or their personnel in the
performance of any duty under this article or in the enforcement of
this article;
(5) Act in a manner that is contrary to Act 9780 or Act 101,81
regulations promulgated thereunder, the plan, the plan revision,
this article, the county ordinance, rules or regulations promulgated
under this article, the county ordinance or the terms of licenses
issued thereunder.
78.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
79.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
80.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
81.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 565-21 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 565-23
1:300
§ 565-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person who engages in unlawful conduct as defined in this article
(particularly in § 565-23A) shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $1,000 and not less than $500 for each offense, and, in
default of payment thereof, shall be committed to the county jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Each day that there is a violation of this article shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 565-25. Revocation of license.
Upon finding that any person has engaged in unlawful conduct as defined
in this article, the Waste Authority may revoke any license issued to that
person in accordance with § 565-17, and the Waste Authority may deny any
subsequent application by that person for a license pursuant to § 565-17.
§ 565-26. Injunctions; concurrent remedies.
§ 565-27. Intermunicipal agreement.
B. Public nuisance. Any unlawful conduct set forth in Subsection A of this
section shall constitute a public nuisance.
A. Restraining violations. In addition to any other remedy provided in this
article, the Waste Authority or the county may institute a suit in equity
where unlawful conduct or public nuisance exists as defined in this
article for an injunction to restrain a violation of this article or rules,
regulations, orders or the terms of licenses promulgated or issued
pursuant to this article. In addition to an injunction, the court may
impose penalties as authorized by § 565-24.
B. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
article shall be deemed concurrent. The existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the Waste Authority or the county from
exercising any other remedy provided by this article or otherwise
provided at law or equity.
A. Entry into IMA. In order to implement the intent and terms of this
article, the municipality, pursuant to the authority of the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act, Act of July 12, 1972, No. 180,
codified at 53 P.S. §§ 481 to 490 (Purdon 1974 and Purdon Supp. 1990)82
and Article IX, Section 5 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, has determined to enter into the IMA between the
municipality, the county, the Waste Authority and other municipalities
within the Western District, together with such changes consistent with
this article, if any, as may be approved by the officials of the parties
82.Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 12-19-1996 by P.L. 1158, No. 177, § 2(a). See now 53
Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 565-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-27
1:301
executing the same, such execution to be conclusive evidence of such
approval.
B. Terms and implementation of IMA. As more fully set out in the IMA and
this article:
(1) Terms of IMA. In the IMA:
(a) The Waste Authority agrees to arrange through the Western
County System for the provision of municipal waste disposal
facilities for the economical and environmentally sound
disposal of acceptable waste generated within the
municipalities;
(b) The municipalities state that they have enacted a municipal
waste flow ordinance in a form substantially similar to this
article which requires that all acceptable waste be delivered to
the Western County System;
(c) The county and the Waste Authority agree to enact or cause to
be enacted rules and regulations and to enforce or cause to be
enforced this article and the County Waste Flow Ordinance and
the parallel municipal waste flow ordinance;
(d) The municipalities agree to cooperate with the Waste Authority
in the enforcement of the IMA and all ordinances enacted
pursuant to the IMA (provided, however, that to the extent the
enforcement of such ordinances can properly be delegated to
it, the Waste Authority shall undertake the primary
responsibility for such enforcement) and the municipalities
thereby agree cooperatively to exercise their powers to
accomplish the objectives of the IMA.
(2) Duration of the term of the IMA. The term of the IMA shall
commence on the date thereof and shall terminate on the tenth
anniversary of the date the Western County System becomes
operational.
(3) Purpose and objectives of IMA. The purpose of the IMA is to
provide a mechanism to implement and operate the Western
County System.
(4) Financial obligations under the IMA. During the term of the IMA,
municipalities (to the extent that they engage in the collection or
transportation of municipal waste or contract with other persons
for the collection or disposal of municipal waste) and other persons
using the Western County System shall pay to the Waste Authority
on a monthly basis the appropriate per-ton tipping fee plus any
other charges payable, as specified by the Waste Authority, for all
tonnage delivered or caused to be delivered to the Western County
System, in accordance with Article III of the IMA. Municipalities
shall provide certain monies for operating expenses of the
§ 565-27 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 565-27
1:302
§ 565-28. Construction.
The terms and provisions of this article are to be liberally construed, so as
best to achieve and to effectuate the goals and purposes hereof. This article
shall be construed in pari materia with Act 9784 and Act 101.85
§ 565-29. Compliance with IMA.
The municipality will take such actions as are necessary to comply with the
terms of the IMA and to fulfill its obligations thereunder.
Authority to the extent not paid for through tipping fees on the
basis of adjusted population data.
C. Execution. Appropriate officers of this municipality are authorized and
directed to execute the IMA on behalf of this municipality.
D. Findings under Intergovernmental Cooperation Act. As required by the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act of July 12, 1972, P.L. 762, No.
180,83 as amended, the following matters are specifically found and
determined:
(1) The conditions of agreement are set forth in the IMA;
(2) The duration of the term of the agreement is set forth in Section
801 of the IMA;
(3) The purpose of the IMA is to cooperate with the county or Waste
Authority and other municipalities in implementing the plan and
the plan revision;
(4) The agreement will be financed through tipping fees imposed on
users of the Western County System and through the budgeting
and appropriation of funds by municipality as necessary to meet
the expenses of the Waste Authority;
(5) The organizational structure necessary to implement the
agreement is set forth in the IMA with which the current officers of
municipality shall cooperate;
(6) The manner in which property, real or personal, shall be acquired,
managed, licensed or disposed of is as set forth in the IMA; and
(7) The agreement contemplates cooperation with the county or Waste
Authority, which entities are empowered to enter into contracts for
policies of group insurance and employee benefits, including social
security, for their employees.
83.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
85.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 565-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-29
1:303
Chapter 580
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 270.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 345.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
600.
Zoning — See Ch. 680.
§ 565-29 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 565-29
1:304
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 580-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "MS4 Stormwater
Management Ordinance."86
§ 580-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 580-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 580-2 of this chapter, through provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the
cost of public facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines
floodplain management and flood control efforts in downstream
communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens public health
and safety, and increases nonpoint source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, and
welfare and the protection of people of the commonwealth, their
resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code 93 to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore
the existing and designated uses of the waters of this commonwealth.
B. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
86.
§ 580-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-3
1:305
§ 580-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality also is empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247,
The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,87 as amended.
§ 580-5. Applicability.
All regulated activities and all activities that may affect stormwater runoff,
including land development and earth disturbance activity, are subject to
regulation by this chapter.
§ 580-6. Severability.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or
provision of this chapter invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 580-7. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve the
applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for
activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation, or ordinance.
§ 580-8. Erroneous permit.
Any permit or authorization issued or approved based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Municipality
purporting to validate such a violation.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all SWM BMPs that are
implemented within the municipality.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
87.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 580-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 580-8
1:306
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 580-9. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 580-10. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal heavy use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops, including tillage, land clearing,
plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops or pasturing and
raising of livestock and installation of conservation measures. Construction
of new buildings or impervious area is not considered an agricultural
activity.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed an
application to the municipality for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, designs,
measures, or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts from
regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge, and to otherwise meet the purposes of this chapter.
Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one of two broad categories
or measures: structural or nonstructural. In this chapter, nonstructural
BMPs or measures refer to operational and/or behavior-related practices
that attempt to minimize the contact of pollutants with stormwater runoff
whereas structural BMPs or measures are those that consist of a physical
device or practice that is installed to capture and treat stormwater runoff.
Structural BMPs include, but are not limited to, a wide variety of practices
and devices, from large-scale retention ponds and constructed wetlands,
to small-scale underground treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter
strips, low impact design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving,
grassed swales, riparian or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins,
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
§ 580-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-10
1:307
and manufactured devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the project site.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — A conservation district, as defined in Section
3(c) of the Conservation District Law [3 P.S. § 851(c)] that has the authority
under a delegation agreement executed with DEP to administer and enforce
all or a portion of the regulations promulgated under 25 Pa. Code 102.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours) used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see "return period."
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into the waters of this commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — See "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth disturbance
activity is occurring or has occurred.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; road maintenance;
building construction; and the moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of
soil, rock, or earth materials.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn
away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EXISTING CONDITION — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from any
natural source or delineated by applicable FEMA maps and studies as being
a special flood hazard area. Also includes areas that comprise Group 13
Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania DEP Technical Manual for
Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to time by
DEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year flood. Unless otherwise specified, the boundary of
the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance studies provided
by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have defined the
boundary of the one-hundred-year floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence
to the contrary, that the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet from
the top of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forestland. These include conducting
a timber inventory, preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
§ 580-10 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 580-10
1:308
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation, and reforestation.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary widely
and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface intake rates.
Soils are classified into four HSGs (A, B, C, and D) according to their
minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for bare soil after prolonged
wetting. The NRCS defines the four groups and provides a list of most of the
soils in the United States and their group classification. The soils in the area
of the development site may be identified from a soil survey report that can
be obtained from local NRCS offices or conservation district offices. Soils
become less pervious as the HSG varies from A to D (NRCS88).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that prevents
the infiltration of water into the ground. Impervious surfaces (or areas)
shall include, but not be limited to, roofs, additional indoor living spaces,
patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, and any new streets
or sidewalks. Decks, parking areas, and driveway areas are not counted as
impervious areas if they do not prevent infiltration.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by surface
depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/uneven bedrock surface,
underground drainage, and caves. Karst is formed on carbonate rocks, such
as limestone or dolomite.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) — Inclusive of any or all of the
following meanings:
MUNICIPALITY — Collegeville Borough, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
NRCS — USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously SCS).
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as impervious.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated activities in
the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts,
or parcels of land for any purpose involving a group of two or more
buildings or the division or allocation of land or space between or
among two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or
for the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features;
A.
B. Any subdivision of land;
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.89
C.
88.Editor's Note: See § 580-35C and D
89.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 580-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-10
1:309
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner that
may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving earth
disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code 92, 25 Pa. Code 102, or
the Clean Streams Law.90
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff that
is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to occur one time. For example,
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to occur on
average once every 25 years; or stated in another way, the probability of a
twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent
chance).
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as a
product of erosion.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.91
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Is
abbreviated as BMPs or SWM BMPs throughout this chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to: detention and retention basins;
open channels; storm sewers; pipes; and infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the development site in accordance with this chapter.
Stormwater management site plan will be designated as SWM site plan
throughout this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — As defined in The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247.92
90.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
91.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
92.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 580-10 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 580-10
1:310
USDA — United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse, or other
surface water of this commonwealth.
WETLAND — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
§ 580-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-10
1:311

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 580-11. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless preparation of an SWM site plan is
specifically exempted in § 580-12:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until the municipality
issues written approval of an SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. SWM site plans approved by the municipality, in accordance with
§ 580-20, shall be on site throughout the duration of the regulated
activity.
C. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law, including, but not limited to, the
Clean Streams Law.93
D. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual)94, No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000),
as amended and updated.
E. Impervious areas:
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
(3) For projects that add impervious area to a parcel, the total
impervious area on the parcel is subject to the requirements of this
chapter; except that the volume controls in § 580-13 and the peak
rate controls of § 580-14 do not need to be retrofitted to existing
93.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
94.Editor's Note: See § 580-35B
§ 580-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-11
1:313
impervious areas that are not being altered by the proposed
regulated activity.
F. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated, or otherwise altered without written
notification of the adjacent property owner(s) by the developer. Such
stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
G. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
(1) Protect health, safety, and property;
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, and wooded
areas.
(b) Maintain or extend riparian buffers.
(c) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(d) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(e) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
(3) To the maximum extent practicable, incorporate the techniques for
low impact development practices described in the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (BMP Manual)95.
H. The design of all facilities over karst shall include an evaluation of
measures to minimize adverse effects.
I. Infiltration BMPs should be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter.
J. Normally dry, open top, storage facilities should completely drain both
the volume control and rate control capacities over a period of time not
less than 24 and not more than 72 hours from the end of the design
storm.
K. The design storm volumes to be used in the analysis of peak rates of
discharge should be obtained from the Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of
the United States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, United States
Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
NOAA's Atlas 1496 can be accessed at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/
pfds/.
95.Editor's Note: See § 580-35A.
96.Editor's Note: See § 580-35E.
§ 580-11 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 580-11
1:314
§ 580-12. Exemptions.
§ 580-13. Volume controls.
The low impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual100 shall
be utilized for all regulated activities to the maximum extent practicable.
Water volume controls shall be implemented using the Design Storm
Method in Subsection A or the Simplified Method in Subsection B below.
For regulated activity areas equal or less than one acre that do not require
hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter
establishes no preference for either methodology; therefore, the applicant
may select either methodology on the basis of economic considerations, the
intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures associated
with each methodology, and other factors.
L. For all regulated activities, SWM BMPs shall be designed,
implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes and
requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under Title
25 of the Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law,97 and the Storm
Water Management Act.98
M. Various BMPs and their design standards are listed in the BMP
Manual99.
A. Regulated activities that result in cumulative earth disturbances less
than 5,000 square feet maximum are exempt from the requirements in
§ 580-13, § 580-14, and Article IV of this chapter.
B. Agricultural activity is exempt from the SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code 102.
C. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the SWM
site plan preparation requirements of this chapter, provided the
activities are performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code
102.
D. Exemptions from any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the
applicant from the requirements in § 580-11D through K.
E. The municipality may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health and safety or the environment.
97.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
98.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
99.Editor's Note: See § 580-35A.
100. Editor's Note: See § 580-35A.
§ 580-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-13
1:315
§ 580-14. Rate controls.
A. The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual101) is applicable to
any size of regulated activity. This method requires detailed modeling
based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the postdevelopment total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour duration
precipitation.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment) nonforested pervious areas must be
considered meadow in good condition.
(b) Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow in good condition in the model for
existing conditions.
B. The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual102) provided below is
independent of site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm
Method is not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated
activities greater than one acre or for projects that require design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(1) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches of
runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(2) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious surfaces
shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not
be released into the surface waters of this commonwealth. Removal
options include reuse, evaporation, transpiration, and infiltration.
(3) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(4) This method is exempt from the requirements of § 580-14, Rate
controls.
A. Areas not covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
stormwater management plan. Postdevelopment discharge rates shall
not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, five-,
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year twenty-four-hour storms.
If it is shown that the peak rates of discharge indicated by the
postdevelopment analysis are less than or equal to the peak rates of
discharge indicated by the predevelopment analysis for one-, two-, five-,
ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour
101. Editor's Note: See § 580-35A.
102. Editor's Note: See § 580-35A.
§ 580-13 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 580-14
1:316
storms, then the requirements of this section have been met.
Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary
to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement.
B. Areas covered by a release rate map from an approved Act 167
stormwater management plan. For the one-, two-, five-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year storms, the postdevelopment peak
discharge rates will follow the applicable approved release rate maps.
For any areas not shown on the release rate maps, the postdevelopment
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment discharge rates.
§ 580-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-14
1:317

ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management (SWM) Site Plan Requirements
§ 580-15. Plan requirements.
The following items shall be included in the SWM site plan:
A. Appropriate sections from the municipal Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance,103 and other applicable local ordinances, shall
be followed in preparing the SWM site plans. In instances where the
municipality lacks subdivision and land development regulations, the
content of SWM site plans shall follow the county's subdivision and land
development ordinance.
B. The municipality shall not approve any SWM site plan that is deficient
in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole discretion and in
accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan is found to be
deficient, the municipality may either disapprove the submission and
require a resubmission, or in the case of minor deficiencies, the
municipality may accept submission of modifications.
C. Provisions for permanent access or maintenance easements for all
physical SWM BMPs, such as ponds and infiltration structures, as
necessary to implement the operation and maintenance (O&M) plan
discussed in Subsection E(9) below.
D. The following signature block for the municipality:
"(Municipal official or designee), on this date (date of signature), has
reviewed and hereby certifies that the SWM site plan meets all design
standards and criteria of the Municipal Ordinance No. (number
assigned to the ordinance)."
E. The SWM site plan shall provide the following information:
(1) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(2) A determination of site conditions in accordance with the BMP
Manual104. A detailed site evaluation shall be completed for
projects proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas, such as
brownfields.
(3) Stormwater runoff design computations, and documentation as
specified in this chapter, or as otherwise necessary to demonstrate
that the maximum practicable measures have been taken to meet
the requirements of this chapter, including the recommendations
and general requirements in § 580-11.
(4) Expected project time schedule.
103. Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
104. Editor's Note: See § 580-35A.
§ 580-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-15
1:319
§ 580-16. Plan submission.
§ 580-17. Plan review.
(5) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, where applicable, as
prepared for and submitted to the approval authority.
(6) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing stormwater conveyance system that may be
affected by the project.
(7) Plan and profile drawings of all SWM BMPs, including drainage
structures, pipes, open channels, and swales.
(8) SWM site plan shall show the locations of existing and proposed onlot
wastewater facilities and water supply wells.
(9) The SWM site plan shall include an O&M plan for all existing and
proposed physical stormwater management facilities. This plan
shall address long-term ownership and responsibilities for O&M as
well as schedules and costs for O&M activities.
A. (Typically 5) copies of the SWM site plan shall be submitted as follows:
(1) (Typically 2) copies to the municipality.
(2) (Typically 1) copy to the Municipal Engineer (when applicable).
(3) (Typically 1) copy to the County Conservation District.
(4) (Typically 1) copy to the County Planning Commission/Office.
B. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by the municipality or
DEP.
A. SWM site plans shall be reviewed by the municipality for consistency
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 days
whether the SWM site plan is approved or disapproved. If the SWM site
plan involves a subdivision and land development plan, the notification
shall occur within the time period allowed by the Municipalities
Planning Code105 (90 days). If a longer notification period is provided by
other statute, regulation, or ordinance, the applicant will be so notified
by the municipality.
C. If the municipality disapproves the SWM site plan, the municipality will
state the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The municipality also
may approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide
the acceptable conditions for approval in writing.
105. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 580-15 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 580-18
1:320
§ 580-18. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan that involves a change in SWM
BMPs or techniques, or that involves the relocation or redesign of SWM
BMPs, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated
on the SWM site plan as determined by the municipality shall require a
resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance with this article.
§ 580-19. Resubmission of disapproved SWM site plans.
A disapproved SWM site plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the municipality's concerns, to the municipality in accordance
with this article. The applicable review fee must accompany a resubmission
of a disapproved SWM site plan.
§ 580-20. Authorization to construct and term of validity.
The municipality's approval of an SWM site plan authorizes the regulated
activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term of validity
of five years following the date of approval. The municipality may specify a
term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for any specific SWM
site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date the municipality
signs the approval for an SWM site plan. If an approved SWM site plan is
not completed according to § 580-21 within the term of validity, then the
municipality may consider the SWM site plan disapproved and may revoke
any and all permits. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by
the municipality shall be resubmitted in accordance with § 580-19 of this
chapter.
§ 580-21. As-built plans, completion certificate, and final
inspection.
A. The developer shall be responsible for providing as-built plans of all
SWM BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The as-built plans
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the construction plans
shall be submitted to the municipality.
B. The as-built submission shall include a certification of completion
signed by a qualified professional verifying that all permanent SWM
BMPs have been constructed according to the approved plans and
specifications. If any licensed qualified professionals contributed to the
construction plans, then a licensed qualified professional must sign the
completion certificate.
C. After receipt of the completion certification by the municipality, the
municipality may conduct a final inspection.
§ 580-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-21
1:321

ARTICLE V
Operation and Maintenance
§ 580-22. Responsibilities of developers and landowners.
§ 580-23. Operation and maintenance agreements.
A. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
maintenance responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site
plan. The municipality may require a dedication of such facilities as part
of the requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a
requirement is not an indication that the municipality will accept the
facilities. The municipality reserves the right to accept or reject the
ownership and operating responsibility for any portion of the
stormwater management controls.
B. Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater management BMPs
shall be enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and
recorded as deed restrictions or conservation easements that run with
the land.
C. The O&M plan shall be recorded as a restrictive deed covenant that
runs with the land.
D. The municipality may take enforcement actions against an owner for
any failure to satisfy the provisions of this article.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan, the property owner shall
sign and record an operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (see
Appendix A106) covering all stormwater control facilities which are to be
privately owned.
(1) The owner, successor and assigns shall maintain all facilities in
accordance with the approved maintenance schedule in the O&M
plan.
(2) The owner shall convey to the municipality conservation easements
to assure access for periodic inspections by the municipality and
maintenance, as necessary.
(3) The owner shall keep on file with the municipality the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or company
responsible for maintenance activities; in the event of a change,
new information shall be submitted by the owner to the
municipality within 10 working days of the change.
B. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance (O&M) of the
SWM BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the O&M agreement, the
municipality may perform the services required and charge the owner
106. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 580-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-23
1:323
§ 580-24. Performance guarantee.
For SWM site plans that involve subdivision and land development, the
applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to the municipality for the
timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater management
controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and this chapter
in accordance with the provisions of Sections 509, 510, and 511 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.107
appropriate fees. Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the
property.
107. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509, 10510, and 10511.
§ 580-23 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 580-24
1:324
ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 580-25. General.
A. The municipality may include all costs incurred in the review fee
charged to an applicant.
B. The review fee may include, but not be limited to, costs for the
following:
(1) Administrative/clerical processing.
(2) Review of the SWM site plan.
(3) Attendance at meetings.
(4) Inspections.
§ 580-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-25
1:325

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 580-26. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that
allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water to enter a regulated small MS4 or to enter
the waters of this commonwealth is prohibited.
B. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into a regulated
small MS4, or discharges into waters of this commonwealth, which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided in Subsection
C below and discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
C. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution a regulated small MS4 or to the
waters of this commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from firefighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Diverted stream flows.
(9) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(10) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(11) Lawn watering.
(12) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(13) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(14)Water from individual residential car washing.
(15) Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
D. In the event that the municipality or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection C significantly contribute pollutants
to a regulated small MS4 or to the waters of this commonwealth, the
§ 580-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-26
1:327
§ 580-27. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration or vegetative
BMPs.
§ 580-28. Alteration of SWM BMPs.
No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any SWM BMPs,
facilities, areas, or structures without the written approval of the
municipality.
municipality or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 580-26 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 580-28
1:328
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 580-29. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, the municipality may enter at
reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to inspect the
condition of the stormwater structures and facilities in regard to any aspect
regulated by this chapter.
§ 580-30. Inspection.
SWM BMPs should be inspected by the landowner, or the owner's designee
(including the municipality for dedicated and owned facilities), according to
the following list of minimum frequencies:
§ 580-31. Enforcement.
§ 580-32. Suspension and revocation.
A. Annually for the first five years.
B. Once every three years thereafter.
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or greater
storm.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person to undertake any regulated activity
except as provided in an approved SWM site plan, unless specifically
exempted in § 580-12.
B. It shall be unlawful to violate § 580-28 of this chapter.
C. Inspections regarding compliance with the SWM site plan are a
responsibility of the municipality.
A. Any approval or permit issued by the municipality pursuant to this
chapter may be suspended or revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule, or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution, or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended approval may be reinstated by the municipality when:
(1) The municipality has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violations that caused the suspension.
§ 580-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-32
1:329
§ 580-33. Violations and penalties.
§ 580-34. Appeals.
(2) The municipality is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by the municipality cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
D. If a violation causes no immediate danger to life, public health, or
property, at its sole discretion, the municipality may provide a limited
time period for the owner to correct the violation. In these cases, the
municipality will provide the owner, or the owner's designee, with a
written notice of the violation and the time period allowed for the owner
to correct the violation. If the owner does not correct the violation
within the allowed time period, the municipality may revoke or suspend
any, or all, applicable approvals and permits pertaining to any provision
of this chapter.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $100 for each violation, recoverable with costs. Each day
that the violation continues shall be a separate offense and penalties
shall be cumulative. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
B. In addition, the municipality may institute injunctive, mandamus, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity for the
enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction shall
have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus, or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the
municipality within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the municipality, relevant to
the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the County Court of
Common Pleas in the county where the activity has taken place within
30 days of the municipality's decision.
§ 580-32 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 580-34
1:330
ARTICLE IX
References
§ 580-35. References.
A. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated.
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual.
Harrisburg, PA.
B. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. No.
363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as amended and updated. Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual. Harrisburg, PA.
C. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS). National Engineering Handbook. Part 630: Hydrology,
1969-2001. Originally published as the National Engineering
Handbook, Section 4: Hydrology. Available from the NRCS online at:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/.
D. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service. 1986. Technical Release 55: Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, 2nd Edition. Washington, D.C.
E. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design
Studies Center. 2004-2006. Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United
States, Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 3.0, Silver Spring, Maryland.
Internet address: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
§ 580-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 580-35
1:331
Chapter 592
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Poles, wires and manhole covers — See Ch.
481.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 640.
§ 580-35 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 580-35
1:332
ARTICLE I
Sidewalks and Curbs; Excavations and Openings
[Adopted 3-5-1952 by Ord. No. 131 (Part 12, Ch. 2, Art. A, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 592-1. Location of curbline.
On all streets now laid out or hereafter to be ordained and laid out in the
Borough, the curbline of those streets which are laid out of a width of 40
feet shall be 13 feet on either side of the center line as designated in the
ordinance establishing the street; and on streets which are laid out of a
width of 50 feet, the curbline shall be 18 feet on either side of the center
line as designated in the ordinance establishing the street.
§ 592-2. Pavement widths. [Amended 12-7-1955 by Ord. No. 144]
§ 592-3. Location of pavement in sidewalk area.
All pavements shall be constructed or laid so that the center line of the
pavement shall coincide with the center line of the space allotted to the
sidewalk.
§ 592-4. Requirements for grass plots.
Where grass plots shall be permitted, the surface thereof shall be firm
and on a level with the sidewalk and curb and shall be safe for the use
A. The width of the sidewalk designated in this article shall be exclusive of
the curb.
B. The width of pavements on the sidewalk area of Main Street shall not be
less than 5 1/2 feet. The owner or owners of the lot or lots fronting
thereon may provide a grass plot between the pavement and curb.
C. The width of the pavements on the sidewalk area of Sixth Avenue and
West Fifth Avenue shall be five feet.
D. The width of the pavements on the sidewalk area of all other streets
shall be four feet unless, upon application to Council a variance from
the terms of this article is permitted.
E. Grass plots 12 inches between curb and sidewalk shall be constructed
by the owners of the abutting premises on all streets except Main
Street, as above provided, unless upon application to Council a variance
from the terms of this article is permitted.
F. Flagstone or concrete pavements not conforming to the widths
specified herein, existing upon the effective date of Ordinance No. 144
may remain until notice to repave is served upon the owner or owners
of the lot or lots fronting thereon in accordance with the provisions of
§ 592-8.
§ 592-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-4
1:333
of pedestrians and shall not be wired or roped or otherwise obstructed or
maintained so as to endanger persons or property.
§ 592-5. Width and location of curbs.
Curbs shall be six inches in width at the top, and where grass plots are
not permitted, shall be located between the outer edge of the sidewalk and
the roadway for vehicles. Where grass plots are permitted, such curbs shall
be located between the outer edge of the grass plots and the roadway for
vehicles.
§ 592-6. Placement and location of trees, poles and pipes.
Trees, poles and pipes now or hereafter placed or maintained in the
sidewalk limitations as provided in this article, shall be placed or
maintained so to prevent injury to persons or property and shall be
removed, changed or trimmed whenever Council decides that it is for the
best interest of the Borough.
§ 592-7. Responsibility of property owners.
All sidewalks and curbs shall be built and maintained at the expense of the
owner of the abutting premises and shall be in thorough repair and in safe
condition, free of any obstruction.
§ 592-8. Time limit for construction, reconstruction and repair of
sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be constructed or reconstructed upon 20 days' notice to the
owner of the abutting premises and shall be repaired upon 10 days' notice.
§ 592-9. Emergency repairs to sidewalks.
Emergency repairs to sidewalks may be directed and undertaken as
prescribed by Section 1806 of the Borough Code.108
§ 592-10. Conditions for continued maintenance of sidewalks and
curbs built of material not authorized for new walks.
No pavement or curb laid before the effective date of this article with
material or materials not prescribed in the specifications authorized by
§ 592-11 and the specifications contained in that section shall be permitted
to be repaired, but whenever any such pavement or curb becomes, in the
opinion of the Borough Council, in disrepair, notice shall be served upon the
owner or owners of the lot or lots fronting thereon to repave the sidewalk
or reset the curb with the material as provided in this article.
108. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1806.
§ 592-4 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-11
1:334
§ 592-11. Conformity to sidewalk, curb and driveway specifications.
The materials to be used in the construction of all curbs and sidewalks
(including the portion of the sidewalk comprising part of a driveway
providing vehicular access to and egress from a property), and the method
of constructing all curbs and sidewalks shall conform to and comply with the
official sidewalk, curb and driveway specifications as adopted by Council
from time to time. The use of any other materials, methods or procedures
for new sidewalks, curbs and the portion of any driveway occupying a
sidewalk area or for the repairing of any existing sidewalk, curb or driveway
portion found to be in disrepair shall be prohibited. The detailed
specifications referred to in this section shall be made available to persons
required to construct, reconstruct or repair sidewalks.
§ 592-12. Authority for property owners to do work on own
initiative.
Nothing in this article shall be so construed as to prevent any owner or
owners of property from laying curbs and sidewalks or repairing the same in
front of their properties, provided they comply with the terms of this article.
§ 592-13. Authority for Borough to do work at expense of
delinquent property owners.
On the neglect or refusal of the owner or owners of the lot or lots as
required by this article to grade, pave, repave or repair any sidewalk or
to set, place, construct or repair any curb at the edge thereof, after 30
days' notice so to do from Council, through its proper officers, the Borough
shall have the work done and shall collect from the owner or owners of the
lot or lots the cost thereof and 10% additional, together with all charges
and expenses and shall file a municipal lien therefor against that lot or
lots. Provided, this section shall be also applied to rectification or remedy
of construction, reconstruction or repair work not in conformity with this
article or with specifications adopted under authority of this article.
§ 592-14. Process and requirements for openings and excavations
in Borough roads and rights-of-way. [Added 4-6-2005 by Ord. No.
511]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this specification is to provide for the public
good and establish a permit process and requirements for roads, utility
cuts in roads and streets, backfilling of trenches replacing of removed
pavement sections and regulating the location and construction of
utility facilities and other structures with Borough highway rights-ofway
for the purpose of ensuring the structural integrity of the highway,
economy of maintenance, preservation of proper drainage and safe and
convenient passage of traffic.
B. Definitions. The definitions of words and terms, when used in this
article, have the meaning set forth in the PennDOT regulations for
occupancy of highways by utilities, 67 Pa. Code § 459.1, as amended.
§ 592-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:335
C. Permit application procedures.
(1) General rule. Except for emergency repairs of utility facilities, no
work may be performed within the right-of-way involving the
placing of utility facilities or other structures or opening of the
surface without first obtaining a permit from the Borough. Work
performed within the right-of-way shall conform to PennDOT
regulations 67 Pa. Code Chapter 203 (relating to work zone traffic
control).
(2) Emergency repairs of utility facilities. Emergency repairs of utility
facilities may be performed without first obtaining a permit under
this article; however, application must be made by the applicant or
person making such repair, pursuant to this article, for a permit
under this section, within 16 hours of beginning the emergency
repair work or the next business day for weekends and holidays
when the Borough Building is closed.
(3) Who may execute applications.
(a) If a corporation, authority, political subdivision or other person
in the business of providing utility service owns, operates or
intends to operate the facility, the application shall be
submitted in the name of, and executed by, the party. An
application may not be submitted in the name of contractors of
the owner or operator nor in the name of persons only being
serviced by the facility.
(b) In the case of a facility owner who is not in the business of
providing utility service, such as a developer whose land is
located outside a utility's service jurisdiction, the application
shall be submitted in the name of, and executed by, the owner
of the facility at the time of construction. The applicant shall
indemnify and hold harmless the Borough from claims by
anyone claiming residual property interests in the permitted
area.
[1] An applicant under this section shall provide satisfactory
evidence to the Borough of ability to completely discharge
construction, maintenance and financial duties imposed by
this article. An applicant shall provide satisfactory
evidence that the proposed facility will not be inconsistent
with the structural integrity of the right-of-way, the
Borough's maintenance responsibilities or the safe and
convenient passage of traffic. The Borough may require
security, including but not limited to:
[a] Executing indemnity agreements satisfactory to the
Borough.
[b] Obtaining insurance in a form and amount acceptable
to the Borough.
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:336
[c] Obtaining surety bonds in a form and amount
acceptable to the Borough to guarantee restoration of
the permitted area in a manner satisfactory to the
Borough for a period of at least 18 months after the
acknowledged completion of the permitted work.
[d] Obtaining surety bonds in a form and amount
acceptable to the Borough to guarantee necessary
maintenance costs for the facility and the right-of-way
in which it is located for a period of at least two years
after the acknowledged completion of the permitted
work.
[e] Depositing sufficient currency in an escrow account
acceptable to the Borough to fully secure the
obligations in Subsection C(3)(b)[1][a] and [b] above
as an alternative to the obtaining of the surety bonds.
[f] The use of bonded contractors as well as consultants
and engineers having professional liability insurance.
[2] An applicant under this section shall submit a detailed
traffic control plan for permitted work.
[3] An applicant under this section is not authorized to place a
facility longitudinally within the pavement, nor in the
shoulder unless the applicant provides detailed plans
which verify there is no feasible space outside the shoulder
for placing the facility.
[4] The application and/or permit are not transferable or
assignable.
D. Required application information. A permit application:
(1) Shall be submitted in person or by mail on a properly completed
Borough form, available at the Borough Building.
(2) Shall be signed by the applicant, and the consulting engineer, if
any, performing work related to the application.
(3) Shall include at least four sets of plans of quality sufficient for
microfilming, detailing the location and pertinent horizontal and
vertical dimensions of the opening, the proposed utility
installations and related, highway features, including specific
highway location, center line, edges of pavement, outside edges of
shoulders, curbing, guide rail, highway drainage structures and
right-of-way lines. Color coded plans and freehand drawings of
roadway or utility features are unacceptable.
(4) Shall be accompanied by a check or money order, payable to the
Borough according to the Schedule of Fees of the Borough. Said
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:337
fees will be established from time to time by Borough Council
Resolution.
(5) Shall be submitted to the Borough at least 30 days prior to the
anticipated start of work. If the permitted work shall be performed
for the permittee by a contractor, the application shall, if possible,
be submitted to the Borough at least 60 days prior to soliciting bids
for the permitted work so that the permittee may notify bidders of
permit requirements. If the application specifies that the permitted
work involves providing priority utility service, the Borough office
will process the priority application before other nonpriority
applications submitted by the applicant.
(6) Shall identify consulting engineers performing work related to the
application. The consulting engineer shall also sign the application.
E. Plans for occupancy of the pavement or shoulder. A permit application
for occupancy of the pavement or shoulder shall include detailed plans
which, in addition to § 592-14D, comply with the following:
(1) Plans depicting new occupancy of more than 500 linear feet of
pavement or shoulder, or both, shall have a horizontal scale of one
inch equal to no more than 50 feet. Plans depicting other
occupancy of the pavement or shoulder shall specify dimensions
from the near edge of pavement.
(2) Plans depicting installation or replacement of a facility involving
more than 100 linear feet of pavement or shoulder opening shall
identify utility facilities and other structures within the right-of-way
that will be affected by the proposed occupancy and shall include
typical cross sections at each significant change in highway cross
section features.
(3) Plans depicting installation of a facility longitudinally within more
than 100 linear feet of pavement or shoulder, or both, shall verify
there is no feasible space outside the pavement or shoulder
available for placing the facility.
F. A traffic control plan shall be submitted with the application in the
following manner:
(1) With the exception of emergency work performed under
§ 592-14C(2), the applicant shall submit a traffic control plan for
Borough approval for work on roadways or rights-of-way whenever
it will be necessary to close a portion of a travel lane during hours
of darkness without work in active progress; or whenever it will be
necessary to completely close a highway to perform the permitted
work. If a roadway is approved for closure the applicant must:
(a) Advertise in the local newspaper at least twice, one week prior
to the anticipated closure notifying motorists of closure.
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:338
(b) Provide written notices to emergency services (police, fire and
ambulance) and school district notifying them of work, at least
two weeks prior to the closure.
(c) Provide written notices to residents who reside along that
roadway notifying of the work to be done, one week prior to the
closure.
(2) The Borough may require an applicant to submit a traffic control
plan under other special circumstances.
(3) A traffic control plan shall comply with PennDOT regulations, 67
Pa. Code Chapter 203, and shall clearly indicate how the work area,
vehicular and pedestrian traffic will be protected, maintained and
controlled.
(4) A traffic control plan shall consist of one of the following:
(a) A reference to specific figures in PennDOT regulations, 67 Pa.
Code Chapter 203, if the referenced figures properly depict
actual site conditions and address the necessary traffic control.
(b) Four copies of specific figures from PennDOT regulations, 67
Pa. Code Chapter 203, which have been modified to depict
actual site conditions and the necessary traffic control
requirements for the specific project.
(c) Four copies of a detailed drawing, showing actual site
conditions and the necessary traffic control requirements for
the specific project.
G. Blasting requirements. When blasting methods other than controlled
blasting, as specified in PennDOT regulations, Section 203.3(b)1 of
Publication 408, will be used or when blasting is anticipated within 100
feet of a bridge, box or culvert, a detailed plan of excavating, shoring,
blasting and backfilling procedures shall be submitted at least 15 days
prior to blasting. Prior to blasting within the right-of-way, insurance
shall be furnished.
H. Accuracy of application. The applicant is responsible for the accuracy of
information submitted to the Borough, including the application, plans,
drawings, reports and correspondence.
I. Penalty for falsifying application. Information provided in applications
shall be accurate. Section 4904 of the Crimes Code (relating to unsworn
falsification to authorities)109 makes it a misdemeanor of the second
degree for a person to mislead a public servant in performing an official
function by making a written false statement which the person does not
believe to be true.
109. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904.
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:339
J. Authority to reject application. The Borough will examine and
determine the genuineness, regularity and legality of every application
and may reject an application if not satisfied as to its genuineness,
regularity or legality or the truth of a statement contained in the
application. The Borough may also make investigations and require
additional information as it deems necessary.
K. Debarment.
(1) The Borough may debar a person, including permittee, consultants,
contractors and their employees, agents, successors and assigns
from placing a facility, working within or otherwise occupying
Borough highway rights-of-way under permit, directing work or
having involvement in a permit issued or an application submitted
under this article, for one or more of the following:
(a) Unsatisfactory past performance, as documented by records,
reports or performance ratings.
(b) Failure to complete permitted work under the permit and this
article, as documented by records, reports or performance
ratings.
(c) Bribing, attempting to bribe or giving gratuities to Borough
employee or permit inspector.
(2) The first debarment of a person shall be for six months to 18
months. A subsequent debarment of the same person ordered
within five years after the first debarment is served, shall be for 18
months to three years.
L. Issuance of permits.
(1) General rule. Upon approval of an application submitted under this
article, a permit will be issued by the Borough, subject to this
article and the conditions contained in the permit and its
attachments and supplements. The permit shall be the applicant's
authority to proceed with the work specified in the permit. A copy
of the permit and relevant plans shall be available at the work site
for review.
(2) Agreement/security. If a permittee will be authorized to perform a
substantial amount of work within the right-of-way, the Borough
may, at its discretion, require the applicant to execute an
agreement or provide security, or both, as a prerequisite to
issuance of the permit. If security is required, it shall be delivered
to the Borough in a form and amount acceptable to the Borough
and shall guarantee restoration and maintenance of the highway
for a period of at least two years after acknowledged completion of
the permitted work.
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:340
(3) Photo documentation. At least 15 days prior to opening more than
100 linear feet of pavement or shoulder, or both, the permittee shall
deliver photo documentation to the Borough office verifying the
preconstruction condition of the pavement and shoulder surfaces.
(a) The pavement and shoulder that will be disturbed shall be
photo documented in its entirety with color videotape or color
film. Photo documentation shall be compatible with Borough
viewing equipment.
(b) The permittee may submit color slides or color prints in lieu of
videotape or film, if each slide or print is clearly labeled and
arranged to verify the surface condition of each successive
0.25 linear feet of pavement and shoulder that will be
disturbed.
(c) The date of photo documentation shall be identified on each
cartridge, reel, slide or print.
M. Scope of permit. The permit is binding upon the permittee, its agents,
contractors, successors and assigns.
(1) The permittee is responsible for causing compliance with the terms
and conditions of the permit by its employees, agents and
contractors.
(2) The permit shall be located at the work site and be available for
inspection by a police officer or representative of the Borough.
(3) The permit shall be maintained by the permittee as a permanent
record and remain in effect, subject to the permit conditions and
this article, as long as the permittee's facilities authorized by the
permit occupy the right-of-way.
(4) The permittee is liable to the Borough for failure to comply with the
permit and this article. The liability of the permittee to the Borough
does not preclude the permittee or the Borough from bringing an
action against the permittee's contractor, subcontractor, engineer,
architect, assignee, agent, workers, employees or other persons.
(5) Additional restrictions. Work authorized by the permit is subject to:
(a) Applicable laws, rules and regulations.
(b) The conditions, restrictions and provisions of the permit.
(6) Work to conform to Borough standards. Work shall conform to
Borough standards, including the following:
(a) The work shall be done at a time and in a manner consistent
with the safety of the public and conform to requirements and
standards of the Borough, including but not limited to
Publication 408.
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:341
(b) Highway materials shall be obtained from PennDOT approved
sources which are identified in current PennDOT Publication
Numbers 34, 35, 41 and 42. Upon request, the permittee shall
make available for review certifications for backfill and
restoration materials placed within the improved area.
(c) If it is found by the Borough that the work is not being done or
has not been properly performed, the permittee shall promptly
take the necessary steps, at its own expense, to place the work
in condition to conform to the requirements or standards.
(d) If a dispute arises between the permittee and the Borough's
inspector, the Borough's inspector has the authority to suspend
work until the question at issue may be referred to and decided
by the Borough office.
(7) Permittee responsibilities. Permittee responsibilities include the
following:
(a) The permittee shall pay the costs and expense incident to or
arising from the project, including the prescribed fees for the
project, the cost of making and maintaining temporary
restoration of the disturbed areas and making permanent
restoration. The permittee shall reimburse the Borough for
inspection cost which the Borough deems necessary to incur
within 30 days after receipt of the Borough's invoice.
(b) In the event of failure or neglect by the permittee to perform
and comply with the permit the Borough may immediately
revoke and annul the permit and order and direct the
permittee to remove structures, equipment or property
belonging to the permittee or its contractors, or both, from the
legal limits of the right-of-way and to restore the right-of-way
to its former condition. If the Borough determines that the
structures, equipment or property poses a threat to the public
safety and the permittee fails to remove it after notice from the
Borough to do so, the Borough Solicitor or his attorneys, is
authorized to enter an amicable action of ejectment and
confess judgment against the permittee. The attorney is
authorized to issue forthwith a writ of possession with a clause
of fieri fascias for costs, without leave of court.
(c) At the end of a workday, an opening in the right-of-way shall be
covered, backfilled or protected under § 592-14N relating to
special conditions; subsurface operations. If work is stopped
on a project, other than at the end of a normal workday, the
permittee shall promptly backfill the opening and restore the
surface, and work may not be resumed until the permittee is
prepared to proceed with the work to its completion. If the
permittee fails to backfill the opening or proceed until
completion of the work, the Borough reserves the right to do
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:342
the work upon notice to the permittee, where practicable, and
shall be reimbursed for the costs by the permittee within 30
days after receipt of the Borough's invoice.
(d) If the permittee, after making an opening in the surface to
place or repair a facility or for another purpose, fails to restore
a portion of the right-of-way the Borough reserves the right to
do the work upon notice to the permittee, if practicable, and
the permittee shall reimburse the Borough for the costs within
30 days after receipt of the Borough's invoice.
(e) If backfill or restoration work will be performed for the
permittee by a contractor, the permittee shall identify to the
Borough both its contractor and its inspector-in-charge who
shall be assigned to monitor backfill and restoration work
performed within the improved area. The permittee's
inspector-in-charge, as well as the permittee, is responsible for
ensuring the work is performed in compliance with the permit,
this article and PennDOT Publication 408.
(f) The permittee shall notify the Borough at least three full
workdays prior to the start of work when the permit identifies
that the permitted work will be inspected on a more than spotinspection
basis.
(8) Altering drainage is prohibited. Altering drainage shall be
prohibited by the following conditions:
(a) Unless specifically authorized by the permit, the permittee may
not:
[1] Alter the existing drainage pattern or the existing flow of
drainage water.
[2] Direct additional drainage of surface water toward, onto
or into or in any way affect the highway right-of-way or
highway facilities.
(b) The permit does not authorize the permittee to direct, divert or
otherwise drain surface waters over the property of another
property owner.
[1] The permit does not relieve the permittee from acquiring
the consent, permission or other authorization from a
property owner who may be adversely affected by
drainage alterations.
[2] The permittee is responsible for damage caused to
property owners as a result of work done under the permit.
(c) A permit will not be issued to authorize the discharge of water
into the right-of-way unless the water is surface drainage.
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:343
(9) Equipment damaging highway. A highway shall be protected in
accordance with the following:
(a) To protect the pavement and shoulders, equipment shall have
rubber wheels or runners and have rubber, wood or similar
protective pads between the outriggers and the surface unless
otherwise authorized by the permit.
(b) If other than rubber equipped machinery the pavement and
shoulders shall be protected from equipment damage by the
use of matting or other suitable protective material, unless the
permittee requests, in writing, a waiver from the use of
protective material, thereby acknowledging its obligation and
commitment to repair or reconstruct the pavement and
shoulder, if damaged, to its former condition.
(c) If the equipment damages the pavement or shoulders, the
permittee shall restore the damaged pavement or shoulder, or
both, to its former condition, in a manner authorized by the
Borough.
(d) The Borough office may authorize the permittee to restore the
pavement or shoulder from superficial surface damage with a
seal coat or surface treatment.
(10)Work zone traffic control. Maintenance and protection of traffic
shall be carried out by the permittee under 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6123 (as
amended, relating to erection of traffic-control devices while
working), the approved traffic control plan and the applicable
provisions of PennDOT 67 Pa. Code Chapter 203 (relating to work
zone traffic control).
(11) Limited access right-of-way. No utility may conduct any operations
or inspection of existing facilities, within limited access right-ofway
without first obtaining a permit, except for an emergency.
(12) Indemnification of the Borough for property and personal injury
will be governed as follows:
(a) The permittee shall fully indemnify and save harmless and, if
requested, defend the Borough, its officers, agents and
employees, of and from liability for damages or injury to
persons or property in a claim or suit seeking to impose
liability on the Borough, its officers, agents or employees,
arising out of an act or omission of a contractor, agent, servant,
employee or person engaged or employed in, about or upon the
work, by, at the instance of or with the approved consent of the
permittee, including a failure of the permittee or a person to
comply with the permit or this article.
(b) Upon request, the permittee shall deliver to the Borough
certificates of insurance.
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:344
(13) Insurance. The permittee shall obtain, prior to the start of work, a
policy of insurance, issued by an insurer having a certificate of
authority and a licensed agent authorized to transact the business
of insurance in this commonwealth, in accordance with the
following conditions:
(a) The permittee or its contractor shall obtain insurance for
public liability and property damage, in form, amount and
duration satisfactory to the Borough to cover a loss that may be
incurred for construction, reconstruction, repair, relocation or
installation of the permitted structure or facilities.
(b) If blasting is authorized by permit the insurance coverage shall
include property damage and personal injury occasioned by
blasting. In addition, the insurance policy shall provide
coverage for damage to the highways, highway structures and
appurtenances or other Borough property and shall be in an
amount satisfactory to the Borough.
(c) Upon request, the permittee shall deliver to the Borough
certificates of insurance evidencing the insurance coverage
required.
(d) The permittee's obligations to indemnify the Borough and
obtain insurance to secure indemnification and its obligations
to restore the highway and obtain a bond relating to
restoration are separate obligations from obtaining insurance
for the purposes required.
(14) Maintaining structure or facility. As long as the permittee operates
and leaves in place structures or facilities, in, upon or along the
right-of-way, the permittee shall maintain and keep them in good
order and repair.
(15) Damaged structure or facility to be repaired. If a structure or
facility becomes damaged, the permittee shall promptly have it
removed, repaired or otherwise made safe. The permittee is
responsible for repair or restoration of the portion of the highway
damaged by a structure or facility. The permittee's obligation to
repair or restore the highway necessitated by a damaged structure
or facility under this subsection is separate from the obligations to
restore the highway and obtain a bond relating to restoration and
maintenance of the highway.
(16) Damage to highway. Responsibility of the permittee for restoration
of the highway includes the following:
(a) If there is a failure of the highway, including a slope or other
appurtenance thereto, in the area of the permitted work within
two years after the acknowledged completion of the permitted
work and there is no similar failure of the highway beyond the
area of the permitted work, the permittee has absolute
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:345
responsibility to make temporary and permanent restoration
of this area unless the permittee delivers clear and convincing
evidence to the Borough office demonstrating that the highway
failure was caused by another person.
(b) In situations where the permittee has the responsibility to
restore the highway, including slope or another appurtenance
thereto, the permittee has the duty to restore the improved
area in accordance with the permit. If the permittee fails to
restore the improved area properly, the Borough will have the
authority to do the work at the expense of the permittee. The
permittee shall reimburse the Borough for the costs within 30
days after receipt of the Borough's invoice.
(c) The obtaining of a bond, other security or an agreement to
secure restoration costs does not relieve the permittee of the
restoration obligations imposed. The obtaining of a bond, other
security or an agreement will not act as a release of the
permittee from liability under principles of tort law with
respect to a failure of the highway in the permitted area
occurring after the expiration of the bond, other security or
agreement.
(17) Future highway changes. If in the future the highway is altered for
public convenience or necessity, the permittee shall at its own cost
and expense, change or relocate all or a part of the structures or
facilities authorized by the permit which interfere with the highway
alterations or which is inconsistent with the purpose of the highway
alterations.
(18) Acknowledgment by inspector. Acknowledgment, by the inspector
of the Borough that all or part of the permitted work has been
completed, does not constitute approval or acceptance of the work
or agreement that the work was performed in accordance with the
permit. Acknowledgment of completion by the inspector will not act
as a release of the permittee or waiver by the Borough of its right to
seek performance or restitution from the permittee.
N. Special conditions; subsurface operations.
(1) Drilling, boring, driving or tunneling across improved area.
Drilling, boring, driving or tunneling across improved areas shall
comply with the following conditions:
(a) When crossing under an improved area, the opening for a
utility facility shall be drilled, bored, driven or tunneled a
minimum depth of three feet from the surface to the top of the
opening.
[1] If the facility or its casing is 30 inches or greater in
diameter, the bored cylindrical space surrounding either
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:346
an uncased facility or a facility casing shall be filled with
grout, in a manner authorized by the Borough office.
[2] Jet or other nonmechanical boring methods are prohibited.
Water may be used under low pressure only to cool the
drill bit and to facilitate removal or cuttings from the bore
opening, if retrievable liquids are immediately removed
from the boring pit.
(b) No openings for the purpose of placing utility facilities or other
structures under the improved area by drilling, boring, driving
or tunneling may be made closer than three feet to the edge of
the shoulder, unless the permit authorizes a lesser clearance.
(c) A facility or other structure crossing under the improved area
shall be constructed to assure the safety of the traveling public
and to preclude the necessity of entering upon the improved
area to effect future maintenance or replacement.
(2) Trenching across the improved area. Trenching across an improved
area may be performed only when specifically authorized by the
permit, in accordance with the following:
(a) The top of every utility facility shall be installed at least three
feet beneath the surface.
(b) Trenching across the improved area may be authorized by the
permit where drilling, boring, driving or tunneling are not
feasible because:
[1] The subsurface is solid rock, as documented with
satisfactory evidence such as drill records, or where
boring was attempted without success.
[2] There are other facilities located longitudinally under the
improved area and their location precludes methods other
than trenching, as documented with a detailed plan.
[3] Adjacent development in a very congested urban area
makes the construction of a tunneling or boring shaft
impossible.
(c) Not required because of one of the following:
[1] The highway is unpaved.
(d) When trenching is authorized by the permit, the trenching
operation shall be performed by one of the following methods:
[1] Utility facility placed in one piece across highway:
[a] Traffic shall be routed over 1/2 of the pavement width.
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:347
[b] The closed half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth and bridged with steel plates.
[c] Traffic shall be shifted to the bridged half of the
pavement.
[d] The remaining half of the pavement shall be opened to
the required depth.
[e] The facility shall be placed full width.
[f] The open trench shall be backfilled with restored halfwidth
in accordance with this section.
[g] Traffic shall be shifted to the restored half of the
pavement.
[h] The bridging shall be removed and the remaining half
of the trench shall be backfilled and restored in
accordance with this section.
[2] Utility facility placed in more than one piece across
highway:
[a] Traffic shall be routed over 1/2 of the pavement width.
[b] The closed half of the pavement shall be opened to the
required depth, the facility placed and the trench
backfilled and restored in accordance with this
section.
[c] Traffic shall be shifted to the restored half of the
pavement.
[d] The remaining half of the pavement shall be opened to
the required depth, the facility placed and the trench
backfilled and restored in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
[3] The permittee shall protect its openings to provide for the
safety of the traveling public, including motorist, bicyclists
and pedestrians.
[4] The permit may authorize the placement at depths less
than three feet of traffic signal detectors or other highway
facilities which are not capable of operating more than
three feet below the surface.
(e) Openings parallel to the highway. Requirements for openings
parallel to the highway are as follows:
[1] A utility facility shall be placed outside the pavement and
shoulder unless there is no feasible space outside the
pavement and shoulder for placing the facility, in which
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:348
case occupancy within the pavement or shoulder may be
authorized by the permit.
[2] The top of a utility facility shall be installed at least three
feet beneath the surface.
[3] On an unpaved highway, the near edge of the opening shall
be at least 12 feet from the general center line of the
traveled highway, or as authorized.
[4] No opening may be made for more than 200 linear feet at
one time, unless authorized by the permit.
[5] The permittee shall protect its openings to provide for the
safety of the traveling public, including motorists,
bicyclists and pedestrians.
(f) Daily stoppage of work requirements. Daily stoppage of work
requirements include the following:
[1] Except for emergency repairs of utility facilities, work
within the pavement or shoulder shall be stopped prior to
peak traffic hours that may exist on a particular highway
on a particular day and as specified in the permit.
[2] At the end of each workday, an opening in the right-of-way
shall be one of the following:
[a] Covered with steel plates or bridges over openings
which are less than six feet in either length or width.
The plates or bridging shall be extended a minimum of
18 inches from each edge of the opening and shall be
secured in a safe manner.
[b] Backfilled to the bottom elevation of the pavement or
base course, or to the original surface elevation if
outside the pavement and shoulder, and protected in
accordance with PennDOT regulations, 67 Pa. Code
Chapter 203, (relating to work zone traffic control)
and an approved traffic control plan until the surface
is restored to its former condition.
[c] Protected under PennDOT regulations, 67 Pa. Code
Chapter 203, and an approved traffic control plan, if
the permittee has delivered certificates of insurance.
[3] The permittee shall protect its opening to provide for the
safety of the traveling public, including motorists,
bicyclists and pedestrians.
(g) Plowing operations shall comply with the following:
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:349
[1] No plowing will be permitted within the right-of-way,
unless authorized by the permit.
[2] Plowing operations will not be authorized in the pavement
or paved shoulder.
[3] Plowing operations in unpaved shoulders are not allowed
from December through March inclusive or at other times
when there is frost in the top three feet beneath the
surface.
[4] No plowing is authorized within three feet from the edge
of the pavement. A greater distance shall be attained
wherever possible.
[5] The opening shall be a minimum depth of three feet. If this
depth cannot be consistently maintained, the proper depth
shall be achieved by trenching.
[6] The utility facility shall be installed under any structures
that are less than three feet deep. Disturbed structures
shall be repaired or replaced by the permittee.
[7] The disturbed area shall be restored in conjunction with
the plowing operation. Heaved surfaces shall be scarified
to a depth of at least four inches, extending at least one
foot on either side of the heaved area for the entire length
of heaved area. The disturbed area shall then be graded,
backfilled where necessary and compacted until the
disturbed area is restored to a condition at least equal to
that which existed before plowing. Disturbed shoulders
shall also be restored.
(h) Disposition of materials. The responsibility of the permittee for
disposition of materials is as follows:
[1] The permittee shall keep the improved area free of
material which may be deposited by vehicles traveling
upon or entering onto the highway during the performance
of work authorized by the permit.
[2] The permittee is responsible for controlling dust
conditions created by its own operations.
[3] Excess material and material that is not suitable for
backfill shall be promptly removed and properly disposed
of outside the right-of-way as the work progresses.
[4] Other material shall be stored so that there will be no
interference with the flow of highway drainage.
[5] The permittee is not authorized to close a portion of the
pavement or shoulder to traffic for the primary purpose of
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:350
storing material. If the permittee stores material on the
pavement or shoulder, the permittee thereby
acknowledges its obligation and commitment to repair or
reconstruct the pavement and shoulder, if damaged, to its
former condition, in a manner authorized by the Borough
office. Delivered material may not be stored overnight on
the pavement.
[6] The Borough may authorize the permittee to restore the
pavement or shoulder from superficial surface damage
with a seal coat or surface treatment.
(i) Backfilling. An opening shall be backfilled by the permittee in
accordance with the following:
[1] The opening may first be backfilled with fine aggregate
material, meeting the requirements of PennDOT
regulations, Section 703.1 of Publication 408, or granular
material to protect the facility, placed to a height not to
exceed one foot over the top of the facility, if the material is
compacted in not more than four-inch loose layers or as
authorized under Publication 408. To help protect its
facility from future excavations, the permittee is
encouraged to place a permanent colored ribbon under
Subsection N(1)(a) at least one foot above its facility. If the
facility is nonmetallic, the permittee is also encouraged to
place a metallic ribbon at a depth from which the ribbon
can be sensed by typical metal locating instruments.
[2] The opening shall then be backfilled with 2A modified.
[3] Backfill shall be compacted as follows:
[a] General rule. Backfill material shall be placed in loose
layers not to exceed eight inches if vibratory
compaction equipment is used. Each layer shall be
thoroughly compacted to 97% to 100% compaction.
[b] Existing pavement elevation. Compaction shall be
completed to the bottom elevation of the existing
pavement.
[4] The Borough may require the permittee to have material
proposed for use as backfill and compacted material
tested, at the expense of the permittee, for conformance to
the applicable gradation and compaction requirements of
Publication 408.
[5] Test holes shall be backfilled, as soon as safely possible,
with material authorized by the Borough. The Borough
office may authorize test holes in the pavement or
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:351
shoulder to be restored with a one foot cutback of the
surrounding surface.
(j) Restoration of flexible base pavement. Base and surface
restoration of flexible base pavements shall be performed
under this subsection and as specified in the permit. Prior to
replacement of the base course, one foot outside of each edge
of the opening shall be sawed, in a neat straight line, to the top
elevation of the existing aggregate subbase or stone base
course, and the detached material shall be removed. Other
surface opening methods such as cutting may be authorized if
the methods result in the opened pavement having a neat
straight vertical line.
[1] Exposed vertical and horizontal surfaces shall be prepared
under PennDOT regulations, Section 401.3(f) of
Publication 408.
[2] The base course shall consist of bituminous concrete
meeting the requirements of PennDOT regulations,
Section 305 of Publication 408 or other base course
material authorized by the Borough office. The base
course material shall have a minimum depth of five inches
or a depth equal to the existing base course, whichever is
greater.
[3] If required, the binder course shall consist of ID-2 material
meeting the requirements of PennDOT regulations,
Section 421 of Publication 408. The binder course shall
have a minimum depth of two inches or a depth equal to
the existing binder course, whichever is greater.
[4] The wearing course shall consist of ID-2 material meeting
the requirements of PennDOT regulations, Section 420 of
Publication 408, or FJ-1 material meeting the
requirements of PennDOT regulations, Section 422 of
Publication 408. The wearing course shall have a minimum
depth of 1 1/2 inch ID-2, or one inch FJ-1, or a depth equal
to the existing wearing course, whichever is greater.
(k) Restoration of plain or reinforced cement concrete pavements.
Base and surface restoration of plain or reinforced cement
concrete pavements shall be performed under this subsection
and as specified in the permit. Drilling is not permitted where
sawing or cutting is required.
[1] Prior to replacement of the pavement, one foot outside of
each edge of the opening shall be sawed the full depth of
pavement in a neat straight line. The detached material
shall be removed without damaging the adjacent
pavement. The use of a pavement breaker is prohibited.
The permittee may partially saw cut the pavement to a
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:352
depth of at least three inches and cut the remaining
pavement with a jackhammer weighing no more than 90
pounds, if:
[a] The restored opening does not exceed six feet in either
length or width.
[b] The restored opening is at least two feet from a
pavement edge or joint.
[2] Outside existing shoulder. If the disturbed area extends
outside the existing shoulder, the disturbed area outside
the restored shoulder shall be properly graded and a ditch
line shall be constructed wherever necessary to maintain
highway drainage.
(l) Temporary pavement restoration of a pavement or paved
shoulder may be required by the Borough office prior to
permanent restoration, under the following:
[1] Temporary pavement restoration shall be completed
before traffic is allowed to travel on the disturbed area.
The temporary pavement may be kept in place for up to six
months or as specified in the permit, and properly
maintained.
[2] The temporary pavement shall be removed and permanent
restoration performed.
(m) Appurtenances to underground installations. Requirements
relating to appurtenances to underground installations shall
include:
[1] The top of every manhole, valve box or other access to the
facility shall be approximately one inch below the surface
in which it is located.
[2] The surface surrounding manhole covers valve boxes, or
other facility located in paved shoulders shall be paved
with four inches bituminous concrete base course a
distance of at least two feet around the structure to
prevent washouts.
[3] A manhole, including those cast-in-place, shall be
constructed in compliance with current industry standards
and PennDOT regulations, Section 713.2(c) of Publication
408.
(n) Additional restoration shall be required as follows:
[1] Disturbed portions of the highway, including, but not
limited to, slopes and appurtenances and structures such
as guide rails, curbs, signs, markings, drain pipes,
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:353
driveways and vegetation shall be restored by the
permittee to a condition at least equal to that which
existed before the start of work authorized by the permit,
if the restoration is consistent with the Roadway
Construction Standards. Additional restoration may also
be required, upon written notification, to restore the
structural integrity of the pavement or shoulder.
[2] If the permittee opens pavement having a bituminous
concrete surface and the Borough's wearing course is less
than five years old, the permittee shall, in addition to the
restoration conditions outlined in the permit and in this
section, overlay the pavement in accordance with the
following conditions:
[a] When a longitudinal or transverse opening longer
than 10 linear feet has been made in the pavement,
the permittee shall overlay the traffic lanes for the
entire length of highway that was opened, in a manner
authorized by the Borough.
[3] If the permittee opens pavement having a bituminous
concrete surface and the wearing course is over five years
old, the permittee shall, in addition to the restoration
conditions outlined in the permit and in this section,
overlay the pavement in accordance with the following
conditions:
[a] When two or more transverse openings have been
made the permittee shall overlay traffic lanes, for the
entire length of highway between the openings, in a
manner authorized by the Borough.
[b] When four or more emergency openings have been
made by the same permittee, the permittee shall
overlay traffic lanes, for the entire length of highway
between the openings, in a manner authorized by the
Borough.
[c] If disturbed lanes adjacent to undisturbed lanes are
overlaid, the edge of the disturbed lane shall be saw
cut or milled to a depth of 1 1/2 inches or the depth of
the existing surface course, whichever is less, for the
length of the opening to insure a smooth joint, with
proper elevation and cross section. A full width
overlay may be authorized on various highways
instead of saw cutting or milling the disturbed lane.
[d] If disturbed lanes adjacent to shoulders are overlaid,
the shoulder shall be raised, with material and in a
manner authorized by the Borough for the type of
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:354
existing shoulder, so that the overlaid pavement and
shoulder edges are at the same elevation.
[4] Regardless of the age of the wearing course:
[a] If more than 100 linear feet of longitudinal or
transverse openings, or both, are made in the
pavement, the Borough may require the permittee to
overlay traffic lanes for the entire length of highway
that was opened, if the Borough office determines that
the rideability or structural integrity of the pavement
has been impaired by the openings.
[5] Aggregate used in a bituminous overlay wearing course
shall comply with skid resistance level (SRL) criteria
specified in PennDOT regulations, Design Manual, Part 2,
Chapter 11.
[6] If an opening is made in a bituminous concrete pavement
within three feet from the edge of pavement or other
longitudinal joint or opening, the surface restoration shall
be extended to the edge of pavement or other longitudinal
joint or opening.
[7] At each end of an overlay, the permittee shall install a
paving notch, under PennDOT regulations, Roadway
Construction Standard RC-28, by milling, planing or other
authorized method and provide a minimum ten-foot
transition.
[8] The transition areas at each end of an overlay shall follow
the contour of the surrounding surface.
[9] When pavement markings on more than 100 linear feet of
highway are covered or destroyed by the permitted work,
including overlays, they shall be replaced with temporary
pavement markings, under PennDOT regulations, Section
203.72 (relating to temporary pavement markings) before
opening the disturbed pavement to traffic. When the
pavement surface is restored, pavement markings that
were covered or destroyed shall be replaced in their
former location.
[10] Sealing. Restored openings in the pavement or paved
shoulder shall be sealed under PennDOT regulations,
Section 401.3(j)(3) of Publication 408 in the case of
bituminous concrete or PennDOT regulations, Section
501.3(n) of Publication 408 in the case of cement concrete.
O. Special conditions, aboveground facilities.
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:355
(1) General rule. A permit will not be issued to install aboveground
facilities at a location which the Borough determines to have a high
accident potential.
(2) Location of aboveground facilities. The location of an aboveground
facility shall be:
(a) Within nonlimited access right-of-way.
[1] New poles and other aboveground facilities shall be
installed outside the highway clear zone as near the rightof-
way line as practicable, under the permit and applicable
provisions of PennDOT regulations, Design Manual, Parts
2 and 5.
[2] Replacement of poles and other aboveground facilities
shall comply with the permit and applicable provisions of
PennDOT regulations, Design Manual, Part 5.
[3] Installation of poles and other aboveground facilities in
locations where highway guide rail or curb exists shall
comply with the permit and applicable provisions of
PennDOT regulations, Design Manual, Parts 2 and 5.
(b) Installation of poles, guys and other aboveground facilities
within limited access right-of-way shall comply with applicable
provision of the Federal Highway Program Manual - Volume 6,
Chapter 6, Section 3; the American Society of State Highway
and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) policy of the
accommodation of utilities on freeways; and PennDOT
regulations, Design Manual, Part 5.
(3) Location of wires, cables or conductors. A wire, cable or conductor
which overhangs a portion of the right-of-way shall be placed to
provide a minimum vertical clearance of 18 feet over the pavement
and shoulder, except where the National Electrical Safety Code
requires vertical clearances in excess of 18 feet due to voltage or
span lengths.
(4) Guys. A guy shall be placed and insulated in the following manner:
(a) A guy shall be placed to avoid interference with vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
(b) A guy shall be insulated or grounded in compliance with the
National Electrical Safety Code.
(5) Identification of poles. A pole shall bear the name or initials of the
facility owner and the pole numbers assigned by the facility owner.
(6) Seismograph-vibriosis method. Seismograph-vibriosis method shall
comply with the following:
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:356
(a) Seismograph operations by other than vibriosis method will
not be permitted.
(b) A percent will not be issued to authorize seismograph
operations within limited access highway right-of-way.
(c) Wherever possible, seismograph operations shall be performed
entirely off the pavement and shoulder to lessen interference
to traffic.
(7) Modular concrete replacement units, metal reinforcing collars and
similar devices.
(a) Modular concrete replacement units, metal reinforcing collars
and similar devices may not be placed in Borough right-of-way
unless located:
[1] Thirty feet or more beyond the edge of pavement under
PennDOT regulations, Design Manual, Part 2, Chapter 12.
[2] At the top of a slope (2:1 or greater) or at least eight feet
beyond the toe of the slope.
[3] Beyond parallel drainage ditches.
[4] Beyond the specified deflection distance for the type guide
rail in front of the location, under PennDOT regulations,
Design Manual, Part 2.
(b) No permit will be issued for the placement of a new facility, or
for the repair, modification, reinforcement or replacement of
an existing facility, by modular concrete replacement units,
metal reinforcing collars or similar devices unless the facility is
located in compliance with Subsection O(7)(a).
P. Bridge occupancy. License required. No person may attach a utility
facility to Borough bridge or modify an existing facility until the owner
of the utility facility has obtained a permit from the Borough.
Q. Penalties and enforcement.
(1) General rule. Violation of this article or the permit requirements
constitutes ground for imposition of the following penalties:
(a) Upon receipt of oral or written notice of violations from the
authorized representative of the Borough or a Borough police
officer, the permittee shall cease to perform any further work
in the permitted area except to restore the area to a safe
condition. No further work may commence in the permitted
area until the violations have been remedied. Where the
permittee has received oral notice of the violations, written
notice shall be sent to the permittee within 10 days of receipt
of the oral notice.
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:357
(b) Confiscation of the applicant's permit by any police officer or
authorized representative of the Borough.
(c) Revocation of the applicant's permit or emergency permit card
by the Borough.
(d) Removal of facilities installed without a permit or in violation of
the provisions of this article.
(e) Fines, imprisonment or other penalties as are provided by
statute.
(f) Other action as may be deemed necessary or proper after
consultation with the Borough Solicitor.
(g) Other conditions which may be specified on a Borough citation.
(2) Additional grounds for revocation shall be as follows:
(a) The Borough may revoke a permit whenever it determines that
the permitted facility is not being maintained, is in violation of
a condition of the permit or this article, constitutes a hazard to
traffic or interferes with the proper use of the highway by the
Borough or the public.
(b) The Borough may revoke a permit for nonpayment for a fee
authorized by the schedule of fees. The schedule of fees will be
established by Borough resolution, including default of a check
submitted for payment.
(3) Modification of conditions.
(a) General rule. When a term or condition of this article cannot be
met, an applicant may request, in writing, that the Borough
modify that term or condition if it is not required by law, under
the following:
[1] The applicant has done all that can reasonably be done to
comply with the term or condition.
[2] The proposed modification satisfies the intent of the term
or condition to be modified.
[3] The proposed modification represents the minimum
feasible deviation from the term or condition to be
modified.
[4] The reason for the requested modification is in feasibility
of meeting the exact terms or conditions of this article
rather than mere economic benefit to the applicant.
(b) Modification granted. If a requested modification is granted,
the permit will specify the allowable modification. A permit
issued under authority of this section shall be signed only the
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:358
Borough Manager or his/her designee. The granting of a
modification will be predicated on the applicant's complying
with the following:
[1] Unless the applicant is excused in writing, executing a
hold harmless and indemnity agreement acceptable to the
Borough.
[2] Unless the applicant is excused in writing, obtaining bonds
satisfactory to the Borough to guarantee highway
restoration and maintenance costs.
[3] Unless the applicant is excused in writing, obtaining public
liability insurance for personal injury and property
damage on behalf of the Borough, its officers, agents and
employees, in a form and amount acceptable to the
Borough for the life of the facility.
[4] Permit conditions, which may include use restrictions,
special traffic control devices or safety features.
R. Street grading. All streets shall be graded the full width of the right-ofway
to the grades shown on the street profile and cross-section plan
submitted and approved with the preliminary plan. They shall be
inspected and checked for accuracy by the Borough Engineer or the
Borough representative. Typical recommended sections are attached
hereto.
S. Paving and curbing. The pavement and curbing for all streets and all
commercial and industrial parking areas and driveways into and out of
said parking areas shall be installed as shown on the preliminary plan,
and in accordance with the following:
(1) Pavement construction.
(a) Rural and residential roads and commercial, industrial and
multifamily parking areas and driveways. All paved rural and
residential cartway areas and commercial, industrial and
multifamily parking area and driveways covered by these
regulations shall have a thickness of not less than 9 1/2 inches,
which shall consist of three inches modified stone subbase, five
inches bituminous concrete base course and 1 1/2 inches ID-2
wearing course conforming to the current specifications of the
PennDOT regulations.
(b) Major and secondary roadways. All major and secondary
roadways covered by these regulations shall have a thickness
of not less than 16 inches, the subbase of which shall consist of
six inches of compacted 2A modified stone, a base course of
seven inches of bituminous concrete base course, a 1 1/2 inch
ID-2 binder course and 1 1/2 inch ID-2 wearing course, or
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:359
approved equivalent, conforming to the current specifications
of the PennDOT regulations.
T. Excavation. Prior to any excavation, the pavement shall be cut vertically
and to a straight line, preferably with a pavement saw, equal to the
width of the trench. The trench shall be as narrow as possible to provide
adequate working space, but shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the barrel of the pipe plus 16 inches. Side walls of the trench shall be as
nearly vertical as possible.
U. Blasting.
(1) Must be in accordance with PennDOT regulations, Form 408.
(2) If blasting is necessary the Borough may require a full-time
inspector. The expense of that inspector shall be reimbursed back
to the Borough by the developer or contractor.
(3) If roadway is raised or damaged the Borough will require those
sections to be repaired to Borough standards.
(4) If blasting is required the Borough will require the contractor and/
or developer to post bonding for the protection of the roadways.
(5) If 50% or more of a roadway is damaged the Borough will require
base restoration and on overlay of the entire roadway.
(6) No predrilling or blasting may be performed within the right-of-way
unless authorized by a permit and until the permittee provides
insurance for property damage and public liability.
(7) The blaster's license number shall be furnished upon request.
(8) No blasting will be permitted within 50 feet of the nearest part of a
bridge, box or culvert.
(9) The permittee's obligation for restoration of the highway shall
include failure of the highway occasioned by blasting.
V. Backfilling.
(1) Backfill material.
(a) Existing improved rights-of-way. Within the right-of-way must
be 2A modified or equivalent, full depth and compacted, in
accordance with § 592-14N(2)(i). [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
(b) Proposed new construction of roadways. Within the right-ofway,
must be 2A modified or equivalent, full depth and
compacted in accordance with § 592-14N(2)(i). [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
§ 592-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-14
1:360
(2) As an alternative, the Borough will accept suitable material, as
defined by PennDOT regulations, Form 408 to be used as backfill in
new road construction only with the following conditions: If 2A
modified stone is not used, the construction and the backfill will be
subject to full-time inspection by the Borough Inspector as well as
full-time soil compaction tests by an independent soil scientist all at
the expense of the owner/developer/contractor. In addition, no
dedication of the roadway will be accepted prior to four years from
the date of completion of the base paving. At the time of dedication,
developer/owner/contractor must provide a three year
maintenance bond.
W. Pavement replacement. Prior to placement of the subbase and
pavement, the existing pavement and base course shall be cut back 12
inches from the edge of the trench. The cut shall be vertical and to a
straight line. Streets with asphalt pavement surfaces shall be cut with a
pavement saw.
(1) Transverse trenches.
(a) The permanent pavement replacement on all transverse
trenches (trenches crossing the normal direction of traffic)
shall consist of a five inch thick bituminous concrete base
course, a two inch ID-2 binder course and a 1 1/2 inch thick
ID-2 bituminous wearing course, all in accordance with
PennDOT regulations, Publication 408.
(b) After the BCBC has cooled and set up, and immediately prior to
replacement of the surface course, the vertical surfaces of the
existing pavement and the surface of the base course shall be
sprayed or painted with a tack coat of type No. 1 emulsified
asphalt. Application shall be in accordance with PennDOT
regulations, Section 460.3, Form 408.
(c) The surface course shall be properly placed and compacted
with a 10 ton roller even with the existing road surface.
(d) The joint between the new paving and the existing paving shall
be sealed with an application of Class BM-1 petroleum asphalt.
(2) Longitudinal trenches. The permanent pavement replacement on
all longitudinal trenches (trenches parallel to the normal direction
of traffic) shall consist of a five inch thick bituminous concrete base
course, a two inch ID-2 binder course, and a one-and-one-half-inchthick
ID-2 bituminous wearing course, all in accordance with
PennDOT regulations, Publication 408. All other requirements shall
be as specified for transverse trenches.
X. Road restoration. If a utility project (installation) is being done in
conjunction with a road reconstruction project, the Sewer Authority
and the Borough Engineer shall coordinate the restoration work.
§ 592-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-14
1:361

ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 8-7-1985 by Ord. No. 332 as Part 12, Ch. 2, Art. B, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances]
§ 592-15. Responsibility for removing snow, ice and slush from
sidewalks, or for placing abrasive material.
The owner, occupant or tenant of every property fronting upon or alongside
any street in the Borough shall remove or cause to be removed all snow,
ice, slush or any combination of them, from the sidewalk, including that
portion of the driveway where the sidewalk crosses the driveway, for a
minimum width of three feet, within 24 hours after the snow, ice, slush, or
any combination of them is so hardened or frozen that it cannot be removed
without injury to the sidewalk, in which event the owner, occupant or tenant
shall place salt, sand or other abrasive material upon the snow, ice, slush
or combination of them within the time above prescribed. The owner of a
property shall be responsible for conforming to the requirements of this
section where that property is occupied by the owner or is unoccupied or
vacant, or is a multibusiness or multidwelling property occupied by more
than one tenant or occupant; the tenant or occupier shall be responsible
where the property comprises a single unit, occupied by the tenant or
occupant only, or where the ground floor or first floor is a mercantile
establishment, in which case the ground floor or first floor tenant shall be
responsible. Provided: the snow, ice or slush removed from a sidewalk shall
not be placed in any street or gutter.
§ 592-16. Authority for Borough to remove snow, ice and slush or to
place abrasive material at expense of person in default.
In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant fails, neglects or refuses
to comply with any provision of § 592-15 within the time limit prescribed
in that section, the Borough may, in its discretion, proceed immediately to
clear the snow, ice, slush or any combination of them from the sidewalk, or
to place salt, sand or other abrasive material, and to collect the expenses
of that work, with any additional amount allowed by law, from that owner,
occupant or tenant, as the case may be, which may be in addition to any fine
or penalty imposed under § 592-17.
§ 592-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any owner, occupant or tenant who fails to remove any snow, ice, slush or
any combination of them from any sidewalk or to place salt, sand or other
abrasive material upon that snow, ice, slush or any combination of them on
any sidewalks as required by § 592-15, or who violates or fails to conform
with any other provision of § 592-15, shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of fine and costs may be
sentenced to imprisonment for not more than 10 days. Provided, the fine
§ 592-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-17
1:363
and costs may be in addition to any costs and expenses collectible under
§ 592-16.
§ 592-17 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-17
1:364
ARTICLE III
Permits for Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 8-7-1985 by Ord. No. 332 as Part 12, Ch. 3, Art. A, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances]
§ 592-18. Definitions and limitations.
§ 592-19. Permit required for making opening or excavation.
No person shall make any opening or excavation in any street in the
Borough, for the purpose of installation, replacement or repair of any public
utility line or other facility, or for any other purpose or reason whatever,
without first having obtained a permit from the secretary as provided in this
article.
§ 592-20. Application for permit; fee.
The permit required by this article shall be issued following application to
the secretary and payment of a permit fee of $50, which shall be for the use
of the Borough.
§ 592-21. Issuance and conditions of permit.
Upon receipt of the application and the permit fee, the secretary shall issue
a permit, which shall be valid for the period of time stated on the permit
and shall be conditioned as follows:
A. As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
OPENING or EXCAVATION — Opening, digging into, ditching or
otherwise breaking the surface of a street.
STREET — Any street, alley, highway, bridge or other way or
thoroughfare in the Borough, including all parts of it constituting the
designated right-of-way or lying anywhere between the right-of-way
lines.
B. Nothing in this article shall apply to any state highway or any street or
part of a street that is a continuation of a state highway.
A. The opening or excavation shall be limited to the location and the
dimensions set out in the permit.
B. At all times while the opening or excavation remains open, the permit
holder shall protect the area with barriers, guardrails, lights and/or
other protective and warning devices so that it will be clearly
discernible to the traveling public, and from sunset to sunrise until final
paving is completed, red lights or flares, which can be seen clearly from
all directions, shall be displayed upon or at the barriers.
§ 592-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-21
1:365
§ 592-22. Restrictions on issuance of further permits to violators;
violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No. 363]
Any person who violates any provision of this article or who fails to replace
paving or to backfill as required by § 592-21C or who fails to remedy
defective or unsatisfactory conditions as required by § 592-21E shall be
denied a permit for future work under this article until all paving and
backfill bills for corrective work done by the Borough have been paid, and
the Borough may collect those bills as other Borough debts or bills are
collected. Provided further: any person who violates or fails to conform to
any provision of this article, including any condition attached to his permit,
shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay
a fine of not more than $1,000 and costs, and, in default of payment of fine
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Provided further: the
fine and costs, imposed after hearing, may be in addition to any charges
payable to the Borough under this article for reimbursement for remedial
and corrective work as authorized by this article.
C. The permit holder shall replace the earth and other material removed
from the opening by tamping it with a mechanical tamper at not more
than six inch intervals and promptly replace the surface of the street or
alley in like form and condition and with like material as prior to the
opening of the street or alley. In the event that the ditch or opening is
not repaired as above required within 48 hours after the opening, the
Borough shall cause backfilling and paving to be completed in
accordance with this section and shall bill the applicant the cost of the
work.
D. The permit holder shall indemnify and save harmless the Borough from
all accidents and damages resulting from or caused by unsatisfactory,
imperfect or inadequate work, or by failure to protect the work and all
excavations and fillings.
E. In the event that the opening or excavation shall sink below the surface
of the existing roadway at any time within two years after completion of
the backfilling and resurfacing, notice shall be given to the permit
holder to repair it so as to remedy the condition, and, if it is not repaired
within 48 hours, Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, the
Borough shall have the repairs made and shall bill the permit holder for
the cost of the work.
§ 592-21 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 592-22
1:366
Chapter 600
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 154.
Sewers — See Ch. 550.
Solid waste — See Ch. 565.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 580.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 592.
Water — See Ch. 659.
Zoning — See Ch. 680.
§ 592-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 592-22
1:367

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 600-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Collegeville Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of 2006."
§ 600-2. Enactment.
This chapter has been enacted in conformance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act No. 247 of 1968,110 as
amended.
§ 600-3. Contents.
This chapter contains regulations which include, but are not limited to the
following:
§ 600-4. Purposes.
The following are the purposes of this chapter:
A. Provisions for the submittal and processing of plats for subdivisions and
land developments, and specifications for such plats, including
provisions for sketch, preliminary, and final plan processing and
approvals, and for processing of final approval by stages or sections of
development.
B. Provisions governing the standards by which streets shall be graded
and improved, and walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants,
water, sewage, and storm drainage facilities, and other improvements
shall be installed as conditions precedent to formal approval of plats.
A. To insure that development within the Borough will be orderly, efficient,
integrated, and harmonious.
B. To insure that the layout and arrangement of subdivisions or land
developments shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and to any
regulations, maps, studies, and reports adopted in furtherance thereof.
C. To insure that streets in and bordering a subdivision or land
development shall be coordinated, and be of such design, and in such
locations as deemed necessary to accommodate prospective traffic and
parking, and to facilitate fire protection and other emergency services.
D. To require adequate, appropriately located easements or rights-of-way
for utilities and storm drainage facilities.
110. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 600-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-4
1:369
§ 600-5. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be the minimum requirements to meet
the above-stated purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter impose
greater restrictions than those of any other statute, ordinance, or
regulations, then the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the
provisions of any other statute, ordinance, or regulations impose greater
restrictions than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute,
ordinance, or regulations shall take precedence.
E. To insure that any lands offered for dedication or otherwise reserved for
use as public or common grounds shall be of suitable size,
configuration, and topographical character for their designated uses.
F. To insure conformance of subdivision and land development proposals
with the availability of municipal services and public facilities, and the
coordination of intermunicipal programs.
G. To preserve lands subject to inundation or flooding from subdivision or
land development which would endanger life or property or further
aggravate or increase the existing flooding or inundation conditions.
H. To encourage and promote flexibility, economy, and ingenuity in the
layout and design of subdivisions and land developments, including
provisions authorizing the Borough to modify the requirements of this
chapter in accordance with concepts and practices consistent with the
modern and evolving, generally accepted principles of site planning and
land development.
I. To provide equitable handling of all subdivision and land development
proposals by providing uniform procedures and standards.
J. To encourage subdivision and land development in accordance with
principles and practices which conserve energy, both during and after
construction, and which encourage the use of alternative energy
sources by the layout of the proposal and the siting of buildings.
K. To ensure conformance of subdivision and land development plans with
the public improvements of the Borough, and coordination of
intermunicipal, county, and commonwealth improvement plans and
programs.
L. To provide adequate open space for traffic, recreation, light and air, and
for proper distribution of population.
M. To preserve and protect natural resources such as, but not limited to,
wetland areas and groundwater reserves so as to maintain the quality
of life within the Borough and adjacent lands.
N. To provide for the buffering of certain types of land uses to minimize
their impact upon their surroundings.
§ 600-4 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-6
1:370
§ 600-6. Jurisdiction.
Borough Council shall, with the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, review all subdivision and land development plans as defined
below and in § 600-8 of this chapter which are located in whole or in part of
the Borough.
A. Subdivision and land development. No subdivision or land development
of any lot, tract, or parcel of land as defined in Article II, shall be made,
and no street, alley, sanitary sewer, storm drain, water main, gas, oil or
electric line, or other improvements in connection therewith, shall be
laid out, constructed, or dedicated for public use, or travel, or for the
common use of occupants of a building abutting thereon, except in
strict accordance with this chapter.
B. Sale of lots, issuance of building permits or erection of buildings. No lot
in a subdivision or land development may be sold, and no permit to
erect, alter, or repair any building upon land in a subdivision or land
development will be issued unless and until a subdivision and/or land
development plan has been approved, and where required, recorded,
and until the required improvements in connection therewith have
either been constructed or guaranteed for construction in the form of a
bond, escrow, or other means approved by Borough Council under the
advice of the Borough Engineer and Solicitor, in accordance with the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
C. Condominiums. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to
prohibit condominium ownership as permitted by the applicable
enabling legislation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 600-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-6
1:371

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 600-7. Language interpretations.
For purposes of this chapter, certain words shall be interpreted as follows:
§ 600-8. Definitions.
Words and terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings given in this
article. Unless expressly stated otherwise, any pertinent word or term not
a part of this listing, but vital to the interpretation of this chapter, shall be
construed to have its legal definition, or in absence of a legal definition, its
meaning as commonly accepted by practitioners, including civil engineers,
surveyors, architects, landscape architects, and planners.
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combination of man's activities and natural processes at a rate greater
than would occur from natural processes alone.
ACCELERATION LANE — The portion of a roadway adjoining the traffic
lane constructed for the purpose of enabling a vehicle entering a roadway
to increase its speed to a rate at which it can safely merge with traffic.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future.
B. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
C. The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended
for," "maintained for," and "occupied for."
D. The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership,
incorporated association, and/or any other similar entity.
E. The words "include" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specified examples, but are intended to extend the meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
F. The word "building" shall always be construed as if followed by the
words "or part thereof."
G. The word "may" is permissive, and the words "shall" and "will" are
always mandatory.
H. The words "he" or "she" or "they" are to be used interchangeably with
the word "person."
I. The word "street" includes road, highway, avenue, boulevard, or
expressway.
J. The word "stream" includes watercourse, creek or river, and, where
referenced, a seasonal stream.
§ 600-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8
1:373
ACCEPTED ENGINEERING PRACTICE — That which conforms to accepted
principles, tests or standards of nationally recognized technical, scientific,
and/or engineering authorities.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A structure or building
detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal building.
ACCESS STRIP — A piece of land which provides physical access to, and
legal road frontage for a lot, but which does not comply with the minimum
lot width regulations of this chapter. Access strips provide access to flag,
rear or interior lots.
ACT 247 — The Municipalities Planning Code of July 31, 1968, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.
APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for approval of
subdivision, land development plan, variance, special exception or
conditional use, including his/her heirs, successors, agents and assigns.
The term also includes landowner, developer, builder and/or other persons
responsible for the plans and construction or building or other
improvements on any parcel of land.
APPLICATION FOR SUBDIVISION OR LAND DEVELOPMENT — Every
application, whether preliminary or final, required to be filed and approved
prior to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plan, or
for the approval of development plan.
AUTHORITY — A public organization created pursuant to the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, P.L. 382, No. 164, 53 P.S. § 301 et seq.111
AVERAGE VEHICLE OCCUPANCY — A numerical value calculated by
dividing the number of employees scheduled to start work between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. by the number of vehicles arriving
between those hours.
BLOCK — A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets
and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or any other barrier to
development.
BOND — Any form of surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to
Borough Council. All bonds shall be approved by Borough Council whenever
a bond is required by regulations.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The elected governing body of the Collegeville
Borough.
BUFFER — An area designed and functioning to separate the elements
and uses of land which abut it and to ease the transition between them.
111. Editor's Note: The Municipality Authorities Act of 1945 (53 P.S. § 301 et seq.) was repealed
2001, June 19, P.L. 287, No. 22. See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 600-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-8
1:374
Unless otherwise specified, "buffer" may be included as part of the required
setbacks and yard areas.
BUILDER — See "applicant."
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind or nature. (Also see
"accessory structure" and "principal building.")
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The area of a lot within which a principal building
may be erected. This area is defined by the limits of the minimum front,
side, and rear yard areas, and encompasses the area of the lot not found in
the yard areas and rights-of-way.
CALIPER — Tree diameter measured at a depth of breast height (dbh).
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN — A plan setting forth, by category of
public facility, those public improvements and that portion of their costs that
are attributable to servicing new development within a designated service
area for such public facilities over a period of specified years.
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street or highway designed for
vehicular traffic.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land within a development
site designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of the residents of
the development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas
set aside for public facilities. Common open space shall not be part of
individual residential lots, and shall be substantially free of structures but
may contain such recreational facilities for residents as are shown in the
approved development plan.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan and amendments
thereto, including maps, charts, and/or descriptive matter officially adopted
by the Borough Planning Commission and Borough Council, indicating
recommendations for the continuing development of the municipality and
including all elements required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
CONCURRENCY — The requirement that development applications
demonstrate that adequate public services be available at prescribed levels
of service concurrent with the impact or occupancy of the developed
property.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions, created under either the
Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of July 3, 1963, 68 P.S. § 700.101 et seq.,112
or the Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
112. Editor's Note: The Pennsylvania Unit Property Act was repealed 7-2-1980 by P.L. 286, No.
82. See now 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 600-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8
1:375
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of mobile homes.
CONTIGUOUS — Sharing a boundary for purposes of this chapter,
properties on opposite sides of a public right-of-way shall not be considered
contiguous.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian travel across a street
connecting two blocks.
CULVERT — A drain, ditch, or conduit not incorporated in a closed system,
that carries drainage water under a driveway, roadway, or paved area.
CURBLINE — A line formed by the face of the existing curb or in its
absence, the outer edge of the shoulder, along which a curb would be other
wise located.
CURB RETURN — The connecting link between a street curb and the curb
of a driveway.
CUT RETURN — An excavation; the difference between a point on the
original ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade.
Also, the material removed in an excavation.
DE MINIMUS IMPROVEMENTS — Nonresidential property improvements
which would, by their use, require less than five parking spaces with a
maximum footprint of the addition being less than 1,000 square feet.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude of precipitation from a storm event
measured in probability of occurrence (i.e., a fifty-year storm) and duration
(24 hour storm) and used in computing stormwater control devices.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, streets
and other paving, utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or
drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for guiding development,
including a plan of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and
bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, parking facilities, ways, common open space, and
public facilities.
DRAINAGE — The natural or man-made features of land that are specifically
designed to store or carry surface water runoff.
DRIVEWAY — A private way providing for vehicular access between a public
street and a parking area within a lot or property.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms designed, occupied or intended for
occupancy as a separate living quarter with cooking, sleeping and sanitary
§ 600-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-8
1:376
facilities provided in the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family
maintaining a household.
EASEMENT — A vested or acquired right to use land other than as a tenant,
for a specific purpose, such right being held by someone other than the
owner who holds title to the land.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and competent in the profession
encompassed by these regulations.
EQUIVALENT DEVELOPMENT UNIT — A standardized measurement of the
consumption, use or generation equivalent to that of a new single-family
residential development unit.
ESCROW — A deposit of cash with the Borough or escrow agent to secure
the promise to perform some future act.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which natural materials are dug into, cut,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated or bulldozed, as well as
the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which natural materials are placed, pushed, dumped,
pulled, transported or moved to a new location above the natural surface
of the ground or on top of the stripped surface, as well as the conditions
resulting therefrom.
FLOODPLAIN RELATED TERMS —
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this and other
ordinances have been prepared. For the purposes of this chapter, it
shall be the one-hundred-year flood as referenced in the current Flood
Insurance Study and delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the
Federal Insurance Administration.
A.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation
as referenced in the Flood Insurance Study. Within the approximated
floodplain, alluvial soils floodplain, or other similarly documented
areas, the one-hundred-year flood elevation shall be established as a
point on the boundary of the floodplain nearest to the construction site
in question.
B.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — Space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to permit the
passage of water and water vapor.
C.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding; except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage;
the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
D.
FEMA and FIA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the Federal Insurance Administration who have jurisdiction over the
National Flood Insurance Program and its related studies and
regulations. FEMA is the parent agency of the FIA.
E.
§ 600-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8
1:377
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas.
F.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP — The official FIA map which shows
special hazard zones and risk areas for insurance rating purposes. For
the purposes of this chapter, it also delineates floodplain areas.
G.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The examination and determination of
flood hazards by the FIA. The flood elevations contained in this study
are used for floodplain management purposes as related to this and
other ordinances.
H.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a stream,
river, or watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete inundation
during a one-hundred-year flood, or any area subject to the unusual and
rapid accumulation of surface water from any source; also referred to
as flood-prone area.
I.
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS — Those floodplain districts specifically
designated in this chapter as being inundated primarily by the onehundred-
year flood. Included would be areas identified as the Floodway
District (FW), Flood-Fringe District (FF) and General Floodplain
District (FA).
J.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The application of a program or
activities which may consist of both corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damages.
K.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. Such measures
are set forth in Flood Proofing Regulations published by the Office
of the Chief Engineers, United States Army, Publication Number EP
1165 2 314 (June, 1972, and as subsequently amended). Floodproofing
measures for all new construction and substantial improvements of
structures shall satisfy the requirements of the Completely Dry Spaces
(WI) and Essentially Dry Spaces (W2) classes referenced in these
regulations. In said publication where reference is made to below (or
above) the BFD (base flood datum) it shall be interpreted as meaning
below (or above) the base flood elevation.
L.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land area required to carry and discharge a flood of the onehundred-
year magnitude as specifically defined in this chapter.
M.
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert,
building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along,
across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or designated
floodplain district which may impede, retard or change the direction
of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris
N.
§ 600-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-8
1:378
FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting on a street or right-of-way and
ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot, but it should not be considered
the ordinary side of a corner lot, or rear of a double frontage lot.
GRADE — The slope of a street, parcel of land, utility lines, drainageways,
etc., specified in percent and shown on plans as required herein.
GROUND COVER — Low growing plant materials planted in a manner to
provide continuous plant cover of the ground surface; lawn, ivy, and other
low plant materials are included. Nonplant ground cover may also include
bark or wood chips, gravel, and stone provided they are maintained as a
continuous pervious cover.
GUARANTEE, MAINTENANCE — Any security which may be required from
the developer by the Borough after final acceptance by the Borough of
improvements installed by the developer. Such security may include
carried by such water, or is placed where the flow of the water might
carry the same downstream to the damage of life and property.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100
or a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one year. For the
purposes of this chapter, the "one-hundred-year flood" (base flood) is as
defined by the Federal Insurance Administration in the Flood Insurance
Study.
O.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION (RFE) — The one-hundred-year
flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
P.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either:
(a) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored,
before the damage occurred.
(b)
(1)
For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or
(a)
Any alteration of a structure listed on a National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
(b)
(2)
Q.
§ 600-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8
1:379
irrevocable letter of credit, escrow account or surety bond with a bonding
company or commonwealth or federally chartered financial institution.
GUARANTEE, PERFORMANCE — Any security which may be required
from the developer by the Borough in lieu of the requirement that certain
improvements be made before the Borough approves a developer's
subdivision or land development plan. Such security may include
irrevocable letter of credit, escrow account or surety bond with a bonding
company or commonwealth or federally chartered financial institution.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the existing grade at the location of the building to the highest
point of a flat or multilevel roof or, for gable, hip or gambrel roofs to
the mean height between the eaves and ridge. Chimneys, spires, towers,
mechanical penthouses, tanks, and similar projections not intended for
human occupancy shall be excluded.
IMPACT FEE — A fee imposed on new development to help finance the cost
of new improvements or services. Impact fees do not include the dedication
of rights-of-way or easements for such new facilities or construction of such
improvements.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Those surfaces which are covered in any way
so as not to allow the ground beneath to absorb water at a natural rate,
including, but not limited to, buildings, walks, roofs, swimming pools, manmade
ponds, and paved or stoned areas.[Amended 7-9-2014 by Ord. No.
569]
IMPOUNDMENT — A body of water, such as a pond, confined by dam, dike,
floodgate or other barrier.
IMPROVEMENTS — The physical additions, installations and changes
required to render land suitable for the use proposed, including streets,
curbs, sidewalks, utilities, and drainage facilities.
IMPROVEMENTS, ON-SITE — Improvements, including but not limited to
those contained in the definition of "improvements," that are constructed
on the applicant's property or along the road frontage of the tract being
developed up to the center line of the road.
IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC — Improvements, including but not limited to
those contained in the definition of "improvements," that are intended for
dedication to the Borough, or other municipal body or authority, either in
fee or in easement.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS — A septic tank and drainage
field or other type of sewage disposal system located on a single lot and
serving one equivalent development unit.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A.
§ 600-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-8
1:380
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having
proprietary interest in land.
LOT — A contiguous tract, parcel, or unit of land held by a landowner and/
or intended for use, development, lease, or transfer of ownership, and for
which a deed description is recorded or is intended to be recorded at the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery County.
LOT AREA, BUILDABLE — Net lot area contained by the building line,
minus the area of any land in a floodplain conservation district, in a steep
slope conservation district, or in a wetlands areas.
LOT AREA, GROSS — Calculated land area contained within the deeded
boundaries of a lot.
LOT AREA, NET — Gross lot area minus areas of public and private rightsof-
way, easements, ultimate rights-of-way and access strips for flag lots.
LOT, CORNER — A lot having contiguous frontage on two or more
intersecting roads. The yard setback for each road frontage shall be the
front yard setback for the district in which the lot is located.
LOT, FLAG — A lot not fronting or abutting a public roadway and where
access to the public roadway is limited to a narrow private right-of-way.
LOT LINE — Any property boundary line of a lot, further defined as follows:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
B. A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
C.
Front lot line is the line identical with the street ultimate right-of-way
line (also known as "street line").
A.
Rear lot line is the line or lines most nearly parallel or concentric to the
front lot line.
B.
Side lot lines are the lines most nearly perpendicular or radial to the
front lot line. On a corner lot, the side lot line shall be the line or
lines most nearly perpendicular or radial to the higher classification of
C.
§ 600-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8
1:381
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured
at the building line, parallel or concentric to the ultimate right-of-way line.
For a corner lot, lot width shall be measured parallel or concentric to
the ultimate right-of-way line of the higher classification of street, where
applicable.
MATURE TREE — Any tree of six inches or more in caliper, whether
standing alone or in a tree mass or woodlands. A mature tree shall be
a desirable species as determined by the Shade Tree Commission or
landscape architect.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy in one unit or two units designed to joined into an
integral unit, which arrives at the site complete and ready for occupancy
except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and
constructed so that it may be used without a permanent foundation. A
mobile home need not meet local building codes, but shall meet the
standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, as indicated in the Structural Engineering Bulletin(s) which
shall be provided to the Borough by the applicant.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or mobile home lots
for the placement of mobile homes.
MODULAR HOME — A single-family dwelling unit for permanent
occupancy, made by assembling one or more factory produced, threedimensional
sections into one integral building, not capable of easily being
separated for repeated towing, whose construction materials must conform
to those of conventionally built units, as required by the Borough's Building
Code,113 and must be placed on a permanent foundation. A copy of the
Structural Engineering Bulletin(s) must be provided to the Borough
Council, indicating approval of the dwelling or its components by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
MONUMENT — A tapered, permanent survey reference point of stone or
concrete having a top four inches on each side and a length of 24 inches.
OFF-SITE — Located out side the boundary lines of the lot or tract which is
being subdivided or developed but within the right-of-way of a contiguous
street.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted by Borough Council pursuant to Article
IV of the Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10401 et seq.
OPEN SPACE — Public or private lands designated for the use and
enjoyment of residents of a development and/or the general public,
street, where applicable. The remaining line shall be considered the
rear lot line.
A lot which fronts on more than one street shall have a front lot line on
each street frontage.
D.
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 600-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-8
1:382
incorporating natural features such as woodlands, streams, or meadows,
and including state, county or Borough parks, trails and other recreational
facilities. Also includes "common open space" as defined above, and other
private lands which are available for the use of Borough residents (i.e.,
through access easements). (See "common open space.")
PATHWAY — A designated land corridor containing a route designed for
nonmotorized travel that connects local facilities, neighborhoods,
commercial districts, etc., to a larger trail or sidewalk network. Sidewalks
are not considered pathways.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of stormwater runoff at
given point and time resulting from a particular magnitude storm.
PERCOLATION TEST — One of the tests required to identify a suitable area
for the location of an on-site septic system. The test measures the ability of
the soil to absorb water.
PLAN — A graphic representation of a proposal for subdivision and/or land
development, including necessary written notes.
PLAT — The map or plan or a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building which is considered the principal use
of the lot on which it is located.
PRINCIPAL USE — The single dominant use or single main use on a lot.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
governing body, planning commission or other municipal agency, intended
to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the act of
July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."114 ("... any
prearranged gathering of an agency which is attended or participated in by
a quorum of the members of an agency, held for the purpose of deliberating
agency business or taking official action.")
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice of a public hearing published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state the time and
place of the hearing and particular nature of the matter to be considered
at the hearing. The publication of a public notice shall be in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as last amended, 53
P.S. § 10101 et seq.
RELEASE RATE — The level of control of the postdevelopment peak rate of
runoff to be achieved for a particular site, expressed as a percentage of the
predevelopment peak rate of runoff.
114. Editor's Note: Said Sunshine Act was repealed 10-15-1998 by P.L. 729, No. 93; see now 65
Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 600-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8
1:383
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of land whose primary function is to separate
a street from adjacent properties, while not being used or capable of
being used as a building lot, open space or recreation area, or legitimate
environmental protection purposes.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTTING — Lotting which extends between two
streets of differing classifications, with vehicular access provided from the
lesser street, in order to promote traffic flow and safety on the greater
street.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land over which are provided rights for various
purposes, including vehicular access and travel, storm drainage, and
utilities. Also see "street right-of-way."
SECURITY — A letter of credit, surety bond, or cash escrow provided by the
applicant to secure its promises regarding public improvements associated
with an approved subdivision or land development.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A licensed employee of the
Montgomery County Health Department who issues permits, reviews
permit applications, and sewage facilities planning modules, and conducts
inspections and investigations necessary to implement the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., and regulations promulgated
under it.
SEWAGE FACILITIES PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the provision of
adequate sewage facilities which was adopted by Borough Council and
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection.
SEWAGE FACILITIES PLANNING MODULE — Completed forms submitted
to the Sewage Enforcement Officer and PADEP for the purposes of revising
the sewage facilities plan resulting from a proposed land development or
subdivision.
SIGHT DISTANCE, STOPPING — The distance of unobstructed view along
the center line of a street from the driver's eye-height of 3.5 feet to the
furthest visible point six inches above the street surface.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established at
street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed
to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the site distance of
motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SPECIMEN TREE — Any tree with a caliper that is 75% or more of the
record tree of the same species in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Soil
Survey. The Montgomery County Soil Survey, latest edition, prepared by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department
of Agriculture.
STORMWATER BASIN — A structure which provides for the storage and
slow release of stormwater runoff during and after a storm. Referred to as
a sediment, retention or detention basin.
WET BASIN — An impoundment basin designed to retain stormwater
runoff within a permanent pool of water or existing pond.
A.
§ 600-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-8
1:384
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan prepared and adopted by
Montgomery County pursuant to Act 167 of 1978, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
STREET LINE — A line identical to the ultimate right-of-way line.
STREET or ROAD — A public or private right-of-way serving primarily as
a means of vehicular and pedestrian travel, furnishing access to abutting
properties, and which may also be used for utilities, shade trees, and
stormwater control. Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
freeway, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct, and any other ways used or intended
to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians.
DRY BASIN — A naturalized impoundment basin designed to retard
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate.
B.
ARTERIAL — A street serving a large volume of comparatively high
speed and long distance traffic.
PRINCIPAL — An arterial serving the heaviest volumes of traffic in
municipality, providing the highest degree of vehicular mobility and
involving controls on access.
(1)
MINOR — An arterial serving high volumes, providing a high
degree of mobility, and some limits on access.
(2)
A.
COLLECTOR — A street designed and located to provide a means
to accommodate traffic between neighboring communities and to
interconnect arterial streets with local roads.
MAJOR — A collector serving moderate levels of traffic within the
municipality, providing a mix of mobility and access and linking
adjacent communities.
(1)
MINOR — A collector serving lower amounts of traffic, providing
relatively more access than mobility, and serving as a major road
through identifiable neighborhoods.
(2)
B.
LOCAL ROAD — A road intended to provide access to other roads from
individual properties.
C.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A local street with only one outlet and having
an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic.
D.
PRIVATE STREET — A local street, serving abutting lots that is not
offered or required to be offered for dedication.
E.
ALLEY — A public or privately owned right-of-way, on which no new
dwellings, stores, or other principal buildings are intended to front,
serving as the secondary means of access to two or more properties
whose principal frontage is some other street.
F.
§ 600-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8
1:385
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — Rights-of-way for street purposes are defined as
follows:
STRUCTURE — Any thing built, constructed, or erected which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something located on the ground.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisee, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SURVEYOR — A land surveyor, licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, and competent in the skills needed to conduct the surveys,
lay out the subdivision plans and install all markers required by the terms
of this chapter.
TOPSOIL — The original upper layer of soil material to a depth of six inches
which is usually darker and richer than subsoil.
TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY — A technical evaluation of the traffic impacts
associated with a proposed subdivision or land development. Criteria for a
traffic impact study are contained in § 600-59.
TRAIL — A designated land corridor containing an improved route designed
for nonmotorized travel that provides recreational, aesthetic, alternate
transportation, or education opportunities for all ages and abilities.
Sidewalks are not considered trails.
TRIP — A single or one-way vehicle movement to or from a property or study
area. Trips can be added together to calculate the total number of vehicles
expected to enter or leave a specific land use or site over a designated
period of time.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the
outside limit of a street ultimate right-of-way. Identical with "front lot line"
and "street line."
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A street parallel to and adjacent to a
collector or arterial street which provides access to abutting properties
and separation from traffic.
G.
LEGAL RIGHT-OF-WAY — The street right-of-way legally in the public
domain at the time a development plan is submitted.
A.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The street right-of-way projected as
necessary for adequate handling of anticipated maximum traffic
volumes, according to the Ultimate Right-of-Way Map incorporated in
the Comprehensive Plan. The ultimate right-of-way is the legal rightof-
way where it has been offered for dedication and accepted by the
Borough.
B.
§ 600-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-8
1:386
VIEWSHED — The viewing area readily perceived by the observer from
a certain location or series of locations, commonly delineated by visual
accents such as, but not limited to, tree lines or ridges, geologic features,
historic structures, stone walls, and watercourses.
VISUAL SCREEN — A barrier whose purpose is to obscure a view; generally
comprised of plant materials suitable for the purpose.
WATERCOURSE — A place intended or used for the directed surface flow
of water, including permanent and intermittent streams, brooks, creeks,
channels, ditches, swales, and rivers.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system designed to transmit water from a
source to users, in compliance with the requirements of the appropriate
state agencies and the local authorities. Includes the following definitions:
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; includes swamps,
marshes, bogs and similar areas. Development in wetlands is regulated
by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. Identification of wetlands" should
be based upon the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Wetlands,
an interagency publication of the Corps of Engineers, EPA, Fish and Wildlife
Service, and Natural Resources Conservation Service, dated January, 1989.
YARD — The area(s) of a lot which must remain free of buildings or other
structures, and may be used as lawn or planted area, parking or driveway
space, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A yard is measured
at right angles from the right-of-way or lot line to the nearest building wall.
"Yard" is further defined as follows:
WATER FACILITIES, PUBLIC — A water distribution system serving all
or a portion of the Borough and operated by a certified public utility.
A.
WATER FACILITIES, COMMON — A water distribution system serving
a single neighborhood or development.
B.
FRONT YARD — A yard which extends across the full width of a lot, for
a depth equal to the minimum front yard setback distance required by
the specific regulations of this chapter, measured from the street legal
right-of-way line, unless stated otherwise.
A.
REAR YARD — A yard which extends across the full width of a lot, for a
depth equal to the minimum rear yard setback distance required by the
specific regulations of this chapter, measured from the rear lot line.
B.
SIDE YARD — A yard which extends along a side lot line from the
required front yard to the required rear yard, the minimum width of
which shall be the minimum specified by the regulations of this chapter,
measured from the side lot line. However, corner lots shall be regarded
as having two front yards for the frontage along a street. Therefore, the
C.
§ 600-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-8
1:387
setback for a side yard with street frontage shall be the same as the
front yard setback for the district in which the property is located.
§ 600-8 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-8
1:388
ARTICLE III
Plan Submission, Processing, and Review
§ 600-9. Applicability.
The standards, requirements, and procedures contained in this article shall
govern the submission and processing of all applications for subdivision
and/or land developments in the Borough.
§ 600-10. Types of plans.
All applications for subdivision and/or land development shall be classified
as sketch plans, preliminary plans, final plans, or minor plans, as further
regulated herein. Figure 600-3.1115 graphically presents the general plan
processing procedure.
§ 600-11. Sketch plan submission requirements.
A. Sketch plans. The Borough strongly recommends applicants submit a
preapplication sketch plan for all plans in accordance with the
requirements of § 600-11, Sketch plan submission requirements, and
§ 600-12, Sketch plan review procedure. Where only a portion of the
property is currently proposed for subdivision or land development, a
sketch plan shall show how the immediate proposal can fit logically into
an overall plan for the entire site.
B. Preliminary plans. A preliminary plan is required to be submitted for all
proposals for subdivision and/or land development in accordance with
the requirements of § 600-13, Preliminary plan submission
requirements, and § 600-14, Preliminary plan review procedure.
C. Final plans. A final plan is required to be submitted for all proposals for
subdivision and/or land development in accordance with the
requirements of § 600-15, Final plan submission requirements, and
§ 600-16, Final plan review procedure.
D. Minor plans. Applications which qualify as minor plans are not required
to submit a sketch plan and may be submitted for concurrent
preliminary and final plan processing and approval, in accordance with
the standards and requirements of § 600-18, Minor plan submission
requirements and review procedure.
A. Purposes. The purposes served by a sketch plan are as follows:
(1) To inform the Borough of an applicant's intent to subdivide and/or
develop a property, and graphically show the concepts and extent
of the proposal.
(2) To allow the Borough to provide advice and guidance to an
applicant so that:
115. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-11
1:389
(a) Overall layout and circulation issues can be resolved prior to
preparation of preliminary plans.
(b) The preliminary plan approval process may then be able to
proceed more efficiently.
(3) To show how a tract of land may be further subdivided or developed
in cases where only a portion of a property is currently under an
active proposal.
(a) This plan shall show a logical and efficient pattern of roads,
lots, and/or buildings, as appropriate for the type of plan
proposed, and shall not be acceptable if it proposes lotting or
development which is obviously impractical or questionable for
reasons of floodplain, steep slopes, relationships to other
properties, or other site planning constraints.
(b) This plan may be shown on the preliminary plan for the subject
site in the form of a reduced-scale inset drawing, although
larger scale drawings are encouraged for review and
discussion purposes.
(c) Preapplication sketch plans shall have no legal standing with
regard to the formal plan approval process mandated by the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq., but shall be considered as a tool for discussion and
guidance regarding development issues.
B. Sketch plan information. A sketch plan should be drawn legibly and to
scale, but it need not be a precisely surveyed or engineered plan, and it
should show the following information:
(1) The entire tract boundary, total acreage, and acreage of each lot.
(2) Existing and proposed streets, lots, buildings, and approximate
building envelopes.
(3) Significant physical features such as floodplain, steep slopes,
woodlands, and existing structures.
(4) Contour lines at five- to ten-foot intervals, based on USGS datum.
(5) Approximate locations for stormwater control facilities, if
necessary.
(6) Location plan showing the relationship of the subject tract to the
surrounding road network and major physical features.
(7) North point and scale.
(8) Name and address of the owner.
(9) Name and address of the engineer, surveyor or architect, if
applicable.
§ 600-11 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-11
1:390
§ 600-12. Sketch plan review procedure.
The Planning Commission shall review sketch plans in accordance with the
criteria contained in this chapter and with other applicable ordinances.
It shall provide informal dialogue with the applicant and advise them as
promptly as possible of the extent to which the proposed subdivision or
land development conforms to the relevant standards of this chapter, and
will discuss possible plan modifications that would increase its degree of
conformity. Aspects of the sketch plan that shall be specifically evaluated
include but are not limited to:
§ 600-13. Preliminary plan submission requirements.
This section contains the requirements for preliminary plans for
subdivisions and/or land developments in terms of drafting standards, basic
information, existing features, and proposed features.
(10) Any additional information which the applicant believes will help
explain the proposal.
C. The applicant shall make a request to the Borough Manager to be
scheduled on the meeting agenda of the Borough Planning Commission
for presentation and discussion of the sketch plan, provided the plan is
received three business days prior to the next Borough Planning
Commission meeting.
A. The location of all areas proposed for disturbance (streets, foundations,
yards, septic disposal systems, stormwater management areas etc.)
with respect to notable features of natural or cultural significance as
identified on the applicant's existing resources and site analysis plan.
B. The potential for street connections with existing streets, other
proposed streets, or potential developments on adjoining parcels.
C. The location of proposed access points along the existing road network.
D. The proposed building density and imperious coverage.
E. The compatibility of the proposal with respect to the objectives and
policy recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan, the Open Space
Plan, and other pertinent Borough plans and studies.
F. Consistency with the Zoning Ordinance.116
A. Fifteen copies of the preliminary plan shall be submitted to the Borough
Manager, in person by the applicant or applicant's agent, at the
Borough Office during normal Borough business hours.
B. Plans must be accompanied by:
(1) Borough filing fee.
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13
1:391
(2) Montgomery County Planning Commission review fee.
(3) Completed Borough application and administrative forms.
C. Drafting standards. Plans shall be professionally prepared in
compliance with the following:
(1) The plan shall be drawn to a standard engineering scale not
exceeding 100 feet to the inch.
(2) Sheet size shall be 15 inches by 18 inches, 18 inches by 30 inches,
or 24 inches by 36 inches, appropriately related to the scale of the
drawing.
(3) All sheets shall be the same size, and be numbered relative to the
total number of sheets (i.e., 1 of 5, etc.)
(4) Where two or more sheets are needed to show the entire tract, a
reduced scale key plan shall be provided to show how the sheets fit
together. Match lines shall be shown.
(5) A reduced scale plan of the entire site at a scale greater than 100
feet to the inch may be required in cases where it would facilitate
the review and approval process. Applicants are encouraged to
submit such plans in cases where they are not required.
(6) Property lines shall be drawn and labeled in conformance with the
Act of May 23, 1945, P.L. 913, No. 367, known as the "Professional
Engineers Registration Law,"117 and accepted surveying and civil
engineering practices, including dimensions shown in feet and
decimal fractions thereof, and bearings shown in degrees, minutes,
and seconds.
(a) Tract boundary lines shall be the heaviest property lines.
(b) Proposed lot lines shall be the next heaviest.
(c) Possible future lots, if shown, shall be the lightest line weight,
and may be shown as dashed lines.
(d) Property lines to be eliminated where two lots are proposed to
be joined in common deed should be properly noted and
depicted on the boundary to be removed.
D. Basic information. All preliminary plans shall show the following basic
information:
(1) Name of the subdivision or land development.
(2) Name, address and phone number of applicant.
117. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
§ 600-13 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-13
1:392
(3) Name, address and phone number of the firm which prepared the
plan and professional seal of the individual certifying its accuracy
and compliance with applicable standards.
(4) Date of preparation of the plan and a descriptive list of revisions to
the plan, and the revision dates.
(5) North point and graphic and written scale.
(6) Location plan showing the relationship of the subject tract to the
surrounding road network and major physical features.
(7) The entire tract boundary with bearings and distances and total
tract acreage.
(8) A list of the basic dimensional and density requirements of the
applicable zoning district, compared to the applicant's proposal.
(9) Zoning classification(s) of all lands abutting the proposal.
(10) Names of all current owners of immediately adjacent lands.
(11) A statement showing:
(a) Number of acres under proposal (net and gross acreage should
be indicated in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance118).
(b) Number of lots and/or dwelling units, or gross leasable area.
(12) Description of variances or special exceptions and the dates they
were granted, if any.
(13) Description of any deed restrictions or other covenants affecting
development of the tract.
(14) The requirements of any other local ordinance which may affect the
proposal.
(15) Legend sufficient to indicate clearly between existing and proposed
conditions.
(16) Name and address of the owner of record.
(17) Tax block and unit number of all parcels being subdivided or
developed.
(18) Deed book and page numbers for all parcels being subdivided or
developed.
(19) A note shall be shown on the plan which states "Preliminary Plan -
Not to be Recorded."
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13
1:393
E. Existing features plan. Within the tract proposed for subdivision and/or
land development, and within 100 feet of the tract boundaries, the
following information shall be shown on the preliminary plan:
(1) Streets bordering or crossing the tract, including:
(a) Locations.
(b) Names.
(c) Rights-of-way.
[1] Legal.
[2] Ultimate.
(d) Cartway widths.
(e) Surface conditions.
(f) Location of curbs and sidewalks.
(2) Water resources, including:
(a) Lakes, ponds.
(b) Wetlands, swamps, or marshes.
(c) Watercourses and springs.
(d) Existing well locations: in use, capped, and abandoned.
(e) Flood-prone or floodplain areas, including data from FEMA
studies, supporting hydrologic and hydraulic data for onehundred-
year flood limits, or Montgomery County Soil Survey
when applicable, as determined appropriate by the Borough
Engineer for the watercourse(s) affecting the site.
(3) Sanitary sewers, including:
(a) Pipe locations.
(b) Pipe sizes and materials.
(c) Direction of flow.
(d) Gradient of flow.
(e) Manholes.
(f) Invert elevations.
(g) Septic systems and drain fields.
(4) Storm sewers, including:
(a) Pipe locations.
§ 600-13 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-13
1:394
(b) Pipe sizes and materials.
(c) Direction of flow.
(d) Gradient of flow.
(e) Inlets, catch basins, and manholes.
(f) Invert elevations.
(5) Other existing stormwater and/or erosion control facilities,
including:
(a) Basins.
(b) Swales.
(c) Diffusion devices.
(d) Velocity controls.
(e) Related technical data for those facilities.
(6) Other natural features, including:
(a) Location, size, species, and condition of trees six inches in
diameter or greater, when standing alone or in small groups.
(b) Outer limits of woodlands and a general description of their
types, sizes, and conditions.
(c) Locations and limits of geologic features which may affect the
locations of proposed streets or buildings, including:
[1] Rock outcroppings.
[2] Quarries.
[3] Sink holes.
[4] Ravines.
(7) Soil types, including:
(a) Mapped limits.
(b) Names.
(c) Significant limitations, such as, high water table or shallow
bedrock.
(8) Contour information, including:
(a) Contours at a vertical interval of two feet, accurately drawn
from photogrammetric or on-site survey data.
§ 600-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13
1:395
(b) Areas with slopes of 15% or greater should be shaded, as
determined from the contours shown on the plan.
(9) Other man-made features, including:
(a) Location, size, character, and configuration of existing
buildings, labeled "To Remain" or "To Be Removed" as
applicable.
(b) Location and description of existing buildings and other
structures less than 100 feet beyond the tract boundaries.
(c) Location, type, and ownership of utilities, both above and
below ground, with notes to describe:
[1] Easement or right-of-way dimensions.
[2] Additional setback or development restrictions imposed by
the utility company.
[3] Specific type of product transported with pipelines.
F. Proposed features and lotting plan. Within the tract proposed for
subdivision and/or land development, the following information shall be
shown on the preliminary plan:
(1) Subdivision and/or land development layout.
(a) Proposed streets, alleys, driveways, and parking areas,
including:
[1] Names or other identification.
[2] Right-of-way widths and lines.
[3] Cartway widths.
[4] Center line courses, distances, and curve data.
[5] Curblines.
[6] Radii at intersections.
[7] Street location tie-ins by courses and distances.
[8] Capacity of parking areas.
[9] Sight distance at proposed intersections with existing
streets.
(b) Layout and dimensions of all lots, including the net and lot area
as defined within the Zoning Ordinance.119
(c) All building setback lines.
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-13 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-13
1:396
(d) All parking setback lines where applicable.
(e) Proposed sidewalk or other walkway locations.
(f) Proposed buildings, including:
[1] Locations.
[2] Configurations.
[3] Sizes (ground level floor area, total floor area, and height).
[4] Total building coverage (square feet and percentage of
site).
[5] Locations and types of accessory structures.
[6] Ground floor elevations.
(g) Common use areas, including:
[1] Open space areas.
[a] Locations.
[b] Configurations.
[c] Size.
[d] Use of common area.
[2] Recreation facilities.
[a] Locations.
[b] Types of facilities.
[3] Parking, driveway, or road areas when privately owned for
common use.
[4] Walkways or pathways.
[5] Notes regarding offers of dedication or retention in private
ownership, as applicable.
(h) Areas for future uses, including:
[1] Road extensions.
[2] Stormwater management facilities.
[3] Additional subdivision or land development in sketch form,
in accordance with the requirements of § 600-11, Sketch
plan submission requirements, and in accordance with the
intent of § 600-12, Sketch plan review procedure.
[4] Explanatory notes for such future uses.
§ 600-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-13
1:397
(i) Proposed landscaping plan, including:
[1] Street trees.
[2] Planting screens.
[3] Buffer areas.
[4] Other related landscape features such as mounding and
water features.
[5] Managed meadow.
(2) Grading and drainage plan. The following information shall be
shown on the preliminary plan:
(a) Proposed contours for the entire site at the contour interval of
the plan.
(b) Approximate limits of site disturbance, including a clear
delineation of existing vegetation, including trees, hedge rows,
wooded areas, scrub growth, meadow, and actively farmed
land:
[1] To be removed.
[2] To be preserved, including method of preservation.
(c) Stormwater management and erosion control and
sedimentation facilities, including:
[1] Basins.
[2] Swales.
[3] Diffusion devices.
[4] Velocity controls.
[5] Pipe locations.
[6] Pipe sizes and materials.
[7] Direction of flow.
[8] Gradient of flow.
[9] Inlets, catch basins, and manholes.
[10] Invert elevations.
[11] Design calculations for these facilities shall be submitted
in report form with a note on the plan referencing the
report.
(3) Infrastructure plan.
§ 600-13 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-13
1:398
§ 600-14. Preliminary plan review procedure.
The procedure contained in this section shall regulate the review of
preliminary plans for subdivision and land development.
(a) Sanitary sewer line locations, clearly identifying the following:
[1] Pipe sizes and materials.
[2] Direction of flow.
[3] Gradient of flow.
[4] Manholes.
[5] Invert elevations.
(b) Sanitary sewage pumping stations.
(c) Approved on-site disposal locations.
(d) Sewage treatment plant locations.
(e) Water supply facilities, including:
[1] Central water supply lines.
[2] Pipe sizes and materials.
[3] Fire hydrant locations.
[4] Well locations when on lot, including the one-hundred-foot
radius clear zone separating wells from sewage disposal
locations.
(f) Finished floor elevations of proposed buildings.
(g) Municipal waste disposal facilities.
(4) Cross sections, profiles, structural designs. The following shall be
provided:
(a) Cross section and center line profile for each proposed or
widened cartway, driveway, or parking area shown on the
preliminary plan, including:
[1] Road center line grades and vertical curvature including
road center line elevations shown at horizontal intervals of
25 feet along vertical curves and 50 feet for straight
grades.
[2] Profiles for sanitary sewers, water mains, storm drains,
including locations of manholes, inlets, and catch basins.
(b) Preliminary design of any bridges, culverts, or other structures
and appurtenances which may be required.
§ 600-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-14
1:399
A. The Borough Secretary or Zoning Officer will conduct a cursory review
of the application, administrative forms, and preliminary plans, to
ensure that the submission appears to be complete, and will then stamp
the plans with the plan submission date.
B. The application for approval of the preliminary plan shall be placed on
the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Collegeville
Planning Commission following the plan submission date provided that
plans are received 15 days prior to that date.
C. The Borough Secretary shall distribute copies of the plan to the
following for review and recommendations:
(1) Borough Planning Commission.
(2) Borough Council.
(3) Borough Engineer.
(4) Montgomery County Planning Commission, along with the required
review fee and completed review request form.
(5) Borough Solicitor, Roadmaster, Public Works Director, Fire
Marshal, Police Chief, other Borough boards or officials, sewer and/
or water authorities, and/or other technical consultants as needed.
D. Upon completion of its review of the preliminary plan, which should
include consideration of the timely recommendations of the Borough
Engineer, Montgomery County Planning Commission, and other
technical advisors when requested, the Borough Planning Commission
shall communicate its recommendations to Borough Council.
E. Borough Council shall have a ninety-day time period to act on the plan
unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of the time
period.
(1) The ninety-day time period shall be measured from the date of the
next regularly scheduled Borough Planning Commission meeting
following the plan submission date.
(2) If an extension of the ninety-day time period is applied, it shall be
measured from the expiration of the original ninety-day period. A
time extension shall postpone the deadline and effects of the
ninety-day time period for the additional number of days agreed to
in writing prior to the last scheduled Borough Council meeting
within the ninety-day plan review period.
F. Borough Council shall consider the preliminary plan application at one
or more of its public meetings during the ninety-day time period, and/or
extension thereof if applicable, and shall render a decision on the plan
following receipt of the recommendations of the Borough Planning
Commission, Borough Engineer, Montgomery County Planning
Commission, and/or other technical advisors as requested.
§ 600-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-14
1:400
(1) Provided, in accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., that Borough Council shall
not approve an application until the Montgomery County Planning
Commission report of its recommendations is received, or until the
expiration of 30 days from the date the application was forwarded
to the county.
(2) In accordance with the policies of the Montgomery County
Planning Commission, the date the application was forwarded to
the county shall be considered to be:
(a) The date noted on the Borough's request for review; or
(b) Two days prior to the county's receipt of the request if no date
is noted on the request, except that in no instance will the date
be earlier than five days prior to the county's receipt of the
request.
G. Procedure following the Borough council decision. When Borough
Council make a decision on a preliminary plan, one of following
procedures will be followed, depending on the type of decision:
(1) Denial. If Borough Council denies approval of a preliminary plan,
then the written notification to the applicant shall specify the
defects found in the application and describe the requirements
which have not been met, and shall cite the provisions of the
statute or ordinance relied upon.
(2) Approval. If Borough Council approves a preliminary plan, as filed
by the applicant, then the Secretary will so certify thereon, and a
copy of the approved plan will be forwarded to the applicant. The
applicant shall then submit two paper copies of the approved plan
for Borough seal and signature.
(3) Approval subject to conditions.
(a) If Borough Council approves a preliminary plan, conditioned
upon the performance of any act or the obtaining of any other
approval or permit by the applicant, the applicant shall be
given the opportunity to accept or reject the conditions within
a ten-day period. The approval of the plan shall be rescinded
automatically without action of Borough Council, at the end of
10 days from the date at which conditional approval was
granted or notice received by the applicant regarding the
conditional approval, upon either the applicant's failure to
execute the written acceptance or upon rejection of such
conditions by the applicant. Written notice will be provided to
the applicant in the following manner:
[1] Specify the conditions of approval and request the
applicant's written agreement to the conditions.
§ 600-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-14
1:401
[2] State that the application will be denied if the applicant
does not agree to the conditions, and specify the defects
found in the application, describe the requirements which
have not been met, and cite the provisions of the statute or
ordinance relied upon for denial of the plan.
[3] State that the plan approval shall be rescinded
automatically upon the applicant's failure to accept or
reject the conditions within 10 days following the decision
by Borough Council to grant conditional approval.
(b) Following submission of written agreement to the conditions
specified by Borough Council, the applicant shall submit two
paper copies of the preliminary plan, which show compliance
with the conditions, by plan revision or notation, for Borough
seal and signatures.
(4) Written notification of the Borough Council's decision shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or be mailed to the
applicant's last known address not later than 15 days following the
decision.
H. Effective period of approval. Approval will be effective for a period of
five years from the date of plan approval, unless extended in writing by
Borough Council.
(1) No subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision, or
other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect
adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete
any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the
terms of approval within that five-year period.
(2) In the case where preliminary and final plan approval are
concurrent, the five-year period shall be measured from the date of
that concurrent approval.
(3) In a case of a preliminary plan calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed
by the applicant with the preliminary plan delineating all proposed
sections as well as deadlines within which applications for final
plan approval of each section are intended to be filed.
(a) Such schedule shall be updated annually by the applicant on or
before the anniversary of the preliminary plan approval, until
final plan approval has been granted to the final section.
(b) Any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall be subject to
approval of Borough Council in its discretion.
(c) Each section in any residential subdivision or land
development, except for the last section, shall contain a
minimum of 25% of the total number of dwelling units as
§ 600-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-14
1:402
§ 600-15. Final plan submission requirements.
All final plans for subdivisions and/or land developments shall consist of two
basic parts, the Improvements construction plan and the record plan, and
shall comply with the requirements of this section.
shown on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser percentage is
approved by Borough Council in its discretion.
(d) For any section or sections, beyond the initial section, in which
the required improvements have not been substantially
completed within the initial five-year period, the terms of
Subsection F above shall also apply to each subsequent section
for an additional term of three years from the date of final plan
approval of each section.
A. Fifteen copies of the final plan shall be submitted to the Borough
Manager, in person by the applicant or applicant's agent, at the
Borough Office during normal Borough business hours.
B. Improvement construction plan.
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required for an
improvements construction plan as for a preliminary plan, except
that the horizontal scale of the plan and profile shall not exceed 50
feet to the inch and the vertical scale of the plan shall be two, four,
or five feet to the inch, whichever is most appropriate.
(2) Information to be shown. The plan shall contain sufficient
information needed for the construction of the proposed streets, or
any portion thereof, including all appurtenances, sewers and
utilities, as shown on the approved preliminary plan. This
information shall include:
(a) Horizontal plan. The horizontal plan shall show details of the
horizontal layout as follows:
[1] Information shown on the approved preliminary plan.
[2] The beginning and end of proposed immediate and future
construction.
[3] Stations corresponding to those shown on the profiles.
[4] The curb elevation at tangent points of horizontal curves,
at road or alley intersections, and at the projected
intersections of the curblines.
[5] The location and size of sanitary sewers and lateral
connections and water mains with distances between
manholes, gas, electric and other utility pipes or conduits
and of storm drains, inlets and manholes.
§ 600-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-15
1:403
[6] The location, type and size of curbs and all paving widths.
[7] The location of fire hydrants and streetlights.
(b) Profiles. The profiles shall show details as follows:
[1] Profiles and elevations of the ground along the center lines
of proposed streets.
[2] Profiles of sanitary sewers with a profile over the sewer of
the existing and finished ground surface showing manhole
locations beginning at the lowest manhole.
[3] Profiles of storm drains showing catch basins, inlet, and
manhole locations, sales, ditches, etc.
[4] Profiles of water mains.
(c) Cross sections. The cross section for each classification of
street shall comply with the Borough's standards and
specifications as minimum requirements. It shall show a typical
cross section across the road with details of grading and
construction as follows:
[1] The ultimate right-of-way width and the location and width
of the cartway.
[2] The type, depth, and crown of paving.
[3] The type and size of curb.
[4] When sidewalks are required, grading of the sidewalk area
should be carried to the full width of the ultimate right-ofway.
[5] The location, width, type and depth of sidewalks, when
required.
[6] The typical locations, size and depths of sewers and
utilities.
[7] Proposed grading to the ultimate right-of-way line.
(d) Additional information. The following additional information
shall be submitted with the final plan.
[1] All required local, state, and federal permits shall be
submitted. These permits may include: Montgomery
County, PennDOT, or Borough road access permits; PADEP
permits for drainage, stream alteration, wetlands
encroachment, water quality discharge, dams, erosion,
and sedimentation control, air pollution, or sanitary
sewage facilities.
§ 600-15 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-15
1:404
[2] The following statements shall be required on the final
plan:
[a] "The Approved Improvement Construction Plan, a
copy of which may be inspected at the Borough Office,
has been made a part of the Approved Final Plan."
[b] "For access to a highway under the jurisdiction of
PennDOT, a highway occupancy permit is required,
pursuant to Section 420 of the Act of June 1, 1945, P.L.
1242, No. 428, known as the 'State Highway Law.'
Access to the state highway shall be only as
authorized by the highway occupancy permit."
[3] All engineering calculations which support the proposed
improvements such as drainage calculations, sanitary
facility design calculations, or structural calculations.
[4] Certification of inspection and satisfactory functioning of
any on-lot sewage disposal system which will remain in
use, in accord with current industry and DEP standards.
[5] Developments utilizing public water or sewer facilities
should provide proof that those services will be provided.
[6] Sewage facilities plan approval from PADEP.
[7] Recommendation of approval of the erosion and sediment
control plan from the Conservation District.
C. Record plan.
(1) Drafting standards. The same standards shall be required for a
record plan as for a preliminary plan, and in addition, for recording
purposes, the plans shall be placed on sheet sizes of 15 inches by
18 inches, 18 inches by 30 inches, or 24 inches by 36 inches. All
lettering and lines should be drawn to be legible if the plan is
reduced to half size. A two-inch border on the left side of the plan
should be free of information.
(2) Information to be shown. The plan, which shall include all portions
of an approved preliminary plan, shall also show:
(a) Basic information, as required for a preliminary plan,
§ 600-13D.
(b) Courses and distances sufficient for the legal description of all
the lines shown on the plan. The error of closure shall not be
greater than one part in 5,000.
(c) Names or identification of the following:
[1] Abutting owners.
§ 600-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-15
1:405
[2] All dimensional and technical descriptions of roads.
[3] Easements.
[4] Rights-of-way.
[5] Open space, recreation, and/or other common use areas.
[6] Other public improvements.
[7] For land development plans, all additional information
pertinent to the location and construction of site
improvements, including buildings, walks, parking,
driveways, etc.
[8] Block and unit numbers.
[9] Montgomery County Planning Commission file number.
(d) All lots deeded to the ultimate right-of-way so that a single
deed may be drawn to the appropriate body having jurisdiction
for the dedication of streets by the applicant.
(e) Evidence that the plans are in conformance with the Zoning
Ordinance120 and other applicable Borough ordinances and
regulations. In any instance where such plans do not conform,
evidence shall be presented that an exception, waiver, or
variance has been officially authorized.
(f) The location, material and size of all existing and proposed
monuments with reference to them.
(g) Building setback lines with distances from the ultimate rightof-
way line, and property lines.
(h) Appropriate notes and conditions governing the use or
development of the proposed property.
D. Certifications. When approved, the record plan must show:
(1) The signature and seal of the registered engineer and surveyor
certifying that the plan represents his/her work; that the
monuments shown thereon exist as located; that the dimensional
and geodetic details are correct and that the survey has been
prepared in accordance with the Pennsylvania Engineers
Registration Law, P.L. 913, No. 367.121
(2) The signature of the applicant certifying his adoption of the plan.
(3) The signature of the Borough Secretary, certifying that Borough
Council approved the final plan on the date shown.
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
121. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 148 et seq.
§ 600-15 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-15
1:406
§ 600-16. Final plan review procedure.
Final plans shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with the
procedure contained in this section.
(a) Spaces shall be provided for the signatures of Borough Council
whose signatures are required.
(b) Space shall be provided for the signature of the Borough
Engineer and Chairman of the Borough Planning Commission.
(4) A blank space shall be provided for the stamp and seal of the
Montgomery County Planning Commission, located along the righthand
edge of the plan, measuring 3 1/2 inches wide and 2 1/2
inches tall.
A. The application for approval of the final plan shall be placed on the
agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Borough
Planning Commission following the plan submission date provided that
plans are received 15 days prior to that date.
B. The Borough Secretary shall distribute copies of the plan to the
following for review and recommendations:
(1) Borough Planning Commission.
(2) Borough Council.
(3) Borough Engineer.
(4) Montgomery County Planning Commission, along with the required
review fee and completed review request form.
(5) Borough Solicitor, Roadmaster, Public Works Director, Fire
Marshal, Police Chief, other Borough boards or officials, sewer and/
or water authorities, and/or other technical consultants as needed.
C. A final plan for an application that has been previously granted
preliminary plan approval shall be approved by Borough Council when
it is assured that:
(1) The final plan conforms to the approved preliminary plan.
(2) All engineering and other technical details have been resolved to
the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer, as evidenced by a letter
from the Borough Engineer, and to the satisfaction of other
technical advisors, when requested by Borough Council.
(3) A signed recommendation is received from the Planning
Commission if specifically requested by Borough Council.
(4) All financial security and legal agreements have been found
satisfactory by Borough Council, under the review and advice of the
§ 600-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-16
1:407
§ 600-17. Recording final plan.
Within 90 days following final plan approval, the applicant shall record the
final plan in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Montgomery County.
§ 600-18. Minor plan submission requirements and review
procedure.
Minor plans may be submitted and processed only for lot line adjustments,
simple conveyances, minor subdivisions, of minor land developments as
characterized herein, in accordance with the standards and requirements in
this section.
Solicitor, all security has been posted, and all agreements have
been executed.
(a) When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate
financing, Borough Council shall furnish the applicant with a
signed copy of a resolution indicating approval of the final plan
contingent upon the applicant obtaining a satisfactory financial
security.
(b) The final plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the
financial improvements agreement is executed.
(c) The resolution of contingent approval shall expire and be
deemed to be revoked if the financial security agreement is not
executed within 90 days unless a written extension is granted
by Borough Council.
(5) The plan complies in all respects with applicable Borough
ordinances or that appropriate variances or waivers have been
granted for features that do not comply.
(6) All necessary permits have been obtained from the applicable
regulatory agencies, authorities, or departments.
D. When the final plan is approved, the applicant shall present three paper
and one linen or Mylar copies of the plan to be signed by Borough
Council, and the Borough Secretary, together with the date of the
approval and official Borough seal.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. § 10101 et seq., whenever final plan approval is required by a
municipality, the Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any plan for
recording unless it contains the official approval of Borough Council
and certification of review by the County Planning Commission.
B. Prior to recording, the applicant shall present the municipally approved
plan to the Montgomery County Planning Commission for its stamp and
seal, with one paper copy given to the County Planning Commission for
its files.
§ 600-16 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-18
1:408
A. Standards for qualification as a minor plan submission.
(1) Lot line adjustment.
(a) A proposal between two abutting, existing, legally approved
and recorded lots.
(b) A common lot line is proposed to be adjusted in terms of its
location or configuration.
(c) The land area of each lot may be different after adjustment, but
the total lot area of the two lots will be unchanged.
(d) No alteration will occur to the perimeter boundary lines of the
two lots.
(e) Neither lot shall violate the applicable dimensional
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance122 as a result of the lot
line adjustment.
(f) Possible reasons for lot line adjustments include, but are not
necessarily limited to:
[1] Correcting errors regarding locations of existing
improvements (e.g., if the driveway for Lot No. 1 is located
on Lot No. 2);
[2] Relating the line to definitive physical characteristics (e.g.,
to adjust the line to run along an existing hedgerow);
[3] Preferences of the landowners involved.
(2) Simple conveyance.
(a) A proposal between two abutting, existing, legally approved
and recorded lots.
(b) A portion of one lot is being divided off to be conveyed to the
owner of the abutting lot.
(c) The land area of each lot will be different after conveyance, but
the total lot area of the two lots will be unchanged.
(d) The lot from which the land is being conveyed must be suitable
in terms of the applicable dimensional requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance,123 so that after conveyance, it will remain in
compliance with those requirements.
(e) The land area being conveyed need not satisfy any of the
dimensional requirements applicable to lotting in the district in
which it is located, nor the street frontage requirements of the
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-18
1:409
Zoning Ordinance,124 provided that it shall be deed restricted
to the extent that it may not be transferred independently, but
must be transferred together with the lot to which it is being
functionally added by the process of simple conveyance.
(3) Minor subdivision.
(a) A subdivision proposal which would divide one existing lot into
two lots, both of which will comply with the applicable
dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the
existing lot is located.
(b) The existing lot has sufficient frontage on an existing,
improved public street to satisfy the applicable Borough
requirements for lot frontage and access to a public street for
both proposed lots.
(c) The existing lot has not been a part of an approved subdivision
proposal during the five years previous to the current
application.
(d) The subdivision will not require new road construction, road
improvements, or the extension of existing public utility lines.
(e) The proposal will not involve significant stormwater and/or
erosion control issues, as determined by the Borough Engineer.
(f) Disqualification. Borough Council may require standard
preliminary plan submission in place of a minor plan when
conditions warrant it, at the advice of the Planning Commission
or Engineer.
(4) Minor land developments.
(a) A land development proposal where it is found that the
intended development or modification of a site, or use and
occupancy of an existing structure will create a minimal impact
upon traffic, drainage, visual image, landscaping, buffering,
lighting or other elements described within the purposes of
this chapter.
(b) Parking lot expansions.
(c) Additions to existing nonresidential buildings provided that the
addition is less than 5,000 gross square feet and involves no
more than a 25% in the size of the existing building.
(d) The conversion of a residential dwelling that results in the
creation of no more than four new dwelling units.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-18 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-18
1:410
§ 600-19. De minimus improvement process.
No subdivision or land development approval is needed for a de minimus
improvement as defined in § 600-8 if an applicant who wishes to proceed
under these provisions shall submit to the Borough staff the following for
their review:
(e) The addition of tenants to an existing nonresidential building
when minimal structural improvements are required.
B. Submission requirements and review procedure.
(1) All minor plans shall be considered to be preliminary plans for the
purposes of submission for review and approval, and shall comply
with the requirements of § 600-13, Preliminary plan submission
requirements, and § 600-14, Preliminary plan review procedure.
(2) When a minor plan qualifies for approval, or for approval subject to
conditions, in accordance with Subsection A, herein, the minor plan
may be granted concurrent preliminary and final plan approvals,
provided that the plan includes the final plan certifications required
by § 600-15D, herein, and complies with § 600-16C, herein.
(3) A minor plan is not required to include an improvements
construction plan or a record plan as required by §§ 600-15B and
600-15C, herein.
(4) A minor plan which will require access to a state highway shall
provide the highway access statement on the plan, as required by
§ 600-15B.
A. A building permit application setting forth the proposed improvement,
the cost thereof, and any changes to be made to the land.
B. Where the project has a previously recorded land development plan, the
applicants must file an amended land development plan for the record.
C. The plan, when filed, shall undergo engineering and zoning review to
address all zoning issues such as trash enclosures, landscaping, site
access, and stormwater management. An escrow shall be established
with the Borough to cover appropriate fees for plan review as
determined by staff.
D. Any given building may have no more than three de minimus
improvements as long as the cumulative additions do not exceed the
definition set forth in Article II and each application will contain a
statement to effect that the cumulative de minimus improvements
granted, and including the current application, require less than five
parking spaces and the total footprint of the de minimus improvements
does not exceed 1,000 square feet.
E. Upon completion of the appropriate staff review, if the applicant agrees
in writing to the conditions, improvements, and/or requirements
§ 600-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-19
1:411
determined by the review, the application will be approved and the
appropriate permits will be issued. In the event that the applicant
does not agree with the review conclusions, the application is deemed
denied and the applicant may elect to resubmit the application under
the standard land development procedures as set forth herein.
§ 600-19 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-19
1:412
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 600-20. General standards.
The following principles, standards and design requirements shall be used
in the evaluation of all subdivision and land development proposals. Other
design requirements as established in the Zoning Ordinance125 or other
municipal ordinance shall be used in addition to the following:
§ 600-21. Conformance with plans.
A. All portions of a tract shall be designated as to their use, such as lots,
roads, open space, parking areas, etc.
B. Applicants shall preserve scenic areas, historic sites, other community
assets and landmarks, and natural amenities such as trees and
waterways.
C. Plans shall be designed to avoid excessive disturbance of vegetation
and movement of earth.
D. Floodplain land areas shall be governed by additional standards
contained in this chapter, the Borough Zoning Ordinance, and the
Borough's Building Code.126
E. The applicant shall construct, install, and guarantee, at no expense to
the Borough or its authorities, all improvements required as part of
plan approval, including, but not limited to, streets, curbs, sidewalks,
water and sewage facilities, stormwater management facilities,
streetlights, fire hydrants, road signs, monuments, lot pins, utilities,
and shade trees.
F. The standards contained within this article are the minimum standards
and requirements for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the Borough and are to be used in all subdivisions and
land developments. Applicants are always encouraged to exceed
minimum standards. In addition, Borough Council reserves the right to
require standards in excess of the minimum requirements if warranted
due to the unique characteristics of a particular property.
A. Comprehensive Plan. Proposals for land development or subdivision
shall be generally consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, especially
as to the use of land, intensity of development, transportation,
community facilities and resource protection. Residential development
should also be consistent with the housing element of the plan. All
proposals should be located in areas designated for development in the
future land use plan element and be serviced by currently available
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
126. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning, and Ch. 270, Uniform Construction Codes,
respectively.
§ 600-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-21
1:413
§ 600-22. Site organization.
Proposed land developments and subdivisions should address the
opportunities and limitations present on a site and its adjacent
surroundings. Site opportunities should be maximized to enhance the
overall quality of the development and sincere steps should be taken to
lessen potential negative impacts upon a site and the surrounding
community. The physical, social, and psychological needs of the users of
the site should be evaluated and appropriately incorporated into the final
subdivision layout or site design. The impacts of the proposed development
on the natural environment and surrounding land uses should be given a
high priority and made an integral part of the overall design for the land
development and subdivision. The following site organization guidelines
should be used:
infrastructure or infrastructure that will be developed concurrent with
the development.
B. State, regional, and county plans. Proposals shall be generally
consistent with appropriate state, regional, and county adopted
Comprehensive Plans. Where regional facilities are proposed in the
plan, such as highways, effort shall be made to preserve needed rightsof-
way in the proposed land development or subdivision for future
infrastructure projects.
C. Public service improvements. Proposals shall be consistent with the
location and timing of public service improvements, such as water and
sewage facilities in accordance with the appropriate infrastructure
plans governing those facilities. In addition, the location of public
service facilities as outlined in a capital improvement program or
Official Map should be considered in locating and planning
development.
A. Site improvement layout. Building placement should provide a
functional relationship with a site's topography, existing vegetation,
surrounding land uses, taking into account energy conservation, polar
exposure, and pertinent natural features.
B. Existing natural features. Existing natural features should be
recognized and integrated into the site layout. Natural features such as
streams, hillsides, wetlands, unique habitat, woods, and similar natural
resources should be considered strong design determinants and be
incorporated into the overall site plan to strengthen the unique quality
of the land.
C. Open space and scenic views. The placement of open space and
preservation of scenic views should be a fundamental design decision.
Open space offers more than an opportunity to provide recreation. It
can protect important natural systems, reduce the perceived density of
development and effectively buffer different land uses.
§ 600-21 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-22
1:414
§ 600-23. Lots.
D. Circulation. Movement within a site and access to the site should
consider the safety and convenience of various types of users. Cross
access between properties and joint access are encouraged to improve
circulation.
E. Relationship to surrounding uses. The proposed design should
compliment positive surrounding uses through building set backs,
buffers, and separation of uses. Various potential negative impacts upon
surrounding land uses, including noise, light, and loss of privacy should
be mitigated.
F. Sustainable development. The development of a site should use
methods that reduce energy and water consumption needs of the land
development. Opportunities to utilize renewable energy sources and
conserve and reuse water resources should be considered.
A. Lot size and width. Each lot shall meet or exceed the minimum area and
width requirements of the Zoning Ordinance127 and be generally
sufficient in size and shape to adequately accommodate the
development or use proposed for it. Lots that contain natural
restrictions such as wetlands, water bodies, steep slopes or other
features shall be made large enough to provide suitable area for the
intended use of the lot without requiring encroachment upon natural
amenities. Lots with existing or planned public improvements such as
fuel pipe lines, underground utility easements, stormwater detention
basins, high voltage power lines or other facilities should be sized to
allow suitable room for the intended use of the lot without requiring
encroachment on the public facilities or easements.
B. Lot shape. Deep, narrow lots and wide, shallow lots are to be avoided
except that lots containing uniquely designed structures, such as
certain types of attached dwelling units, may receive special
consideration. Every lot shall contain a building envelope suitable for
the type(s) of development proposed.
C. Lot frontage. Every lot shall have frontage along the right-of-way of a
public, private or common street, in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance.128 Sufficient frontage is the minimum width required to site
a driveway into the property in accordance with the design
requirements in this section and other appropriate state, federal, and
local regulations. Corner lots will have to meet lot frontage
requirements on two streets.
D. Lot lines. Lot lines shall be drawn parallel, concentric, at right angles,
or radial to the street right-of-way line unless not feasible or
undesirable due to existing, permanent, natural or man-made features.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-23
1:415
Where possible lot lines shall coincide with abutting lot lines and
lot lines across streets. Generally, lot corners of several lots should
coincide.
E. Reverse frontage lots. Reverse frontage lots may be used as an
alternative to marginal access streets, or normal lotting when the lots
abut a major collector street or street of a higher classification, or steep
grades (over 15%) at the street right-of-way line. When reverse
frontage lots are used and the total lot depth is less than 200 feet, 25
feet adjacent to the major collector street or street of a higher
classification, shall be planted as a screening buffer in accordance with
§ 600-53.
F. Flag lots.
(1) In unique situations, flag lots may be permitted by special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
Zoning Ordinance.129 In reviewing flag lots proposals, the following
factors will be considered by Borough Council, the Planning
Commission, and Engineer.
(a) The amount of road frontage and configuration of the property
being subdivided.
(b) The sizes and number of lots proposed, including both the total
number of lots and the number of flag lots.
(c) The type and character of road that the tract abuts.
(d) The type and character of the neighborhood and abutting
parcels.
(e) The topography of the parcel being subdivided, with an
emphasis on saving trees, avoiding steep slopes, and
preserving floodplain, wetlands and other environmental
features if present.
(f) The location and safety of access points and street
intersections.
(g) The economic impact on the municipality of maintaining a road
as compared to using flag lots.
(h) The visual and physical impacts of road construction from
excessive regrading, for example, as compared to the use of
access strips.
(2) Parts of a flag lot. Flag lots shall be comprised of two parts, the
access strip and the body of the lot. The body of the lot shall begin
at the point at which the lot width meets the minimum lot width
requirement specified in the Zoning Ordinance.130
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-23 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-23
1:416
§ 600-24. Blocks.
(3) Design standards for flag lots.
(a) The length of the access strip shall be kept to a minimum. As a
guide, the preferred length is approximately equal to the depth
of one lot which complies with the minimum lot width and area
requirements of the district in which it is located.
(b) The location of the access strip should be logical relative to the
body of the flag lot, surrounding lot configurations, and natural
features of the land, and it shall intersect the public street at a
safe, visible location.
(c) Turns greater than 45° or with a radius less than 150 feet and
vertical grades in excess of 10% are prohibited in access strips.
It may be necessary to widen the access strip at such sharp
turns and steep slopes to accommodate grading, drainage, tree
preservation, or emergency vehicles.
(d) Beginning at the edge of road pavement, the first 15 feet of
driveways within an access strip shall be paved.
(e) No more than one tier of flag lots shall be permitted on a tract.
In other words, a flag lot may not be located behind another
flag lot.
(f) In a subdivision of five or more lots, flag lots may comprise no
more than 15% of the total number of lots, rounded to the
nearest whole number.
(g) Flag lots are not permitted to gain access from a single access
street.
(h) The access strip must serve as the primary access point for the
lot.
A. The minimum block length shall be 300 feet unless the Zoning
Ordinance131 specifies a different minimum length.
B. The block width shall be two lots deep when the lots are laid out back to
back according to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.132 When
reverse lotting is designed, the block width shall be in accordance with
the reverse frontage lot standards in § 600-23.
C. Blocks shall be designed to continue the Borough's grid pattern and
provide efficient, convenient, and safe pedestrian and vehicular
circulation, including the reduction of intersections with arterial
streets.
130. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
131. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-24
1:417
§ 600-25. Community facilities.
§ 600-26. Ownership of open space.
D. Blocks shall be designed to reflect natural features that may constrain
subdivision and land development.
A. Borough Council shall determine the need for additional community
facilities to serve the proposed subdivision or land development.
B. Where deemed essential by Borough Council upon consideration of the
particular type of development proposed, and especially in large-scale
residential developments, Borough Council may require the dedication
or reservation of such areas or sites of an extent and location suitable to
the needs created by the development for schools, parks and other
purposes in accordance with the park and recreation plan, community
facilities plan, or Official Map.
C. Areas provided or reserved for such community facilities shall be
adequate to provide for building sites, related activity areas,
landscaping, and off-street parking as appropriate to the use proposed.
D. Where a proposed park, playground, school or other public use shown
in the Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in a subdivision
or land development, Borough Council may require the dedication or
reservation of land within the subdivision or land development.
A. Subdividers and developers shall provide recreation facilities and open
space land in the amount and character prescribed in the Zoning
Ordinance.133
B. Location and criteria for dedicated open space. Lands to be dedicated
shall:
(1) Comply with the open space criteria set out in the Borough Zoning
Ordinance.134
(2) At the discretion of Borough Council, provide for either active or
passive recreational or open space uses or a combination thereof in
accordance with furthering the objectives of Borough's adopted
open space or recreation plans.
(3) Be properly delineated before occupancy permits are granted.
C. Acceptance and use of dedicated land.
(1) Any land dedicated to the Borough shall be used only for the
purpose of providing park and recreational facilities and for the
preservation of open space and shall be available for use by all
residents of the Borough.
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-24 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-26
1:418
(2) When land is dedicated, acceptance by the Borough shall be by
means of a signed resolution to which a property description of the
dedicated area shall be attached. A fee simple warranty deed
conveying the property shall be delivered to the Borough with title
free and clear of all liens, encumbrances and conditions excepting
public utility easements.
(3) Open space designation. All land held for open space shall be so
designated on the plans. The plans shall contain the following
statement for lands in Subsections C(3)(a), (b), (c) or (d), below:
"Open space land may not be separately sold, nor shall such land be
further developed or subdivided." All plans shall further designate
the use of open space, the type of maintenance to be provided and a
planting plan or schedule. In designating use and maintenance, the
following classes may be used.
(a) Lawn. A grass area with or without trees which may be used by
the residents for a variety of informal purposes and which shall
be mowed regularly to insure a neat and orderly appearance.
(b) Natural area. An area of natural vegetation undisturbed during
construction, or replanted. Such areas may contain pathways.
Meadows shall be maintained as such and not left to become
weed-infested. Maintenance may be minimal, but shall prevent
the proliferation of weeds and other undesirable plants. Litter
shall be removed and streams shall be kept in free flowing
condition.
(c) Recreation area. An area designated for a specific recreational
use, including, but not limited to, tennis, swimming, shuffle
board, play field and tot lot. Such areas shall be maintained so
as to avoid creating a hazard or nuisance, and shall perpetuate
the proposed use.
(d) Garden area. An area designated for family vegetable plots.
(e) Stormwater management. None of the required open space
may be used for stormwater detention or retention basins.
D. Open space ownership and perpetuation. Any of the methods cited
under this section may be used either individually or in combination, to
own and perpetually preserve open space that is provided in fulfillment
of this article. The final subdivision and or land development plan shall
clearly indicate the manner in which open space will be owned and
administered. Following final plan approval, the open space required
shall not be transferred to another entity except for the transfer to
another method of ownership as outlined below. Written notice of any
proposed transfer of open space shall be given to the Borough for
approval no less than 30 days prior to such event.
(1) The Borough may, but is not required to, accept fee simple
dedication of open space in accordance with Subsection C.
§ 600-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-26
1:419
(a) There shall be no cost of acquisition (other than costs indicated
to the transfer of ownership or the conveyance of easements,
and title insurance).
(b) The Borough shall agree to maintain the open space.
(c) The open space shall be in an acceptable condition to the
Borough at the time of dedication with regard to size, shape,
location, and that any improvements are certified as
satisfactory by the Borough.
(d) The subdivider or developer shall have, at no expense to the
Borough, prepared the legal description, with metes and
bounds, of the land being offered for dedication.
(e) The Borough shall accept the dedication by means of a signed
municipal resolution to which a property description, deed,
and plan of dedication area or areas shall be attached.
(f) An agreement citing all subdivider or developer obligations
serving as a condition to plan approval shall be approved by
the Borough and recorded with the plan at the same time as
the plan is approved.
(2) A public agency acceptable to the Borough may, but shall not be
required to, accept the fee simple dedication of open space,
provided that the Borough approves a maintenance plan whereby
the grantee agrees to and has access to maintain the open space.
(3) The Borough or another public agency acceptable to the Borough
may, but shall not be required to, accept the dedication of less than
fee simple interests in any portion of the open space, title of which
shall remain in private ownership, provided that a maintenance
agreement satisfactory to the Borough is reached between the
owner and the grantee.
(4) Open space may remain or be placed in the ownership of the
individual property owners and shall be restricted from further
subdivision and/or land development by deed restriction, provided
that:
(a) The Borough shall agree to the boundaries of the open space
that shall be held in private ownership.
(b) Restrictions providing for the protection and continuance of
the open space which meet Borough specifications shall be
placed in the deed for each property that has the open space
area within its boundaries.
(c) A maintenance agreement suitable to the Borough shall be
established, and the deeds to the properties that are located
within the deed restricted open space areas shall clearly state
§ 600-26 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-26
1:420
that the maintenance responsibility for the open space lies with
the individual property owner.
(5) A private, nonprofit conservation organization, among whose
purposes is to conserve open space land and/or natural features,
may, but shall not be required to accept the conveyance of fee
simple or less-than-fee simple interests in any portion of the open
space, provided that:
(a) Any private, nonprofit conservation organization intended to
be the grantee of a conveyance shall be acceptable to the
Borough as a bona fide conservation organization with
perpetual existence.
(b) Any conveyance shall contain appropriate provisions for
proper reverter or retransfer in the event that the grantee
becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying our its
function.
(c) A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Borough shall be
established between the owner and the grantee.
(6) Open space may be controlled with condominium agreements that
shall be approved by the Borough and be in conformance with the
Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et
seq. All land and facilities shall be held as a common element.
(7) Open space may be held in common ownership by a homeowners'
association. In addition, the homeowners' association shall be
governed according to the following:
(a) The owner or applicant shall provide to the Borough a
description of the organization, including its bylaws, and all
documents governing maintenance requirements and use
restrictions for open space, and the homeowners' association
agreement shall be recorded.
(b) The organization shall be established (with financial
subsidization by the subdivider or developer if necessary)
before any lot in the subdivision or building in the development
is sold.
(c) Membership in the organization and fees shall be mandatory
for all purchasers of property therein and their successors.
(d) The organization shall be responsible for the maintenance of
an insurance on the open space.
(e) The members of the organization shall share equitably the
costs of maintaining, insuring, and operating the open space.
(f) The subdivider to developer for any tract proposed to contain
open space shall arrange with the County Board of Assessment
§ 600-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-26
1:421
a method of assessment of the common facilities which will
allocate to each tax parcel in the development a share of the
total assessment for such open space. Where this alternative
is not utilized, the organization shall be responsible for
applicable real estate taxes on common facilities.
(g) The organization shall have or hire adequate staff, as
necessary, to administer, maintain, and operate the open
space.
(h) The organization shall have the power to compel contributions
from property owners therein to cover their proportionate
shares of the initial cost and costs associated with the
maintenance and upkeep of the open space.
E. Guarantees and agreements. Every applicant for subdivision and land
development, whether preliminary or final, shall be accompanied by a
form of agreement or agreements to be approved by the Borough. The
agreements shall be properly recorded simultaneously with the
recording of the final plan, and shall specify the following:
(1) The subdivider or developer shall agree to layout and construct all
open space areas in accordance with the final plan as approved,
where any or all of these improvements are required as conditions
of approval, and that the improvements shall be completed within
the time or times specified by the Borough.
(2) The subdivider or developer, at the Borough's discretion, shall be
required to place in an escrow account for a period of three years,
an amount of financial security to cover the costs of providing all
open space requirements established as conditions for final
approval of the plan.
(3) The Borough is authorized to make random inspections of
nondedicated Borough open space as deemed necessary and
appropriate to ensure that the subdivider or developer and any
successors duly perform, abide by, and complete any duties,
obligations, or requirements as set forth in the final plan and/or
formal agreements.
(4) The Borough shall be granted the right to enforce the deed
restrictions regarding the use and maintenance of the open space if
the organization fails in its responsibilities. The amount of financial
security necessary to reimburse the Borough for its expense of
performing remedial measures shall be forfeited by the subdivider
or developer.
(a) In the event that the entity charged with maintenance
responsibilities, or any successor thereto, fails to maintain all
or any portion of the open space in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the development plan and all
applicable laws, rules, and regulations, the Borough may serve
§ 600-26 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-26
1:422
§ 600-27. Open space design requirements.
Applicants shall provide common open space for all subdivisions land
developments in conformance with the standards of this section.
written notice upon such entity, upon the residents and owners
of the uses relating thereto, setting forth the manner in which
the entity has failed to maintain the open space in reasonable
condition.
(b) Such notice shall set forth the nature of corrections required
and the time within which the corrections shall be made. Upon
failure to comply within the time specified, the organization, or
any successor organization, shall be considered in violation of
their responsibilities, in which case the Borough may enter the
premises and take corrective action.
(c) The financial security funds in the applicant's escrow account,
if any, may be forfeited, and any permits may be revoked or
suspended. If the funds of the escrow account are insufficient
to pay the costs of remedial maintenance, the costs of
corrective action by the Borough shall be assessed ratably, in
accordance with tax assessments, against the properties that
have the right of enjoyment of the common facilities and shall
become a lien on said properties. The Borough, at the time of
entering upon such common facilities for the purpose of
maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the Office of the
Prothonotary of Montgomery County, upon the properties
affected by such lien.
(5) All plans finally approved, whether or not recorded, shall be
binding upon the subdivider or developer, his heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns; shall limit and control the
use and operation of all open space designated in such plans, to the
conditions appearing in such plans and cited in any associated
formal agreement for the approval thereof.
A. Open space criteria. Open space set aside in fulfillment of the
requirements of this article shall be in accordance with the following
standards and principles.
(1) Open space shall be consistent with the plans and proposals
outlined in the Borough's adopted park and open space plans.
Borough Council shall review the consistency of the proposed open
space with the recommendation of the Borough Planning
Commission and Park and Recreation Board.
(2) Open space shall be interconnected with permanently preserved
land on abutting property, if possible, including provisions for
public accessways for general public use to permit residents safe
and easy access to areas of the said open space.
§ 600-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-27
1:423
(3) Open space shall be a cohesive whole if possible, except that two or
more parcels connected by legal public access provisions may be
determined to be in public interest.
(4) Open space shall have frontage on a public or private road or
easement capable of providing suitable grade for access to the
open space from the frontage for maintenance vehicles and
equipment traffic.
(5) Open space may include land within utility corridors only if the
utility companies having legal rights to these corridors do not
prohibit their use for such purposes.
(6) Open space shall be sited in the land that has physical
characteristics capable of serving the purposes intended for such
areas and with a design for recreational use and development that
is sensitive to the site physical characteristics.
(7) Open space shall have a close visual and physical relationship to as
many dwelling units as reasonably possible, yet sited with
sensitivity to surrounding land use.
(8) Open space shall protect environmentally sensitive and/or
aesthetic features and be landscaped to provide sufficient manmade
screening or buffer areas to minimize any negative impacts
upon adjacent development.
B. Recreation facility requirements.
(1) Figure 600-4.1 lists the recreation facilities required by all
residential subdivisions and land developments.
(2) At the discretion of Borough Council upon recommendation of the
Borough Planning Commission, land developments with greater
than 175 dwelling units proposed may have increased recreation
facility requirements.
(3) Borough Council, upon recommendation of the Borough Planning
Commission, may accept alternative recreation facility design if it
can be shown to be more desirable and provide an equal level of
service to residents.
Figure 600-4.1
Recreation Facility Requirements
Total Number
of Lots or
Dwelling Units
No. of Tot
Lots
No. of
Playfields
No. of
Basketball or
Tennis Courts
15 to 49 1 1 0
50 to 99 2 1 0
100 to 149 3 2 1
§ 600-27 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-27
1:424
Figure 600-4.1
Recreation Facility Requirements
Total Number
of Lots or
Dwelling Units
No. of Tot
Lots
No. of
Playfields
No. of
Basketball or
Tennis Courts
More than 150 4 2 2
C. Tot lot requirements.
(1) Tot lot. A confined, developed, neighborhood play area primarily for
use by preschool-age children under the supervision of parents or
guardians.
(2) Use of tot lots shall be limited to daylight hours only; no lighting
shall be installed.
(3) Low maintenance play equipment and structures shall be included
and confined by a gated fence, a minimum of three feet high. The
gate shall be self-closing and self-latching.
(4) Sitting areas, including benches, shall be provided for the
convenience of persons supervising the children.
(5) Shade trees shall be provided for sitting and play areas; gazebo or
picnic-type shelters may be used in addition to shade trees.
(6) When a tot lot is placed adjacent to the playfield, practical
measures, such as fencing and orientation of facilities, shall be
used to reduce hazards, especially from balls or other flying
objects.
(7) Minimum dimensional standards shall be as follows:
(a) Minimum area: 1,500 square feet within the fenced areas.
Applicants shall provide a landscaped, but not screened, buffer
area a minimum of 10 feet in depth around the fenced area.
(b) Minimum horizontal dimension: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks for the fenced-in area:
[1] From lot lines: 20 feet.
[2] From the ultimate right-of-way of streets:
[a] Residential streets: 20 feet.
[b] Collector streets: 40 feet.
[c] Arterial streets: 60 feet.
(8) Locations. At convenient, centralized intervals, requiring not
longer than a one-thousand-foot walk from any dwelling unit.
§ 600-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-27
1:425
D. Playfield requirements.
(1) Playfield. A common area within a subdivision or land development
for neighborhood residents and possibly the general public to use
for informal, active recreation purposes such as ball games and
other activities requiring a large lawn area, away from homes or
other buildings.
(2) Playfields shall be used only during daylight hours; no lighting shall
be installed.
(3) Playfields are intended for informal, neighborhood use. Playfields
shall not be used for formalized programs such as youth or adult
athletic leagues which should be conducted on larger, more
appropriate fields, located, designed, and intended for use by the
extended community.
(4) Playfields shall consist of a lawn area, unobstructed by trees,
shrubs, benches, playground equipment and other obstacles.
Applicants are encouraged to locate trees and shrubs along the
perimeter of a playfield in order to define its limits, enhance its
appearance, and filter noise generated by activities.
(5) Playfields shall be sloped for proper drainage, not less than 1% nor
more than 3% grade, and shall be well-drained so that they are
suitable for use in most weather.
(6) Playfields shall be fenced at the discretion of Borough Council.
(7) Minimum dimensional standards shall be as follows:
(a) Minimum area: 12,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum horizontal dimension: 80 feet.
(c) Minimum setbacks to the edge of a playfield:
[1] From any dwelling unit: 60 feet.
[2] From the ultimate right-of-way of streets:
[a] Residential streets: 30 feet.
[b] Other classifications: 60 feet.
(8) Playfields shall have at least one backstop, facing south.
(9) Locations: at convenient, centralized intervals.
E. Basketball and tennis court requirements.
(1) Basketball court. A basketball facility, including paved, striped
court area of at least high school standard size, with posts,
backboards, and baskets at both ends of the court.
§ 600-27 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-27
1:426
(2) Tennis court. A tennis facility, including paved, standard sized and
striped court area, posts, net, and fencing around its perimeter.
(3) These courts shall be constructed in accordance with specifications
approved by the Borough Engineer, and shall be oriented in a
north/northeast-south/southwest direction.
(4) Minimum dimensional standards shall be as follows:
(a) Tennis court areas shall be of standard size, basketball court
areas shall be at least high school standard size.
(b) Minimum setbacks to the edge of paving:
[1] From any dwelling unit: 60 feet.
[2] From the ultimate right-of-way of streets:
[a] Residential and feeder streets: 30 feet.
[b] Other classifications: 60 feet.
[3] From any lot line: 15 feet.
(5) Tennis courts shall be fenced around the entire perimeter with
minimum ten-foot high fencing.
(6) Basketball courts shall be fenced with minimum six-foot high
fencing under the following conditions:
(a) When the edge of pavement is less than 30 feet from a lot line,
that edge shall be fenced.
(b) When the edge of pavement is less than 30 feet from an area
sloping 10% or greater downward from the court, the edge
shall be fenced.
(7) Lighting may be provided for nighttime use of courts, so arranged
that no glare affects abutting residences or streets, on a demandactivated
basis, until not later than 10:00 p.m.
(8) Locations: at convenient, centralized intervals.
F. Consolidation of facilities. Applicants are required to provide the
numbers and types of facilities as required in this section, spaced for
convenient access by the residents. However, applicants are
encouraged to consolidate several facilities in fewer locations to better
serve the residents' needs in the following possible ways:
(1) By locating all required tennis or basketball courts in one area,
thereby restricting noise and light to one area, and precluding the
need to search the neighborhood for a free court.
(2) By combining two twelve-thousand-square-foot playfields into one
twenty-thousand-square-foot area to permit larger fields for
§ 600-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-27
1:427
§ 600-28. Preservation of existing vegetation.
Preservation of existing woodlands, mature trees, and unique vegetation is
required to maintain habitat, protect soil from erosion, reduce energy costs,
and enhance local aesthetics.
softball, football, soccer, or other field sports, while maintaining the
neighborhood use character.
(3) By creating one or more park-like facilities rather than several sets
of scattered facilities.
(4) Tot lots may be adjacent to other types of recreation facilities but
not to other tot lots so that they may be dispersed throughout the
development and only require short walking distances from all
homes.
A. Preservation of existing vegetation.
(1) All subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out in such a
manner as to minimize the removal or disturbance of healthy trees
and shrubs. Existing woodlands should be incorporated into
common open space, buffer areas, and on large lots. Special
consideration shall be given to mature specimen trees and
ecologically significant woodlands.
(2) It shall be incumbent on the applicant to prove that tree removal is
minimized. If challenged by the Borough, the applicant shall
produce evidence, such as written documents or plans certified by
a registered landscape architect or other professional showing that
no alternative layouts are possible and that no alternative clearing
or grading plan would reduce the loss of mature trees, tree masses,
or woodlands.
(3) Mature trees, tree masses, or woodlands proposed for removal by
the applicant during construction shall be labeled. "TO BE
REMOVED." All other trees, tree masses, or woodlands shall be
designated "TO REMAIN."
(4) Trees over six inches in caliper within a tract proposed for
subdivision or land development shall not be removed unless any of
the following conditions exist:
(a) Immediate danger to life or property.
(b) Affliction by a disease which threatens to injure or destroy
other trees.
(c) There exists an approved land development plan showing
landscape material to be retained or removed. Tree removal
pursuant to such a plan shall be limited to those trees within 15
feet of a proposed structure, six feet of a proposed impervious
§ 600-27 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-28
1:428
§ 600-29. Wetland protection.
surface or an area to be graded pursuant to an approved
grading plan.
(5) All specimen trees which are not to be removed shall be preserved
in their natural condition.
(6) In the event that a tree over six inches in caliper must be removed
for reasons stated in Subsection A(4) above, said trees shall be
replaced with approved trees of 2 1/2 inches caliper at a rate of two
new trees to each one tree removed. Acceptable species for
replacement trees are listed in Appendix 600-A.135
B. Protection of existing vegetation.
(1) Existing vegetation to remain shall be identified "TO REMAIN" in
the field and on the erosion and sediment control plan prior to any
clearing and physically protected during construction. A temporary
physical barrier such as a snow fence shall be erected a minimum
of one foot outside the dripline on all sides of individual trees, tree
masses, and woodlands prior to clearing and construction. The
barrier shall be placed to prevent disturbance to or compaction of
soil inside the barrier, and shall remain until construction is
complete.
(2) It is recommended that trees to be preserved near developed
portions of a site are pruned and fertilized prior to beginning of
construction in order to ensure their health.
A. The presence of hydric soils may indicate the presence of wetlands.
When hydric soils are indicated on the site, a wetlands study should be
conducted in accordance with the Federal Manual for Identifying and
Delineating Wetlands. In the event no wetland study is undertaken, the
location of hydric soils on site will be assumed to be wetlands for the
purpose of this chapter and so noted on the plan.
B. Wetlands, as defined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in accordance with Section 404 of
the Federal Clean Water Act of 1977 and (25 Pa. Code) Chapter 105 of
the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act Amendments of 1978 shall be
preserved in subdivisions and land developments. Required permits
shall be obtained at an early stage to determine the extent and location
in proposed subdivision and/or land development.
C. A twenty-five-foot setback shall be maintained around the perimeter of
all wetlands. This area will be known as the "wetland buffer." No
removal of vegetation, except the optional removal of dead trees or
periodic mowing of existing lawns or fields, shall take place within this
buffer area without the specific permission of the Borough.
135. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-29
1:429
§ 600-30. Riparian corridor management.
D. Required building setbacks as described in the Zoning Ordinance136
shall be measured from the edge of the wetland buffer.
A. Whenever a pond, watercourse, stream, or intermittent stream as
identified in the Soil Survey of Montgomery County is located within a
development site, it shall remain open in its natural state and location
and shall not be piped.
B. Unless otherwise described in the Zoning Ordinance137 a fifty-foot
buffer (25 feet from each bank of the water body) shall be maintained
along all intermittent or perennial watercourses and ponds. This buffer
area will be known as the "riparian corridor." No removal of vegetation,
except for removal of dead trees and shrubs or periodic mowing of
existing lawns or fields, shall take place within this buffer area without
the specific permission of the Borough.
C. The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered without the written approval of the
affected landowners.
D. No stormwater runoff or natural drainage shall be so diverted as to
overload existing drainage systems, or create flooding or the need for
additional drainage structures on the other private properties or public
lands. In cases where additional stormwater flows will overload
adjacent structures, the applicant shall be responsible for enlarging the
facilities.
E. Within any riparian corridor, no construction, development, use,
activity, or encroachment shall be permitted unless a corridor
management plan is submitted and approved by Borough Council and
the effects of such development are mitigated by the implementation of
the corridor management plan. The corridor management plan shall
meet the following requirements:
(1) Plan contents. The corridor management plan shall contain the
following information:
(a) Existing conditions, including the corridor boundaries, steep
slopes, swales, wetlands, streams, ponds, floodplains,
woodlands, other vegetation, and existing structures. A written
description of unusual or significant conditions should also be
included.
(b) Management goals for the entire tract and long-range goals for
the riparian corridor.
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-29 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-30
1:430
(c) Proposed activities, including a plan drawn to scale that shows
all proposed activities within and adjacent to the corridor. The
plan shall differentiate areas that will be disturbed from those
that will be protected and preserved.
(d) Proposed management, including an explanation of how the
goals will be met given the proposed activities. The plan shall
specify when the construction, planting, or other activities are
to begin and end and shall address long and short-term
maintenance, mitigation, and improvement activities
necessary for preservation of the corridor, including
application of herbicides, removal of invasive plants, spacing
and types of newly planted trees and shrubs, mowing
schedules, farming practices, and other related functions.
(2) Management, mitigation, and restoration measures. The proposed
management plan shall comply with the following management,
mitigation, and restoration measures:
(a) Management practices. The following management practices
shall be integrated into the management plan:
[1] Existing woody and other vegetation should be preserved
to the greatest extent possible.
[2] Fallen branches and other organic material should be
allowed to remain where they have fallen, provided that
they do not create a hazard.
[3] Stream crossings should be done at a 90° angle to the
stream.
[4] Stream banks should be stabilized in accordance with "A
Streambank Stabilization and Management Guide for
Pennsylvania Landowners," by PADEP.
[5] Degraded landscapes should be restored or converted to a
more effective landscape for maintaining water resources.
(3) Mitigation measures. Disturbance of vegetation within the riparian
corridor shall be mitigated by at least one of the following
measures, with a total amount of mitigated area, measured
horizontally, that is equal to or greater than the total amount of
disturbed area, measured horizontally:
(a) Increasing the width of the corridor. The width of the riparian
corridor, measured from the defined edge of a watercourse, is
increased to at least 75 feet.
(b) Converting to a more effective landscape. The existing
landscape is converted to a more effective landscape. The
following landscapes are listed in order of effectiveness, from
§ 600-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-30
1:431
most effective to least effective: woodland, meadow, shrub, oldfield,
lawn.
(c) Increasing the effectiveness of the corridor. In existing
degraded wooded areas or proposed new wooded areas, the
riparian corridor is planted with three distinct layers of
vegetation:
[1] Canopy trees, such as oak, hickory, maple, gum, beech,
sycamore, spruce, pine, and fir.
[2] Shrubs that provide an understory, such as elderberry,
viburnum, azalea, rhododendron, holly, laurel, and alders.
[3] Herbaceous plants that serve as ground cover, including
ferns, sorrel, trillium, violet, Virginia creeper, nettle,
phlox, aster, and worts. All three layers shall be planted at
a density sufficient to create a fully functioning,
naturalized riparian corridor.
(4) Restoration and conversion of landscapes.
(a) Landscapes shall be restored by removing invasive vines,
removing invasive trees, cleaning out trash, correcting soil
erosion problems, planting appropriate plants, and properly
maintaining all new plantings.
(b) Landscapes shall be converted to a more effective landscape by
removing existing, incompatible vegetation, planting plants
that are appropriate for the proposed landscape type and the
site, and maintaining and protecting the plantings from
invasive plants, deer, and other long-term problems.
F. Vegetation selection. To function properly, vegetation in the corridor
management plan shall be selected from the Recommended Plant
Materials List in Appendix 600-A.138 Plants not included on the list may
be permitted by Borough Council when satisfactory evidence is
provided from qualified sources certifying their suitability. The Borough
may require species suitability to be verified by qualified experts in the
Montgomery County Conservation District, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission, the
United States Fish and Wildlife Service, or state and federal forest
agencies.
(1) Existing tree cover should be surveyed and inventoried to assess
the need for any new plantings. Existing species included on the
Pennsylvania Noxious Weed Control List should be removed where
conditions warrant.
138. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-30 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-30
1:432
§ 600-31. Topsoil protection and grading.
(2) Adjacent to the watercourse, dominant vegetation shall be
composed of a variety of native riparian tree and shrub species and
appropriate plantings necessary for stream bank stabilization.
(3) Away from the watercourse, dominant vegetation shall be
composed of riparian trees and shrubs, with an emphasis on native
species and appropriate plantings necessary to stabilize the soil.
(4) Disturbed areas shall be revegetated with riparian corridor plants,
in compliance with an approved corridor management plan.
(a) Canopy tree and shrub plantings shall be located along the
streambank to provide shade for the stream, soil erosion
control and stormwater benefits, according to accepted
streambank restoration practices.
(b) New canopy trees shall be planted at a minimum rate of 15 feet
on center or one tree per 225 square feet in staggered
naturalized rows or an equivalent informal arrangement within
the area within 25 feet of the top of each bank of the stream.
One new shrub or understory tree shall be planted for every
four new trees required for riparian corridor revegetation.
(c) New trees shall be a variety of sizes ranging from a minimum
four- to five-foot branched whip to an approximate 1 1/2 inch
caliper balled and burlapped planting stock.
(5) Areas that cannot be revegetated shall be restored using
management practices accepted by experts qualified in riparian
corridor management.
A. The top six inches of soil that existed naturally on the site prior to
subdivision or land development shall be stockpiled on the site.
B. Following construction, the stockpiled soil shall be redistributed
uniformly on the site to a minimum depth of six inches.
C. All disturbed areas excluding the stockpile soil of the site shall be
stabilized and protected against erosion in compliance with the
Pennsylvania Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual.
D. Any topsoil in excess of the six inches depth that existed prior to
subdivision or land development may be stockpiled separately for other
uses by the applicant. Topsoil may be removed from the site only upon
issuance of a permit by Borough Council to ensure that sufficient topsoil
will remain on the site and in the municipality.
E. Grading. All permanent and temporary cutting, filling, grading,
regrading, and/or other forms of earthmoving activities shall be known
as "grading" and shall be conducted only in compliance with the
standards as described below:
§ 600-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-31
1:433
§ 600-32. Erosion and sediment control.
The requirements of this section shall apply when they are more stringent
than those of PADEP or when PADEP has no jurisdiction.
(1) All grading shall be set back from property lines at least three feet,
or a sufficient distance, to prevent any adverse effects on adjacent
properties.
(2) No permanent excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in
slope than three horizontal to one vertical.
(3) Wherever grading will increase the volume or velocity of
stormwater flow toward a property line, the applicant shall install
and maintain drainage facilities sufficient to prevent adverse
effects on the adjoining property. The construction and operation of
these drainage facilities shall not cause any adverse effects on
abutting properties.
(4) Along property lines, where grading creates an abrupt drop off
from the abutting property, in contrast to a previously existing
gradual change, the applicant shall be required to install a fence or
other suitable protective barrier.
(5) A permit shall be required for grading operations. Permits shall be
issued by the Zoning Officer upon recommendation of the Borough
Engineer for each tract, lot, parcel, or site which comprises a
separate operation, unrelated to or not contiguous with nearby
grading proposed or performed by the applicant. A permit shall not
be required in the following situations, however:
(a) For an excavation that does not exceed 20 cubic yards total
material removed.
(b) For a fill that does not exceed 20 cubic yards of material
deposited.
(c) For an excavation below finished grade for basements and
footings for a single-family detached or two-family dwelling,
swimming pool, or underground structure authorized by
building permits, excavation for a driveway for a single-family
detached or two-family dwelling, or the regrading of such
excavated materials into the site from which they were
excavated.
A. General.
(1) For qualifying tracts, no change shall be made in the contour of the
land; no grading, excavating, removal or destruction of the topsoil,
trees or other vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced
until such time that a plan for minimizing erosion and
§ 600-31 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-32
1:434
sedimentation has been approved by the Montgomery County
Conservation District.
(2) No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless:
(a) There has been a plan approved by Borough Council that
provides for minimizing erosion and sedimentation consistent
with this section, and an improvement bond or other
acceptable securities are deposited with the Borough the form
of an escrow guarantee which will insure installation and
completion of the required improvements; or
(b) There has been a determination by Borough Council that a plan
for minimizing erosion and sedimentation is not necessary.
(3) Borough Council, in its consideration of any preliminary plan of
subdivision and land development shall condition its approval upon
the execution of measures designed to prevent accelerated soil
erosion and resulting sedimentation, as required by PADEP. All
applicable regulations and permit requirements of said department
as stipulated in its Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Pollution
Control Manual shall be followed by all parties engaged in
earthmoving activities. The manual is available at the office of the
Montgomery County Conservation District.
B. Performance principles.
(1) Any effective methods of minimizing erosion and sedimentation can
be included in the plan. Any questionable method should be
discussed with the Borough Engineer prior to submission.
(2) No unfiltered stormwater coming from an area which has been
disturbed shall be permitted onto an adjacent tract or discharge
into any water body.
C. Responsibility.
(1) Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation,
regrading or other development activity, it shall be the
responsibility of the person, corporation or other entity causing
such sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces,
drainage systems and watercourses and to repair any damage at
his expense as quickly as possible.
(2) It is the responsibility of any person, corporation, or other entity
doing any act on or across a stream, watercourse or swale or upon
the floodplain or right-of-way thereof, to maintain, as nearly as
possible, in its present state the stream, watercourse, swale,
floodplain or right-of-way during the activity and to return it to its
original or equal condition after such activity is completed.
(3) No person, corporation, or other entity shall block, impede the flow
of, alter, construct any structure, or deposit any material or thing,
§ 600-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-32
1:435
§ 600-33. Historic feature preservation.
or commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any
stream or watercourse without having obtained prior approval
from the Borough or PADEP, whichever is applicable.
D. Compliance with regulations and procedures.
(1) Final plans for minimizing erosion and sedimentation as approved
will be incorporated into the agreement and bond requirements as
required under this chapter.
(2) The approval of plans and specifications for the control of erosion
and sedimentation shall be concurrent with the approval of the
final plans of subdivision or land development, and become a part
thereof.
(3) At the time that a building permit is applied for, a review shall be
conducted by the Borough Engineer to insure conformance with
the plan as approved. During the construction further consultative
technical assistance will be furnished, if necessary, by the Borough
Engineer and the Montgomery County Conservation District.
During this development phase, the Borough Engineer shall inspect
the development site and enforce compliance with the approved
plans.
A. The design of subdivisions and land developments should be done in a
manner which would preserve desirable cultural and historic features
of a site wherever reasonably possible.
B. No proposal will be approved with a property line extending through
any portion of an existing building, except where that property line
follows a party wall separating semidetached or attached units, in
accordance with the Borough Zoning Ordinance.139
C. When existing buildings are retained:
(1) Unless otherwise specified in the Zoning Ordinance,140 when the
height and/or bulk of the existing building significantly exceeds
that of abutting development, building setbacks in excess of the
applicable minimums are encouraged, in respect to all new lot lines
created. For tall buildings, a setback equal to the height of the
building is suggested as a minimum. For proportionally wide or
deep buildings, a setback equal to 1/2 the width or depth of the
building is suggested as a minimum.
(2) Run down buildings shall be rehabilitated on the exterior to
conform in quality with surrounding new development.
139. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
140. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-32 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-33
1:436
§ 600-34. Sidewalks and border areas.
Sidewalks shall be installed along all existing and proposed public and
private streets, common driveways, and common parking areas.
(3) Structurally deficient buildings shall be rehabilitated in
conformance with the Borough's Building Code141 and the Uniform
Construction Code.
(4) Additions to retained buildings shall be in harmony with the
character, design, building materials, and other architectural
features of the building.
(5) Historical or culturally significant buildings shall retain their
respective characters, to the greatest extent practical.
(6) New buildings abutting the retained building should reflect the
respective characters of the surrounding buildings to the greatest
extent practical.
D. When existing buildings will be removed as permitted by the Zoning
Ordinance:142
(1) The plan must show the location and include a brief description of
the building(s) to be removed.
(2) Plan approval will be granted upon written agreement to the
expeditious removal of buildings intended for removal, in
conformance with applicable Borough requirements and
procedures regarding demolition of buildings and disposition of the
reusable parts and/or disposal of the rubble.
(3) All applicable Borough requirements and procedures regarding
demolition of buildings and disposition of the reusable parts and/or
disposal of the rubble shall be complied with.
(4) If the building will not be removed immediately, a financial
guarantee must be posted for its removal, in compliance with
§ 600-62, herein.
A. General.
(1) Sidewalks and border areas shall be required on both sides of the
street within the ultimate right-of-way.
(2) Borough Council may waive the sidewalk requirements if an
alternative pedestrian circulation concept can be shown to be more
desirable, especially when using open space areas, provided that
appropriate connections are provided between the open space
walkways and the surrounding pedestrian origins and destinations.
141. Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Uniform Construction Codes.
142. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-34
1:437
(3) If for any reason an interim waiver of these requirements is made, a
sufficient guaranty shall be posted for the eventual installation of
sidewalks, subject to approval by Borough Council upon
recommendation of the Borough Engineer and Solicitor, in
accordance with § 600-62 of this chapter.
B. Design and layout.
(1) Sidewalks and border areas shall be provided in appropriate
locations to provide safe and efficient pedestrian access between
parking areas, buildings, and other pedestrian destinations.
(2) Sidewalk and border areas widths are to follow the guidelines set
forth in Figure 600-4.2. Figure 600-4.3143 illustrates levels of
service offered by varying widths of sidewalks.
(3) The border area shall exist between the curbline or edge of cartway
and the sidewalk.
(a) Border areas between sidewalks and the curb may contain
streetlights, trees, benches, trash cans, mailboxes, or
newspaper boxes. No obstacle in the border area may reduce
the required sidewalk width for use by pedestrian traffic as
described in the guidelines in Figure 600-4.2.
(b) Border areas shall be maintained as a grass strip between the
sidewalk and the curb. If grass is impractical at the site, brick
pavers or similar surface may be used at the discretion of
Borough Council upon recommendation of the Borough
Planning Commission and Engineer. In this case, a wider
sidewalk may be necessary in place of a border area to create a
safer pedestrian environment.
(c) Where a border area is proposed as a grass strip, in no case
shall its width be less than three feet.
(4) Borough Council may require additional width in areas where
higher volumes of pedestrian traffic are anticipated. In no case
shall sidewalk width be less than four feet.
143. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-34 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-34
1:438
Figure 600-4.2
Sidewalk and Border Area Guidelines
Functional
Classification Street Name
Border Area
(feet)
Sidewalk
(feet)
Ridge Pike/ Main
Street
4 8 to 12
Gravel Pike/
Route 29
4 6 to 8
Principal
arterial
2nd Avenue/
Route 29
5 6 to 8
Minor arterial 5 5 to 8
Park Avenue
4 5 to 8
Clahor Avenue
Major collector
East 9th Avenue
8th Avenue 3 5 to 8
3rd Avenue
Minor collector
Residential
Local road Cul-de-sac 3 4 to 6
Nonresidential
(5) All sidewalk widths are exclusive of any obstacle. Sidewalk areas
containing streetlights, trees, benches, doors, trash cans,
mailboxes, newspaper boxes, or similar feature are required to
have additional width.
(6) Additional sidewalks or paved trails shall be required where
deemed necessary by Borough Council to provide access to
schools, religious institutions, parks, community facilities, trails,
and commercial or employment centers, and to provide necessary
pedestrian circulation within land development and/or subdivisions
where otherwise required sidewalks would not be sufficient for
public safety and convenience.
(7) Sidewalks shall be designed to facilitate access and use by persons
that are physically disabled, in compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq., and to the satisfaction of
the Borough Engineer.
(8) The grade and paving of the sidewalk shall be continuous across
driveways except in certain cases where heavy traffic volume
dictates special treatment. The grade and alignment of all
sidewalks shall be approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 600-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-34
1:439
§ 600-35. Crosswalks.
(9) If the provision of sidewalks requires the destruction or removal of
valuable trees, consideration shall be given to the retention of such
valuable trees.
(10) Conflicts arising from the placement of street trees, utilities, and
border areas should be discussed with the Borough Planning
Commission and Borough Engineer to determine appropriate
placement and alignment.
(11) Proposed sidewalks shall maintain the width, pattern, and style of
the Borough's sidewalk network. Where proposed sidewalks meet
existing sidewalks which have a different width, a tapered
transition shall be constructed.
C. Sidewalk construction and driveway crossing engineering standards.
Sidewalks shall be four inches thick 4,000 psi compression strength
concrete, placed upon a minimum four-inch layer of AASHTO No. 57
stone bedding. The sidewalk shall be built as to discharge drainage to
the street, the grade of which shall be 1/4 inch per foot. The finished
grade between the outside of the sidewalk to the curbline (edge of the
cartway) shall never exceed a total vertical elevation change of one
foot. Expansion joints shall be placed every 30 feet, with contraction
joints every five feet a minimum of one inch in depth. Additional
expansion materials shall be placed between any curb and driveway
apron and in the side walk at driveway limits. A contraction joint shall
be cut between the side walk and apron. All sidewalks shall receive a
broom finish unless otherwise approved by the Borough. An access
ramp for physically disabled persons shall be placed at all sidewalk
intersections with roads.
A. Crosswalks shall be clearly delineated at all intersections and maintain
the width of the largest contributing sidewalk or trail. In no case shall
crosswalk width be less than five feet.
B. Crosswalks and their transition to adjacent sidewalks or trails shall be
designed to facilitate access and use by persons that are physically
disabled, in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, 42
U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
C. Where a crosswalk is located at an arterial or collector street, Borough
Council may require one of the following measures as described in the
Pennsylvania Traffic Calming Handbook upon recommendation of the
Borough Planning Commission and Engineer.
(1) Textured crosswalks. Crosswalk patterns, materials, and colors
shall be consistent with surrounding crosswalks based on the
theme established in the Borough and recommended to Borough
Council by the Borough Planning Commission and Engineer.
§ 600-34 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-35
1:440
§ 600-36. Trails and pathways.
(2) Pedestrian signalization shall be provided at intersections where
traffic signals exist.
(3) Curb extensions, bulb-outs, raised medians, raised crosswalks, and
other pedestrian safety methods shall be considered and, where
determined to be appropriate by Borough Council, constructed.
A. When a subdivision or land development is traversed by or abuts an
existing trail with public access customarily used by pedestrians,
bicyclists, and/or equestrians and delineated in the Borough's adopted
open space or recreation plans, the applicant shall make provision for
the continued recreational use of the trail subject to alterations of the
course of the trail within the boundaries of the development under the
following conditions:
(1) The points at which the trail enters and exits the tract shall remain
unchanged.
(2) The proposed alteration exhibits quality trail design according to
the generally accepted principles of landscape architecture.
(3) Where an existing trail runs coincidentally with the paved road
intended for use by motorized vehicles, efforts shall be made to
alter the trail alignment to increase separation between the trail
and the road.
B. Borough Council may require, as a condition of final plan approval, the
guarantee of public access and improvement of trails when the site is
traversed by or abuts an existing trail or a trail proposed in an adopted
open space or trail plan of the county, Borough, or adjacent
municipality.
C. When existing developed parcels adjacent to a proposed subdivision or
land development allow for dedicated public access through a defined
area for the purpose of connecting to a county or municipal trail, all
attempts shall be made to continue this connection through a dedicated
public accessway to serve the proposed development.
D. When a subdivision or land development lies adjacent to a park, school,
or other pedestrian destination, all attempts shall be made to create
pedestrian connections to that destination.
E. All trails and pathways shall be constructed before occupancy of
residences and other buildings on the site occurs.
F. When trails are intended for public or private use, they shall be
protected by a permanent access easement on the properties on which
they are located. The width of the protected area in which the trail is
located shall be a minimum of 20 feet. The language of the easement
§ 600-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-36
1:441
§ 600-37. Bicycle routes and bicycle lanes.
shall be to the satisfaction of Borough Council upon recommendation of
the Borough Solicitor.
G. Any of the methods cited under § 600-26 concerning open space
ownership may be used either individually or in combination, to own
and perpetually preserve trail easements that is provided in fulfillment
of this article.
H. Trails and pathways shall have adequate access for use by all residents
of the development or, preferably, the general public.
I. Trails shall be landscaped with the specifications described in
§ 600-53D. Landscaping shall help delineate the route of the trail and
screen surrounding properties from trail users.
J. The land area permanently designated for trails for public use may be
credited toward any open space requirement as described in the Zoning
Ordinance.144
K. No trail shall be designed with the intent to accommodate motorized
vehicles except for emergency or maintenance access.
L. Construction standards.
(1) Pathways shall be six feet wide and consist of two inches of M-2
wearing course over a six-inch layer of AASHTO No. 57 stone.
Minimum shoulder width shall be two feet.
(2) Multi-use trails shall be 12 feet wide and consist of two inches of
ID-2 wearing course over a six-inch layer of AASHTO No. 57 stone.
Minimum shoulder width shall be two feet.
(3) Where the edge of the trail is above the surrounding grade,
bituminous pavement shall be feathered.
(4) The vertical clearance above the trail shall be maintained at a
minimum ten-foot height.
(5) Trail grade shall not exceed 5%.
(6) All proposed trails shall meet the guidelines as generally presented
in Figures 600-4.4 and 600-4.5.
A. When a subdivision or land development is located on a street classified
as a principal arterial or a major collector it shall provide for public
access, where feasible, within the ultimate right-of-way for bicycle
lanes.
144. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-36 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-37
1:442
§ 600-38. Streetlighting.
B. Bicycle lanes shall be marked with appropriate striping, marking,
reflectors, and signage in accordance with Federal Highway
Administration guidelines.
C. Bicycle lanes shall be a minimum five feet in width.
D. Where the roadway narrows, signage and pavement markings shall be
added to warn drivers and bicyclists to help them avoid bicycleautomobile
conflicts.
E. Drainage improvements shall be made where necessary to eliminate
puddles and sediment deposit from the section of the road used by
bicyclists.
F. Proposed bicycle lanes shall meet the general guidelines as shown in
Figure 600-4.6.145
A. Streetlighting shall adhere to the requirements described in the Zoning
Ordinance.146
B. Streetlighting shall be required for all nonresidential land
developments, for all multifamily residential areas and, at the
discretion of Borough Council, for all or portions of certain single-family
residential subdivisions. As a minimum in single-family subdivisions,
appropriate conduit with pull wires shall be installed underground even
though standards and lighting fixtures may not be constructed
immediately. Proposed intersections with any major collector street or
arterial shall have streetlights.
C. Lighting shall be designed in accordance with a plan developed by a
utility company of in accordance with the standards recommended in
the IES Lighting Handbook. Construction of highway lighting shall be in
conformance with PennDOT Specifications, Publication 408.
D. Where required above, the owner shall install or cause to be installed,
at the owner's expense, metal pole streetlights serviced by
underground conduit in accordance with a plan to be prepared by the
owner's engineer and approved by the Borough Engineer and by
Borough Council.
E. Lighting for all existing public streets and new streets proposed for
dedication shall be a style, design, height, and source-type in fixture
and pole to be consistent throughout the Borough and as approved by
Borough Council.
145. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
146. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-39
1:443
§ 600-39. Utility locations, easements, and rights-of-way.
Widths and locations of easements and rights-of-way shall be determined by
the Borough Engineer or the appropriate authority or utility company for
all utilities, including stormwater facilities, and shall be governed by the
requirements herein.
A. General standards.
(1) Easements and required front, side, or rear yards may co-occupy
the same land.
(2) Nothing shall be permitted to be placed, set, or put within the areas
of an easement unless it is a portable or removable object. The area
shall be landscaped in accordance with § 600-53 of this chapter.
(3) The owner of any lot, upon written request by the Borough and at
the owner's sole expense, shall remove anything placed, planted,
set or put, (with or without knowledge of these regulations) within
the area of any easement.
(4) To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to rear
or side lot lines, and occupy only a portion of one lot (not centered
on two lots).
B. No right-of-way or easement for any purpose whatsoever shall be
recited or described in any deed unless the same has been shown on the
approved plan. Any error found in a deed shall be immediately
corrected and rerecorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds for
Montgomery County at the sole expense of the subdivider or developer.
C. Utility easements. A minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided for
common utilities and drainage when provided in undedicated land for
one use. Multiple utility uses within one easement require additional
easement width.
D. Public utilities. All water, sewer, and gas mains and other underground
facilities shall be installed prior to street paving at locations approved
by the Borough Engineer.
E. Underground utilities. All water, sewer and gas mains shall be installed
underground. All electric, telephone and communication services, both
main and service lines, shall be provided by underground cables,
installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of
the utility or other companies providing such services, except where it
is demonstrated to the satisfaction of Borough Council that
underground installations herein required are not feasible because of
physical conditions of the lands involved. All main underground cables
which are within the right-of-way of a street shall be located as
specified by the utility company, subject to approval by Borough
Council, upon recommendation of the Borough Engineer.
§ 600-39 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-39
1:444
§ 600-40. New and existing streets.
(1) In order to promote and facilitate the underground installation of
utility distribution lines, a letter of endorsement shall be required
from the suppliers of utility service (not limited to electrical,
telephone, or cable television) of the developer's choice wherein
the applicant acknowledges that underground utilities are feasible
and shall be consummated as part of the improvement plan.
(2) A statement relative to the intent of the developer to provide
underground utility service shall be placed on the final plan
requisite to final approval of the plan.
(3) The provisions in this chapter shall not be construed as to limit or
interfere with the construction, installation, operation and
maintenance of public utility structures or facilities which may
hereafter be located within public easements or rights-of-way
designated for such purposes.
(4) Light Standards are to be placed as required by the Zoning
Ordinance.147 Power source for such standards shall be placed
underground as required.
(5) Along arterial and collector roads, all new electrical service should
be placed underground.
A. All new streets and extensions and widenings of existing streets:
(1) Shall be offered for dedication to the authority having jurisdiction
over the street at the time of plan approval. The Borough may
accept or refuse dedication of lands which are not accepted by
other jurisdictions.
(2) Shall conform with the circulation element of the Comprehensive
Plan and county or state highway plans, and be coordinated with
existing streets.
(3) Shall provide appropriate access between abutting tracts of land
for immediate or future use.
(4) Shall create a road hierarchy among interior subdivision and land
development streets and exterior streets to insure proper throughtraffic
flow, local access, and internal traffic distribution and flow.
(5) Shall be related closely to existing topography to assure reasonable
grades, alignment and drainage, appropriate access to lots, and to
minimize regrading and removal of vegetation.
(6) Shall be designed to continue existing streets at equal or greater
right-of-way and cartway width, as recommended by the Borough
Engineer and Planning Commission.
147. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-40
1:445
§ 600-41. Street classifications.
In its design manual, PennDOT classifies streets according to standards
established by AASHTO. The Borough is using the same classification
system in order to coordinate highway improvements with neighboring
municipalities, the region, and the state. Every street, road, or highway
within the Borough shall be classified by its function as one of the following,
and shall be subject to the guidelines for its classification as contained in
this article and presented in Figures 600-4.7 and 600-4.8:
(7) Curbs and storm sewers shall be installed along all existing and
proposed public and private streets and common parking areas
except when this requirement is waived at the discretion of
Borough Council, upon recommendation of the Borough Planning
Commission and Engineer.
(8) Developer shall assign street names subject to approval of Borough
Council and use street numbers as assigned by the Public Works
Department.
(9) Median strips or other traffic calming devices may be required by
Borough Council to provide for public safety and traffic efficiency.
B. Private streets. Whenever a subdivider or developer proposes to
establish a street which is not offered for dedication of public use,
Borough Council shall require the applicant to submit, and also to
record with the plan, a copy of the agreement made with the Borough
on behalf of his heirs and assigns. Such streets shall be constructed in
conformance with the Borough Engineer standards for public streets.
Maintenance reliability shall be outlined and defined by the applicant
and reviewed by the Borough prior to final approval. When, in the
determination of Borough Council, it becomes necessary for the
Borough to assume responsibility for a private street in order to
maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Borough,
the Borough may do so and assess the property owner(s) or abutting
owners who use the street for any improvements necessary to restore
the street to conformance with Borough specifications.
A. Arterials (Figure 600-4.9).148
B. Collectors (Figure 600-4.10).149
C. Local Roads (Figure 600-4.11).150
D. Marginal Access Streets.
148. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
149. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
150. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-40 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-42
1:446
§ 600-42. Street alignment.
Sight distance, horizontal and vertical curvature, superelevation, and
maximum and minimum street grades shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer in compliance with the standards contained in A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, published by the American
Association of State Highway Transportation Officials, most recent edition,
or PennDOT standards, whichever is more restrictive. In addition, the
following standards and guidelines shall be complied with:
§ 600-43. Street intersection design.
All street intersections shall be governed by the standards of this section
and the Borough's engineering standards.
A. Horizontal curvature for all local access streets shall be not less than
one-hundred-fifty-foot radius, measured along the street center line.
B. Long radius, gentle curves shall be used rather than shorter radius
curves connected by tangents.
C. Curve-tangent relationships shall follow accepted engineering
guidelines for safety and efficiency. For example, minimum radius
curves shall not be used at the ends of long tangents.
D. Street grades shall be measured along the center line in accordance
with the following:
(1) Minimum grade for all streets shall be 1%.
(2) Maximum grades for arterials and collectors shall be 5% and for
residential streets shall be 10%.
(3) Curve-grade combinations shall follow accepted engineering
guidelines for safety and efficiency. For example, minimum radius
horizontal curves will not be permitted in combination with
maximum grades.
(4) At all approaches to intersections, street grades shall not exceed
4% for a minimum distance of 50 feet from the intersection of
curblines or edges of cartways.
(5) Street shall be designed to provide a minimum K value of 25 pci.
A. Number of streets. Not more than two streets shall intersect at the
same point.
B. Angle of intersections.
(1) All intersection approaches shall be designed at 90° angles for a
minimum of 50 feet from the edge of the cartway of the road
intersection road unless sufficient reason exists to justify a lesser
angle.
§ 600-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-43
1:447
§ 600-44. Single-access street regulations.
Any street which is served by only one intersection with a through street
shall be considered a single-access street, regardless of the street's
configuration within the proposed subdivision or land development.
(2) Where angled intersections are used it is preferable to design them
so that the heavier traffic flow will make the obliquely angled turn
rather than the acutely angled turn.
C. Improvements to existing intersections. When existing streets intersect
at odd angles or have more than four approaches, the applicant shall
improve the intersection, to bring it into compliance with this chapter,
as required by Borough Council, who shall first seek the advice of the
Borough Engineer and Planning Commission and other technical
advisors or agencies, as appropriate. For state and county highways,
improvements shall comply with the requirements of the appropriate
agency.
D. Waiver of improvements. Borough Council may waive the above
requirements for improvements under one or more of the following
conditions:
(1) When changes made on the applicant's land will not improve the
intersections deficiencies.
(2) When other road improvements are already planned which would
correct the problem without changes required of the applicant.
(3) When not required by PennDOT where the intersections are under
their jurisdiction.
E. Single-access street intersections.
(1) Intersections with single access shall be designed with the single
access street extending as a side street from the through street.
(2) Four-way intersections may be created using two permanent single
access streets intersecting directly opposite one another along a
through street, when the through street is a local access street.
F. All intersections shall provide clear sight distance in compliance with
PennDOT standards.
G. Intersection spacing shall be measured from center line to center line.
(1) Street intersections with major collectors shall be spaced a
minimum of 500 feet apart.
(2) Street intersections with minor collectors shall be spaced a
minimum of 350 feet apart.
(3) Street intersections with local roads shall be spaced a minimum of
300 feet apart.
§ 600-43 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-44
1:448
A. Single-access streets shall be classified as one of the following:
(1) Cul-de-sac streets.
(2) Single-access loop streets.
(3) Stub streets.
B. Single-access streets shall be subject to the requirements for their
classification of street, notwithstanding their single-access status.
(1) Shall not serve more than twenty dwelling units.
(2) Shall be identified by a standard warning sign stating "No Outlet"
when deemed appropriate by Borough Council to help avoid
mistaken turning movements.
(3) In addition to required sidewalks, shall be served by an
appropriately located pedestrian accessway when required by
Borough Council to connect surrounding neighborhoods and
pedestrian destinations.
(4) Shall be served by an appropriately located and constructed
emergency accessway when required by Borough Council using the
following standards:
(a) Minimum cartway width shall be 10 feet.
(b) Pavement shall satisfy the standards of the Borough Engineer.
(c) When not paved, the cartway shall be constructed of crushed
stone of appropriate size, depth, and compaction to support
the largest Borough fire trucks under all weather conditions.
Placed on top of the six inches of crushed stone shall be an
interlinked porous pavement constructed of fiber reinforced
polyethylene or concrete grass pavers. All void areas shall be
filled with topsoil and seeded with an appropriate grass mix.
(d) Markings or appropriate form of identification shall be placed
at the entrance to the emergency accessway. If necessary,
breakaway bollards shall be installed at each end of the
emergency accessway.
(e) Emergency accessways shall be maintained through properly
recorded easements or deed restrictions which at a minimum
prohibit the planting of any vegetation except grass within the
access way.
(f) May be made available for pedestrian access.
C. The Borough may request the applicant to provide a permanent
easement for snow removal. The easement shall have a minimum length
along the right-of-way line of 40 feet and a depth of 15 feet. When
curbing is required, a curb depression shall also be placed in this
§ 600-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-44
1:449
easement area. No shrubbery, fence, mailbox, or any other obstruction
shall be placed within the easement to hinder the placement of the
snow.
D. Single-access loop streets shall not under any circumstances exceed
1,200 feet in length, measured from the intersection with the through
street, along the entire center line around to its intersection with itself.
E. Cul-de-sac streets.
(1) Shall be permanently closed to vehicular traffic at one end.
(2) Shall be a minimum of 250 feet but not exceed 500 feet in length.
Measurement of the length shall be made from the center line of
the abutting through road or point of intersection with another culde-
sac to the center line of the turnaround, measured along the culde-
sac street's center line.
(3) Shall be provided with a vehicular turnaround at the closed end
with a right-of-way radius of at least 50 feet, and a paving radius of
at least 40 feet. Alternative vehicular turnaround designs are
encouraged to improve traffic flow and overall design of the
subdivision. If an offset bulb turnaround is used, the left side bulb
configuration is preferable. In addition, parking is prohibited on the
cul-de-sac by order of the Fire Marshal.
(4) No more than four lots shall have frontage on the circular
turnaround portion of a cul-de-sac street, and no more than four
driveways shall have access to the circular turnaround portion.
(5) Shall not extend from a single-access loop street.
(6) Landscaped cul-de-sac islands are encouraged and shall conform to
the following standards.
(a) Shall be located within the bulb of a cul-de-sac and be concave
for use as part of the stormwater management infrastructure.
Efforts should be made to retain the existing vegetation on the
site within these islands.
(b) Shall have a maximum radius of 24 feet and be surrounded by
paving on all sides.
(c) Shall be designed to allow for emergency vehicle access into
the cul-de-sac.
(d) In the event that right-of-way grading will not permit the
retention of existing vegetation in a cul-de-sac, the landscaping
proposed for the island shall be of low maintenance varieties as
approved by Borough Council. The landscaping plan shall
specifically describe the maintenance required for any
landscaping proposed on the landscape island.
§ 600-44 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-44
1:450
§ 600-45. Roadway improvements.
F. Stub streets.
(1) Shall be provided in appropriate locations for vehicular access to
abutting undeveloped lands when required by Borough Council,
upon advice of the Borough Planning Commission and Engineer.
(2) Shall not be longer than:
(a) The depth of one building lot abutting the collector street; or
(b) The width of two building lots abutting the stub street.
(3) Shall be provided with a vehicular turnaround.
(4) Shall be constructed to the property line in accordance with the
standards of this chapter applicable to the classification of streets
it will be upon extension.
A. All adjacent structures and areas disturbed or damaged during
construction shall be properly repaired, restored, or replaced to the
satisfaction of the Borough by the party causing the damage.
B. All trees, roots, stumps, brush, down timber, wood, rubbish and any
objectionable material shall be removed from the full legal right-of-way,
or as approved by the Borough Engineer. Efforts shall be made during
construction of roadways to preserve any vegetation specifically for
preservation identified in the landscaping plan.
C. Paving. The pavement of all streets and all commercial, industrial, and
multifamily parking areas and driveways into and out of parking areas
shall be installed as shown on the final plan and in accordance with the
following standards:
(1) General. All paving shall be constructed both as to materials and
methods, generally in conformance with applicable portions of
PennDOT Specifications Publication 408-1990 or more current
edition.
(2) Pavement design. Pavement construction shall conform to the
minimum standards for different types of streets and parking areas
as indicated in Figure 600-4.12.151
(3) Paving cross section. All pavements, except where superelevated
for curves, shall conform with typical roadway cross sections on
Figure 600-4.13.152
(4) Alternative paving. Alternative paving specifications may be
approved for roads, driveways, and parking lots not intended for
151. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
152. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-45
1:451
dedication to the Borough, in commercial, industrial, rural, and
multifamily areas. Porous paving systems are encouraged for use
on parking lots.
(5) Aggregates, coarse and fine, for binder coarse shall be made from
stone, gravel, or other recycled aggregate or glass, and shall meet
the quality requirements for Type A stone and Type A gravel. Fine
aggregate shall be natural sand, manufactured sand or fine
recycled glass cullet composed of free hard, durable, uncoated
particles and free of from lumps of clay and organic material. Fine
sand shall meet the gradation requirements in Table A, Section
703, PennDOT Publication 408, latest revision. The coarse
aggregates shall meet the grading requirements indicated above.
D. Radii of pavement and right-of-way at intersections. Street
intersections shall be rounded with tangential arcs at pavement edge
(curbline) and right-of-way lines as listed below. Where two streets of
different right-of-way width intersect, the radii of curvature for the
widest street shall apply as shown in Figure 600-4.14.153
E. All radii specified herein must be increased if large trucks, fire trucks,
or other emergency vehicles would have difficulty with ingress or
egress as determined by the Borough Fire Marshal.
F. Pavement cross slopes. The typical pavement cross slope on proposed
streets shall not be less than 1/4 inch per foot and not more than 1/2
inch per foot. The typical slope of the shoulder areas shall not be less
than 3/4 inch per foot and not more than one-inch per foot.
G. Driveway apron. The concrete apron in the driveway area shall be six
inches thick concrete 4,000 psi compression strength reinforced with
wire six inches by six inches, 10 gauge wire (minimum). The wire shall
be installed so that it is not closer than two inches from the top or
bottom surfaces of the driveway. Six inches crushed stone shall be used
as a bedding under the driveway apron.
H. Driveways normally used by not more than 25 vehicles per day shall
comply with the standards contained in the 67 Pa. Code Chapter 441,
Access to and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local Roads,
§ 441.8(i)(5), Grade requirements where curbs and sidewalks are
present. Driveways normally used by more than 25 vehicles per day
shall comply with standards appropriate for their anticipated traffic
volumes in conformance with accepted engineering standards and
practices.
I. Maximum grade requirements shall not be waived unless extremely
difficult circumstances exist and cannot be mitigated by alternative
locations, designs, or lotting, in which case a safe, practical alternative
may be permitted by Borough Council, upon recommendation of the
Borough Engineer.
153. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-45 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-46
1:452
§ 600-46. Driveway review and approval.
§ 600-47. Driveway intersections with streets.
A. The term "driveway" as used here refers to every entrance or exit used
by vehicular traffic to or from properties abutting a Borough road. The
term includes proposed streets, lanes, alleys, courts, and ways.
B. Applicants shall submit sketch plans to the Borough Planning
Commission, for their evaluation and advice, in the following
circumstances:
(1) When any residential dwelling units are proposed along an existing
arterial or collector street.
(2) For all nonresidential proposals which require a new driveway or
upgrading of an existing driveway.
(3) For all proposals whose driveways would generate 25 or more
vehicular trips per day, based on ITE trip generation standards.
C. The Borough Planning Commission shall review the proposal in
accordance with the procedures of Article III of this chapter.
D. Following evaluation by the Borough Planning Commission, the
applicant may submit plans to the state or Borough for formal review
and, as appropriate, approval and issuance of permits.
E. No driveway location, classification, or design shall be considered
finally approved by the Borough unless permits have been granted by
the state and/or Borough and preliminary plan approval has been
granted by Borough Council for the subdivision and/or land
development which the driveway(s) will serve.
A. The term "driveway" as used here refers to every entrance or exit used
by vehicular traffic to or from properties abutting a Borough road. The
term includes proposed streets, lanes, alleys, courts, and ways.
B. Driveway intersections with streets:
(1) Shall provide adequate sight distance in compliance with the
standards contained in the PennDOT standards.
(2) Shall not cause or contribute to:
(a) Hazards to the free movement of normal street traffic.
(b) Traffic congestion on the street.
(c) Interference with the design, maintenance, and/or drainage of
the street.
(3) Shall be designed and constructed in compliance with 67 Pa. Code
Chapter 441, unless Borough standards are more restrictive.
§ 600-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-47
1:453
C. In order to facilitate safe and efficient access between streets and
driveways, the number of driveways permitted to serve individual
parcels of land shall be kept to the minimum needed to adequately
serve the parcel in question.
(1) Properties with frontages of 100 feet or less may be permitted not
more than one driveway intersection with a street. Exceptions may
be made when adjacent property owners share parking, or when
the need is determined in a traffic study prepared by a qualified
traffic engineer.
(2) Not more than two driveway intersections with the same street may
be permitted for any parcel of land unless anticipated traffic
volumes warrant more than two, and then only when supported by
a traffic study prepared by a qualified engineer warrants more than
two driveway intersections.
D. Driveway intersections serving individual parcels of land may be
prohibited by Borough Council where such intersections would create
congestion, interference, and/or hazards to traffic flow and safety by
reason of street grades, land forms, vegetation, frequency of driveway
intersections, limited sight distances, and/or high speed traffic flow. In
such cases, Borough Council may permit reasonable alternative forms
of vehicular access to the parcel of land by means of:
(1) Marginal access streets or driveways.
(2) Reverse frontage lotting.
(3) Other means which are legally and technically suitable in the
opinions of the Borough Solicitor and Engineer.
E. Where driveway intersections are prohibited by Borough Council and
alternative forms of vehicular access would cause an undue burden
upon an applicant, Borough Council may permit an alternative interim
access solution in compliance with the following:
(1) It is the safest feasible alternative, acceptable to the Borough
Engineer and/or PennDOT.
(2) Suitable provisions are made for a preferable permanent access
solution, consistent with Subsection D, above, including legal
agreements to enable implementation of the permanent solution.
F. Distance from street intersections. Driveways shall be located as far
from street intersections as is reasonably possible.
G. Choice of streets. When streets of different classes are involved, the
driveway shall provide access to the street of lesser classification unless
this requirement is waived by Borough Council for reasons of sight
distance, incompatibility of traffic, grading, drainage, or other major
reasons.
§ 600-47 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-47
1:454
§ 600-48. Bridges and culverts.
H. Stopping areas. Regardless of the driveway classification, all driveways
shall be provided with a stopping area within which the grade shall not
exceed 6%. The stopping area shall be measured as follows:
(1) The length of stopping area shall be a minimum of 20 feet, or the
length of the longest vehicles anticipated to use the driveway,
whichever is greater.
(2) Stopping areas shall be measured from the cartway line for all
streets.
I. Maximum grades for driveways.
(1) Residential driveways shall not exceed 15% grade.
(2) All other driveways shall not exceed 7% grade.
(3) All driveways shall be provided with a stopping area within which
the grade shall not exceed 4%.
J. Sight distance determinations. Determination of sight distances at
intersections of new driveways and streets with existing Borough roads
shall be in accordance with the following provisions.
(1) Access driveways shall be located at a point within the property
frontage limits which provides at least the minimum safe stopping
sight distance (SSSD), as determined by the standards within 67
Pa. Code Chapter 441, Access to and Occupancy of Highways by
Driveways and Local Roads.
(2) The calculated minimum SSSD shall be obtainable and measured
from a point 10 feet back of the pavement edge and 42 inches
above the road surface to a point six feet above the road surface.
(3) If the minimum required SSSDs cannot be achieved, the Borough
may exercise one or more of the following options:
(a) Prohibit left turns by exiting vehicles.
(b) Restrict turning movements to right turns in and out of a
driveway.
(c) Require installation of a right turn acceleration lane or
deceleration lane.
(d) Require installation of a separate left turn standby lane.
(e) Alter the horizontal or vertical geometry of the roadway.
(f) Deny access to the road.
A. Bridges and culverts shall be designed to meet current PennDOT
Standards to support expected loads and to pass design stormwater
§ 600-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-48
1:455
§ 600-49. Street names.
§ 600-50. Parking and related internal driveways.
Parking and related internal driveways shall be governed by the following
regulations.
flows. They shall be constructed to the full width of the planned
cartway. Allowance for sidewalk must also be made.
B. Where county-owned roads or bridges are involved, the County
Engineer must review and approve all proposals.
C. It is unlawful to construct any dam or other water obstruction, or to
make any change in or addition to, any existing water obstruction, or in
any manner change or diminish the course, current, or cross section of
any stream or body of water, without first having made written
application to and obtained a permit or consent in writing from PADEP.
D. The following information is required: Drawings to include location
plan; cross section of present bridge if one exists; profile of stream for a
reasonable distance above and below bridge site, showing slopes of
bed, normal water surface and flood water surface. If the bridge is on a
skew, give the angle of the center line of the bridge with the direction of
the line of flow. In addition, the following information is required for
new bridge construction: the total drainage area above the bridge site;
description of watershed; length of stream from source to bridge site
and to the mouth; character of stream bed and banks; extent and depth
of overflow during floods; effect of previous floods upon bridges, their
span and clearance; whether bridge will be within backwater influence
of parent stream.
E. A complete set of structural computations and drawings shall be
submitted with plans involving construction of bridges and culverts.
A. Street names. Street names shall be determined in consultation with
the Borough. Street names should bear a reasonable relationship to
significant natural features or history of the community. Efforts should
be made to reduce the occurrence of similar names or similar sounding
names within the Borough or postal delivery area.
B. Street signs. The developer shall erect at every intersection a street
sign or street signs having thereon the names of the intersecting
streets. At intersections where streets cross, there shall be at least two
such street signs and at the intersections where one street ends of joins
another street, there shall be at least one sign. Street signs shall be
erected when the first dwelling on the street is occupied. Temporary
street signs may be erected with the permission of Borough Council.
Any temporary signs will be replaced prior to roadway dedication.
A. General.
§ 600-48 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-50
1:456
(1) The specific purposes to be served by these requirements are:
(a) To add visual character and improve the appearance of parking
areas by reducing their massiveness into smaller units.
(b) To integrate parking areas into the pedestrian circulation
system.
(c) To provide shade for parked cars and reduce heat islands,
stormwater runoff, and air pollution.
(d) To reduce random vehicular flow across parking areas.
(e) To permit a high level of visibility for those uses for which
visibility is an important factor.
(f) To facilitate snow removal and storm drainage, and to conserve
energy in construction and resurfacing operations, by laying
out the paving surface with minimal obstructions.
(2) The terms "parking lot," "parking area," and "parking" are
interchangeable. "Parking" includes the driveway which provides
direct access to the parking spaces.
(3) Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in compliance with
the parking requirements of the Zoning Ordinance154 and the
regulations contained herein.
(4) Angled parking shall not be permitted along public or private
streets or within parking lots, except where specifically permitted
by this or other ordinances. Perpendicular parking shall not be
permitted along public or private streets.
(5) The installation of stormwater storage/infiltration facilities, such as
vegetated swales, infiltration galleries, or beds beneath parking
areas, are strongly encouraged. These facilities avoid the generally
negative visual impacts of surface detention or retention facilities,
and enhance groundwater recharge, with the attendant positive
effects on stream flows and quality.
B. All parking lots.
(1) Parking shall not be permitted along driveways which serve as the
entrance(s) or exit(s) to parking areas with a capacity of 50 cars or
more. A minimum driveway length of 50 feet shall be provided
between the road ultimate right-of-way line and the first parking
space or internal driveway intersection.
154. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-50
1:457
(2) In any case not regulated by the Zoning Ordinance,155 parking
areas shall not be located closer than 15 feet from any tract
boundary line and 10 feet from any legal right-of-way line.
(3) Where the edge of an existing parking area is located close to a
street, driveway, or other parking area and the property is
proposed for subdivision and/or land development, a minimum
separation of 10 feet shall be provided between these features
unless a shared parking or cross access arrangement is proposed.
(4) Dead-ended parking areas shall be discouraged when the required
parking capacity can be accommodated in a layout that permits
more convenient vehicular movements. However, extraneous
through traffic flow should be avoided.
(a) Up to 30 parking spaces may also be located in a dead-ended
parking area if there is no more desirable alternative feasible,
and sufficient back-up areas provided for the end stalls.
(b) More than 30 parking spaces may be located in a dead-ended
parking area only if a turnaround area is provided at the closed
end, suitable for passenger car turning. The turnaround area
may be circular, "T-" or "Y-" shaped, or other configuration
acceptable to Borough Council.
(5) Parking spaces designed for the exclusive use by disabled persons
shall be installed in all parking lots as close and convenient to
building entrances as is reasonable. The specific number and
locations of handicapped stalls shall be in conformance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
(6) Provisions for pedestrian safety within a parking lot shall be
required by providing sidewalks and delineated crosswalks.
(7) Planting islands shall be constructed within all parking lots with
more than 12 spaces based on the following standards:
(a) One planting island shall be provided for every 12 parking
stalls. There shall be no more than 12 continuous parking stalls
in a row without a planting island.
(b) Alternative planting islands (without planting islands located
every 12 parking stalls) must provide 1 canopy tree for every
10 parking stalls in planting island areas and perimeter
parking planting areas at the discretion of Borough Council.
(c) The ends of all parking rows shall be divided for driving lanes
by planting islands.
(d) Planting islands shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet in
area. Unless designed to function as part of the stormwater
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-50 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-50
1:458
management system, planting islands shall be underlain by soil
mounded up to six inches minimum above the paved parking
or drive area and shall be protected by curbs or wheel stops.
(8) Parking lots with more than 12 stalls shall require planting strips
around the entire perimeter of the parking lot except where
buildings, driveways, and walkways are located.
(9) Unless otherwise described in this chapter, where required, all
planting strips shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide and run the
length of the parking row. Unless designed to function as part of
the stormwater management system, planting strips shall be
underlain by soil mounded up to six inches above the paved parking
or drive area and shall be protected by curbs, wheel stops, or
bollards.
C. Parking area dimensions.
(1) Parallel parking stalls shall have minimum dimensions of nine feet
by 22 feet.
(2) Perpendicular parking stalls shall have minimum dimensions of
nine feet by 18 feet with a twenty-two-foot aisle.
(3) At the discretion of Borough Council the minimum length of
parking stalls may be reduced by one foot if stalls are designed to
allow vehicles to overhang an area of grass or other pervious
surface. Bumper stops shall be provided which allow the parked
vehicle to extend at least one foot over the edge of the pavement.
(4) Where parking stalls abut sidewalks, parked vehicles shall not
overhang the sidewalks unless the sidewalk is widened by two feet.
Wheel stops are encouraged in order to allow for full pedestrian
use of the sidewalks.
(5) Parking spaces for physically disabled persons shall be 13 feet wide
and equal in depth to the spaces abutting them in accordance with
standards developed under the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA), 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
D. Residential parking lots.
(1) Parallel rows of parking spaces, which are not separated by a
driveway, shall be separated by a planting strip.
(2) A single row of parking spaces located parallel to and between two
driveways, shall be separated from one of the driveways by a
planting strip, a minimum of eight feet wide.
(3) Large parking lots shall be divided into smaller parking areas of no
more than 40 stalls by planting strips.
§ 600-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-50
1:459
(4) No less than 20 feet of open area shall be provided between the
curbline of any parking area and the outside wall of the dwelling
unit.
E. Nonresidential parking lots.
(1) Parking lots with a capacity of from 41 to 100 cars shall require a
planting strip around the perimeter and an additional 10% planting
area(s) within the perimeter of the lot. Refer to Figure 600-4.15156
for an illustration of generalized locations and use of planting strips
and planting islands.
(2) Parking lots for more than 80 cars shall be divided into sections no
greater than 80 stalls each by planting strips.
(a) These planting strips shall be located parallel to the rows of
parking, to serve the following purposes:
[1] To separate main access (entrance-exit) driveways from
rows of parking spaces.
[2] To separate other major driveways (service drives, general
internal circulation) from rows of parking spaces.
[3] To separate large parking areas into smaller units at
intervals of not more than four rows of parking stalls.
(b) The ends of rows of parking shall be marked by planting
islands.
(c) For parking areas with an ultimate capacity greater than 400
cars, the requirements may be modified by Borough Council to
provide separation into units at intervals of six rows of parking
stalls, with each unit capacity no greater than 100 cars.
(d) The applicant may request the Borough to permit an
alternative design which achieves the purposes of these
parking area requirements as well or better than the
requirements herein. The final decision to permit an
alternative design shall be made by Borough Council, with the
advice of the Borough Planning Commission and Engineer.
(3) Shared access. When required by Borough Council upon
recommendation of the Borough Planning Commission, applicants
should create agreements for shared vehicular access as the
preferred means of reducing the total number of curb cuts, for
traffic safety and congestion reasons. Figure 600-4.16157 illustrates
one generalized example of this concept.
156. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
157. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-50 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-50
1:460
(a) Nonresidential lots shall provide cross-access easements for
parking areas and access driveways guaranteeing access to
adjacent lots. Interconnections shall be logically placed and
easily identifiable to ensure convenient traffic flow.
(b) When two or more abutting lots share an access driveway, the
driveway should be designed as the main access to those lots,
and one or more existing access driveway should then be
closed.
(c) Where development of three or more adjoining parcels
consolidates vehicular access into one shared driveway, that
driveway may be upgraded into a medium volume driveway
according to PennDOT standards.
(d) Shared access may be located entirely on one lot or be split
among a common lot line.
(e) Access easement and maintenance agreements or other
suitable legal mechanisms shall be provided, acceptable to
Borough Council in consultation with the Borough Solicitor.
(f) Liability safeguards for all property owners and lessees served
by the shared access shall be guaranteed to the satisfaction of
Borough Council in consultation with the Borough Solicitor.
F. Driveways within sites proposed for nonresidential development.
(1) The following requirements apply to all driveways within all sites
proposed for land development.
(a) A smooth transition shall be provided between the driveway
section required for access to a public street and the
driveway(s) required for internal site circulation.
(b) Main access driveways (entrance-exit), and service driveways
handling large trucks shall be a minimum paved width of 30
feet, with one lane in each direction, unless otherwise required
by PennDOT standards governing the volume of traffic
anticipated.
(c) Access driveways for cars and other small vehicles which are
clearly secondary in importance may be reduced to 20 feet in
paved width, unless otherwise required by PennDOT standards
governing the volume of traffic anticipated.
(d) Interior storefront driveways in shopping centers shall be a
minimum paved width of 28 feet, to allow one lane in each
direction and a dropoff/pickup lane along the sidewalks.
(e) Driveways along other nonresidential buildings shall be a
minimum paved width of 22 feet, except where a dropoff/
pickup lane is proposed.
§ 600-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-50
1:461
§ 600-51. Curbing.
Curbing shall be installed along all existing and proposed public and private
streets, common driveways, and common parking areas.
§ 600-52. Survey monuments.
(f) Parking aisles shall be a minimum 22 feet wide with two-way
traffic flow for convenience and efficiency.
(2) Wherever feasible, internal circulation driveways shall extend from
access drives in locations which permit and encourage entering
traffic to turn and enter the parking aisles without first traveling
along a building-front driveway. This feature is intended to reduce
the volume of vehicular traffic along building-front driveway to
make it safer for pedestrian traffic.
A. General.
(1) Regardless of small size of a land development or subdivision
proposal, curbs shall be required along all existing and proposed
public streets within the right-of-way, private streets, common
driveways, and common parking areas.
(2) When utilizing an approved stormwater management technique,
Borough Council may waive curbing requirements in full or
partially. Grass swales and infiltration trenches along streets are
encouraged in appropriate locations in the Borough provided that
pedestrian safety and traffic circulation is addressed.
(3) If for any reason an interim waiver of these requirements is made, a
sufficient guaranty shall be posted for the eventual installation of
sidewalks, subject to approval by Borough Council upon
recommendation of the Borough Engineer and Solicitor, in
accordance with § 600-62 of this chapter.
(4) Curb construction. All curbing shall be constructed both as to
materials and methods, generally in conformance with applicable
portions of PennDOT Specifications Publication 408, current
edition. Curbs shall be vertical profile with a minimum of eighteeninch
structure height. Expansion joints shall be placed every 30
feet, at structures and at the end of the day's work. Concrete curb
shall have contraction joints shall be saw cut every 10 feet at a
minimum of two inches. Concrete shall be a minimum 3,000 psi in
compression strength.
(5) Intersections where sidewalks are provided shall be provided with
depressions for wheel chair use at each corner, and opposite each
corner on "T" intersections.
A. Permanent monuments shall be indicated on the record plan. All
monuments shall be constructed of precast concrete or durable stone
§ 600-50 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-52
1:462
with metal insert(s), and be four inches square with at least 36 inches
extending below ground level, or an alternate design approved by
Borough Council. Street right-of-way reference monuments shall be
located on the right-of-way lines at corners, angle points, beginning
and end of curves, and as otherwise required by the Borough Engineer
for all new and existing streets. They shall be placed after a new
street and/or lot grading has been completed. Certified copies of this
reference information shall be given to both the Borough Engineer and
the Borough Office. When final lot grading has been completed and
before the issuance of occupancy permits, permanent monuments shall
be set by the subdivider, developer, or builder, at all lot corners and
angle points, and at all street intersections and intermediate points as
may be required. Security in may be required by the Borough at the
time of plan approval if the monuments have not already been set.
B. Lot pin requirements. All lots upon which construction is planned shall
be temporarily staked or pinned, or permanently monumented and
certified to such by a registered surveyor for the owner, subdivider,
builder, or developer, before issuance of a building permit. A signed
certificate of compliance must be submitted with a building permit
application. Temporary stakes or pins with a surveyor's ribbon attached
may be acceptable on existing lots where construction of an accessory
building or an addition to the primary structure is proposed, only if
construction is begun within 30 days of the certificate of compliance
date. Temporary stakes or pins shall remain in place until witnessed
and accepted by the Borough Building Inspector. Prior to final approval
of a new subdivision plan, all new lot corner markers shall be marked
with a minimum 5/8 inch diameter metal pin extending at least 24
inches into the ground and at least one inch revealed above the ground
surface, or an equivalent metal marker, approved by the Borough
Engineer. Upon completion of construction and final grading, pins shall
be replaced with permanent monuments as described in § 600-52A.
C. Original monuments. In situations where they may be of legal or
historical importance, the original monuments and marks must not be
destroyed, defaced, hidden, or possibly confused by creating new
monuments and marks unless absolutely necessary, e.g., the originals
are decayed, destroyed, or unsafe. In some cases, to be determined by
the Borough Engineer, new monuments should be set as a reference or
witness to the original monument to avoid disturbing the original. When
in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, the angle point falls in a
location that is not appropriate to set a concrete monument, a written
request for a waiver shall be submitted for consideration by Borough
Council.
D. Bench marks. The Borough elevations are based on the USGS Datum.
Location and elevation is available to all engineers and surveyors upon
request to the Borough Engineer's office. All contours and elevations
shown on the plan must be based on this system.
§ 600-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-53
1:463
§ 600-53. Landscaping and plantings.
A. Required landscaping plan.
(1) Applicants shall submit a landscaping plan as part of the
preliminary plan submission for all subdivisions and land
developments, except for residential subdivisions of three lots or
less. The landscaping plan shall be prepared by a certified planting
professional (landscape architect, nurseryman, arborist,
horticulturist, or urban forester). Borough Council may seek the
advice of a certified planting professional regarding compliance
with the ordinance standards.
(2) For residential subdivisions of no more than three lots, a formal
landscaping plan is not required, but the applicant's plans shall be
required to show compliance with the applicable planting
requirements herein.
B. Buffers and screens. Buffer plantings shall be installed in subdivisions
and land developments to integrate new developments with
surroundings, to separate incompatible land uses by providing
screening, and to minimize or eliminate views to certain site elements.
(1) Buffer plantings shall be required for the following types of
development and as otherwise specified in the Zoning
Ordinance:158
(a) All nonresidential development.
(b) All single-family detached development over five units.
(c) All residential infill development.
(d) All multifamily and single-family attached development.
(e) Construction of any of the following items which exceeds 2,500
square feet in ground coverage:
[1] Public utility facilities or structures.
[2] Waste collection, storage and/or treatment facilities.
[3] Any other structure of similar character or impact.
(2) An on-site investigation by the applicant shall determine the
adjacent land uses along each property boundary. In the case of
vacant land, the permitted zoning uses shall be used. The existing
or zoned uses shall be noted on the plan. In the case of several
permitted uses on a site, the most restrictive landscaping
requirements shall apply. The Borough shall have final approval of
interpretation of land uses or Zoning Map.
158. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
§ 600-53 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-53
1:464
(3) Buffer area location and dimensions.
(a) A buffer planting area of not less than 10 feet in width shall be
established along all property lines and external street
boundaries of the site proposed for subdivision or land
development, unless otherwise specified in the Zoning
Ordinance.159
(b) Unless otherwise specified in the Zoning Ordinance,160 the
buffer area may be included within the front, side, or rear yard
setback.
(c) The buffer area shall be a continuous pervious planting area
consisting of tall canopy trees, small understory trees, and
shrubs, with grass or ground cover. No paving shall be
permitted within the buffer areas except for driveway
crossings and/or walkways.
(d) Parking is not permitted in the buffer area unless a shared
parking and/or access arrangement exists.
(e) Stormwater management facilities are permitted in the buffer
area provided that the visual screening requirement of the
buffer is still met.
(f) Reverse frontage lots shall follow the requirements described
in § 600-23.
(4) The minimum planting requirements shall be determined by the
intensity of the proposed land use and the adjacent land use, vacant
land, or zoning district, according to Figure 600-4.17.161
(a) Screening buffers must be adequate to visually screen the
proposed land use or development from off-site view. Several
different planting options could be used to create an effective
buffer. Grading treatments and architectural features, such as
walls, fences, and/or naturally undulating berms may be
necessary in addition to the minimum planting quantities in
order to effectively provide visual screen. The sufficiency of the
buffer shall be determined by Borough Council upon
recommendation of the Borough Planning Commission.
(b) The limited area buffer can be used in older developed areas
where space for planting is severely restricted. The planting
screen would be equivalent to an evergreen hedge planting.
Alternative planting arrangements, such as shade or flowering
trees with deciduous shrubs, could be considered in
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
161. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-53
1:465
conjunction with a fence or wall, at the discretion of Borough
Council.
(5) Minimum plant material requirements. In accordance with Figure
600-4.17,162 for every 100 linear feet of property line and external
street boundaries of the site proposed for subdivision or land
development to be buffered, the minimum quantities, types, and
sizes of plant material shown in Figure 600-4.18163 shall be
required. These are minimum standards; additional plant material,
grading treatments, or architectural elements may be included in
the plan, at the applicant's discretion. Generalized illustrations of
buffer types are presented in Figures 4.19 through 4.21.164 Species
shall be selected from Appendix 600-A, Recommend Plant
Materials List.165
(6) Mitigation of visual impacts. The use of a screening buffer shall be
required to mitigate the adverse visual impacts which proposed
land uses or site elements will have on the subject tract, adjoining
properties and the community in general. In addition to the
requirements for buffer plantings as listed in Figure 600-4.19,166
the following proposed land uses and site elements shall be
screened from off-site with a screening buffer:
(a) Dumpsters, trash disposal, recycling areas, and mechanical
equipment.
(b) Service and loading docks.
(c) Outdoor storage areas.
(d) Sewage treatment plants and pump stations.
(7) Plant material that has been classified as invasive, destructive or is
no longer recommended for use is prohibited. The plant material
listed in Appendix 600-B167 is not permitted in the Borough.
C. Street trees.
(1) Street trees shall be required:
(a) Along all existing streets when they abut or lie within the
proposed subdivision or land development except where
existing trees serve to meet the planting requirement.
(b) Along all proposed streets.
162. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
163. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
164. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
165. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
166. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
167. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-53 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-53
1:466
(c) Along access driveways which serve two or more residential
dwelling units.
(d) Along access driveways that serve nonresidential properties.
(e) Along major walkways through parking lots and between
nonresidential buildings.
(2) Street trees shall be located between the ultimate right-of-way line
and the building setback line, and shall meet these standards.
(a) Trees shall be planted at a rate of at least one tree per 40 linear
feet of frontage or fraction thereof. Trees shall be distributed
along the entire frontage of the property.
(b) Trees shall be planted a minimum distance of five feet and a
maximum distance of 10 feet from the ultimate right-of-way
line. However, in certain cases, as follows, Borough Council
may permit trees to be planted within the legal right-of-way:
[1] In areas where existing planting areas may already be
located within the legal right-of-way.
[2] In cases where closely spaced rows of street trees may be
desirable and future street widening is considered
unlikely.
(c) In nonresidential developments, trees shall be located within a
planting area within the front yard setback, at least 10 feet in
width, planted in grass or ground cover. In areas where wider
sidewalks are desirable, or space is limited, tree planting pits
may be used.
(d) Trees shall be located so as not to interfere with the
installation and maintenance of sidewalks and utilities. Trees
shall be planted a minimum of three feet from curbs and
sidewalks, 12 feet from overhead lines, and six feet from
underground utilities.
(e) Tree species shall be selected from the list in Appendix
600-A168 based on appropriate growth rates and mature
heights for use beneath and adjacent to overhead utility lines.
D. Trail and pathway landscaping.
(1) A filtering buffer as described in Figure 600-4.18169 shall buffer the
trail from adjacent land uses. Upon recommendation of the
Borough Planning Commission, Borough Council may permit
breaks in the filtering buffer where adjacent land uses do not
require a full buffer.
168. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
169. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-53
1:467
(2) Trees and shrubs shall be setback six feet from the trail surface.
Figure 600-4.22170 illustrates a generalized concept of trail
landscaping.
(3) If not required as a visual buffer, evergreen trees shall not be
planted on the southern side of the trail to allow for winter sun
exposure. To fulfill buffering requirements, evergreen trees shall
be replaced by an equal mix of canopy trees, understory trees, and
shrubs of the size described in Figure 600-4.18.171
(4) Entrances to trails and intersections between trails shall be
delineated with post and rail fencing or other suitable material.
E. Parking lot landscaping. All parking lots shall be designed according to
§ 600-50 and landscaped according to the following regulations.
(1) Parking lots shall be effectively landscaped with trees and shrubs
to reduce the visual impact of glare, headlights, and parking lot
lights, to delineate driving lanes, and to define rows of parking.
Furthermore, parking lots should be adequately landscaped to
provide shade in order to reduce the amount of reflected heat and
to improve the aesthetics of parking lots.
(2) Planting strips shall be planted with one canopy tree every 25 feet
plus shrubs and/or ground cover to cover the entire area at
maturity. Species shall be selected from Appendix 600-A.172
(3) Each planting island shall contain at least one shade tree plus
shrubs and/or ground cover to cover the entire area.
(4) The placement of light standard shall be coordinated with the
landscape design to avoid a conflict with the operation of light
fixtures.
(5) Additional planting is encouraged and may include a variety of
ornamental trees, shrubs, and ground covers, chosen from the list
of plant materials in Appendix 600-A,173 provided that:
(a) At the ends of planting strips at driveway intersections,
driver's visibility shall be maintained by limited plantings
within 35 feet of the intersection.
(b) At the ends of planting strips between rows of parking spaces,
visibility shall be maintained by limited plantings within 20 feet
of the intersection.
(c) Limited planting shall mean:
170. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
171. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
172. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
173. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-53 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-53
1:468
[1] Not more than one shade or canopy tree within the area.
[2] No shrubs or ground cover plants exceeding two feet in
height.
[3] No evergreen trees.
(6) Where perimeter landscaping is required, planting strips shall be
planted with a filtering buffer as per Figure 600-4.18.174
(7) Whenever a parking lot abuts a primary arterial street, it shall be
screened by a four-foot-tall fence constructed of wood, vinyl
designed to look like wood, brick, stone, stucco over concrete block
(capped with brick, slate, or stone), or ornamental iron (or
ornamental aluminum, steel, or vinyl designed to look like iron) as
consistent with local character. This will be in addition to filtering
buffer requirements. The design shall require the approval of
Borough Council upon recommendation of the Borough Planning
Commission.
F. Stormwater basins and associated facilities. Landscaping shall be
required in and around all stormwater management basins according to
the following and as generally presented in Figure 600-4.23.175
(1) All areas of stormwater management basins, including basin floors,
side slopes, berms, impoundment structures, or other earth
structures, shall be planted with suitable vegetation such as
naturalized meadow plantings specifically suited for stormwater
basins and as recommended in Appendix 600-A.176 Landscape
designs for the basin should require minimal overall maintenance.
(a) Trees and shrubs shall be planted in and around stormwater
basins. A minimum planting of two trees and 10 shrubs per 100
linear feet of basin perimeter shall be planted in and around
the basin. No canopy trees shall be planted within 30 feet of an
outlet/drain structure, emergency spillway, or berm.
(b) Naturalized ground cover plant species, such as native
wildflowers, meadows, and nonaggressive grasses specifically
designed for the permanently wet, intermittently wet, and
usually dry areas of stormwater basins, shall be seeded in the
floors and slopes of the basin and meet the following
requirements:
[1] The plantings provide a satisfactory continuous cover that
acts to prevent erosion to all areas of the basin.
174. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
175. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
176. Editor's Note: Said appendix is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-53
1:469
§ 600-54. Plant materials specifications.
[2] The plantings do not interfere in the safe and efficient
function of the basin as determined by the Borough
Engineer.
(c) Mown turf grass is permitted only in the emergency spillway,
on top of berms, on outside face of berms, specified walking
paths within the basin, and access paths to allow maintenance
of inflow and outflow structures. Any other areas proposed for
turf grass requiring regular mowing should be approved by the
Borough Engineer.
[1] Areas of the naturalized basin containing lawn grass
(including top and outside berm) shall be sodded or
hydroseeded to minimize erosion during the establishment
period, and once established, these areas shall be
maintained at a height of not more than six inches.
(2) Once established a singular annual mowing of the meadow/
naturalized grass areas should be sufficient to maintain a wet
meadow and/or basin floor. A full description of basin maintenance
responsibilities should be included on the recorded subdivision
plan and a notation outlining the basin maintenance
responsibilities of the basin owner should be placed on the
property deed.
(3) Signage at basins to educate the public and/or designate the limits
of mowing is encouraged.
(4) Low flow channels are not permitted with stormwater management
facilities.
(5) Stormwater basins shall be screened from adjacent properties
using the buffer plantings standards for a filtering buffer as
described in Figure 600-4.18.177
A. General requirements.
(1) The location, dimensions, and spacing of required plantings should
be adequate for their proper growth and maintenance taking into
account the sizes of such plantings at maturity and their present
and future environmental requirements and tolerances, including
wind, moisture, and sunlight.
(2) Plantings should be selected and located where they will not
contribute to conditions hazardous to public safety. Such conditions
include, but are not limited to, public street rights-of-way,
underground and above ground utilities, and sight triangle areas
required for unobstructed views at street intersections.
177. Editor's Note: Said figure is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 600-53 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-54
1:470
B. Plant specifications.
(1) All plants shall meet the minimum standards for health, form and
root condition as outlined in the American Association of
Nurserymen (AAN) Standards.
(2) All plant material shall be hardy and within the USDA hardiness
zone 6 applicable to Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
(3) Canopy trees, sometimes called shade trees, shall reach a minimum
height and spread of 30 feet at maturity as determined by the AAN
Standards and shall be deciduous. New trees shall have a minimum
caliper of 2 1/2 inches at planting.
(4) Ornamental trees or large shrubs shall reach a typical minimum
height of 15 feet at maturity, based upon AAN Standards. Trees and
shrubs may be deciduous or evergreen and shall have a distinctive
ornamental characteristic such as prominent flowers, fruit, habitat,
foliage or bark. New ornamental trees shall have a minimum height
of six feet or 1 1/2 inch caliper at the time of planting. New shrubs
shall have a minimum height of three feet at the time of planting.
(5) Evergreen trees shall reach a typical minimum height of 20 feet at
maturity based upon AAN Standards for that species and shall
remain evergreen throughout the year. New evergreens shall have
a minimum height of eight feet at the time of planting.
C. Maintenance.
(1) Required plant material shall be maintained for the life of the
project to achieve the required visual effect of the buffer or screen.
It shall be the ultimate responsibility of successive landowners to
insure that the required plantings are properly maintained. Dead or
diseased plant materials shall be removed or treated properly by
the landowner and replaced during the next growing season.
(2) All sight distances shall remain clear, and any plant materials that
could endanger safety such as unstable limbs shall be removed and
the plant materials shall be replaced if necessary. It shall be the
responsibility of all property owners to maintain all plantings and
architectural elements to insure a safe environment.
(3) Maintenance guidelines for the plantings should be developed by
the planting plan designer, to be used by grounds maintenance
personnel.
(4) The current landowner or developer shall replace any tree or shrub
that dies within 18 months of planting. Any tree or shrub that with
18 months of planting is deemed, in the opinion of Borough, not to
have survived or not to have grown in a manner characteristic of its
species, shall be replaced. Substitutions for certain species of
plants may be made with the approval of the Borough.
§ 600-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-55
1:471
§ 600-55. Stormwater management and drainage.
A. General provisions.
(1) Various forms of on-site stormwater control structures shall be
incorporated into the land development or subdivision in order to
retain or detain excess stormwater in accordance with the
standards below.
(2) Selected stormwater control devices should be compatible with the
site characteristics. Preference should be given to control systems
that provide water quality and ground water recharge benefits.
(3) When detention basins are provided, they shall be designed to
utilize the natural contours of the land whenever possible. When
such design is impracticable, the construction of the basin shall
utilize slopes as flat as possible to blend the structure into the
terrain.
(4) Prior to the granting of final approval of any subdivision or land
development plan, the Borough must be satisfied through
contractual arrangements that all stormwater facilities will be
properly maintained. If all, or a portion, of the facilities will be on
property which will be conveyed to an individual homeowners'
association or any other eventual owner, the guarantees must be in
such a form that they will carry through to the new owners.
(5) If the land of the proposed subdivision or land development will be
conveyed to two or more separate owners, the developer shall
provide written assurance and deed restrictions to the Borough
that the stormwater management structures will be properly
maintained, by the owners or if acceptable to the Borough, be
dedicated to the Borough, which shall then be responsible for
maintaining the stormwater management structures.
(6) Rainfall frequency data. The intensity of rainfall shall be
determined using the latest approved revision of the Rainfall
Duration Frequency Tables for Pennsylvania published by PADEP.
(7) Design storm. Peak discharge and runoff shall be computed based
on the twenty-four-hour Type II rainfall distribution for the two-,
five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundred-year frequency
storm events. Overflow should have capacity for the one-hundredyear
storm.
(8) Maintenance of natural drainageways. All natural streams,
channels, swales, drainage systems and/or areas of surface water
concentration shall be maintained in their existing condition unless
an alteration is approved by the Borough or an official
representative thereof. All encroachment activities shall comply
with the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105, Water
Obstructions and Encroachments, rules and regulations of PADEP.
§ 600-55 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-55
1:472
Staged discharge or water surface profile studies for the design
storm may be required to establish high water elevations.
(9) Easements and dedication. Where stormwater or surface water will
be gathered within the subdivision or land development and
discharged or drained in volume over lands within or beyond the
boundaries of the subdivision or land development, the subdivider,
developer, or builder, shall reserve or obtain easements over all
lands affected. The easements shall be adequate for such discharge
or drainage and for carrying off of such water and for the
maintenance, repair, and reconstruction of the same, including the
right of passage over, including vehicles, machinery, and other
equipment for such purposes, and which shall be of sufficient width
for such passage and work. The subdivider, developer, or builder,
shall convey, at no cost to the Borough easements to the Borough
on demand, at the completion and stabilization of all
improvements.
(10) Storm drainage directed into an adjacent municipality. When storm
drainage will be directed into an adjacent municipality, all
provisions for accommodating such storm drainage shall be
submitted to the governing body of that municipality for review.
(11) Concentration of stormwater runoff. Stormwater runoff shall not be
concentrated nor shall natural drainage water be diverted as to
overload or further overload as the case may be, existing drainage
systems, create flooding, or create the need for additional drainage
structures on other private or public lands, unless adequate
provisions approved by the Borough and the owners of the other
affected private or public lands are made for taking care of these
conditions.
(12) Discharge of roof runoff. Stormwater runoff from roofs shall not be
discharged into the street right-of-way without approval by the
Borough upon review by the Borough Engineer, nor concentrated
onto adjacent properties. It shall be returned to sheet flow or
discharge into an infiltration structure adequately designed and
approved by the Borough. However, for commercial or industrial
land developments alternate methods may be used when approved
by the Borough.
(13) Blocks and lots. Blocks and lots shall be graded to secure proper
drainage away from buildings and to allow the collection of
stormwater in catch basins. Minimum 2% slopes away from
structures shall be required.
(14) Uphill lands. Consideration shall be given to the present use of
lands uphill from the proposed development. The storm drainage
system and storage system shall be sized to provide for the
tributary watershed within the subdivision or land development
and the tributary watershed outside the subdivision, land
§ 600-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-55
1:473
development, or land disturbance. The Borough shall require the
developer of the uphill lands to maintain a zero increase in runoff.
(15) Drainage area. In large drainage areas the designer shall break up
the area into small areas to calculate the runoff.
(16) Methods of stormwater runoff detention and control. The following
is a listing of detention and control methods which may be utilized
in stormwater management systems, if appropriate. The choice of
control techniques is not limited to those appearing on the list.
(a) Detention Basins.
(b) Porous pavement and concrete lattice block surfaces.
(c) Grassed channels and vegetated strips.
(d) Routed flow over grass.
(e) Decreased impervious area coverage.
(f) Recharge beds.
(g) Rooftop gardens or green roofs.
(h) Cisterns.
(i) The use of other control methods which meet the criteria in
this section will be permitted when approved by Borough
Council upon review by the Borough Engineer. Various
combinations of methods should be tailored to suit the
particular requirements of the type of development and
topographic features of the project area.
(17) Correction of existing stormwater problems. The design and
philosophy of any stormwater management shall consider
corrective measures to existing stormwater problems that are
created in whole or in part by the developer's land, or that would
impact the end users of the development.
(18) Unnatural drainage. Wherever construction stops or concentrates
the natural flow of storm drainage in such a way to affect adjoining
properties, approval of the owners shall be obtained in writing and
a copy filed with the Borough. Approval of plans by the Borough
does not authorize or sanction drainage affecting adjoining
properties.
(19) Drainage from nonnatural sources. Water originating from other
than natural sources, such as air conditioning units, sump pumps,
or other dry weather flow, wherever practicable, shall be
discharged into natural watercourses on the property. The
discharge of water under the sidewalk through the curb into the
gutter, is prohibited.
§ 600-55 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-55
1:474
B. Stormwater runoff computations.
(1) Method of stormwater runoff computations. The stormwater
analysis shall be accomplished using the latest edition of the Soil
Cover Complex Method, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds:
Technical Release No. 55 as published by the United States Natural
Resources Conservation Service) as a basis unless other methods
are reviewed by the Borough Engineer and approved by the
Borough prior to submittal. Use of the Rational Method will only be
permitted for drainage areas less than 2.5 acres in size.
(a) In some instances for small drainage areas, the Borough
Engineer may recommend and the Borough approve use of the
Rational Method as outlined in the Erosion and Sediment
Pollution Control Program Manual published by PADEP.
(b) All computations performed using an approved alternate
method shall comply with the intent of this chapter.
(2) Runoff curve numbers (CN values). All predevelopment, land
disturbance, and postdevelopment runoff computations shall be
performed using the runoff curve numbers (CN) for the ground
covers as specified below. The use of other (CN) values must be
fully justified to the Borough Engineer prior to plan approval. The
following subsections use the terms "cultivated agricultural,"
"other agricultural," and "urban." These terms pertain to the
phraseology used in TR-55.
(3) Predevelopment computations.
(a) Lands within the subdivision or land development and part of
the same watershed:
[1] Cultivated agricultural ground covers shall be considered
contoured and terraced with crop residue and in good
condition C & T + CR).
[2] Urban and other agricultural ground covers (woods,
meadow, brush, etc.) shall be considered as their existing
condition.
(b) Ground covers for lands uphill of the subdivision of land
development and part of the same watershed shall be
considered as their existing condition (urban, cultivated
agricultural, and other agricultural).
(4) Postdevelopment computations.
(a) Lands within the subdivision or land development and part of
the same watershed:
§ 600-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-55
1:475
[1] Ground covers shall be evaluated as the proposed
conditions for all areas within the boundaries of the
subdivision or land development.
[2] Ground covers shall be considered as existing condition or
at best as contoured row crops with crop residue present
for areas which will continue to be considered cultivated
agricultural.
[3] Ground covers shall be evaluated as existing condition for
all areas considered other agricultural (woods, meadows,
brush, etc.).
(b) Lands uphill from the subdivision or land development and part
of the same watershed:
[1] Ground covers shall be considered as existing condition or
at best as contoured row crops with crop residue present
for areas considered cultivated agricultural.
[2] Ground covers shall be considered as existing for all other
conditions (urban and other agricultural).
(5) Land disturbance (During Construction) computations.
(a) Lands within the subdivision or land development and part of
the same watershed:
[1] Ground covers shall be evaluated in the disturbed
condition for all areas within the boundaries of the
regulated activity.
[2] Ground covers shall be evaluated as existing condition or
at best contoured row crops with crop residue present for
areas considered cultivated agricultural outside of the
boundaries of the subdivision or land development.
[3] Ground covers shall be evaluated in the existing condition
for all urban and other agricultural areas outside the
subdivision or land development boundary.
(b) Lands uphill of the subdivision or land development and part of
the same watershed shall be considered the same as shown
Subsection B(4)(b) of these standards.
(6) Comparison of discharges. Predevelopment discharges shall be
compared to land disturbance (during construction) and
postdevelopment discharges for individual drainage basins rather
than to the combined discharges for the overall tract. If the land
disturbance discharge and/or postdevelopment discharge is
greater than the respective predevelopment discharge for a given
drainage basin, a detention facility will be required and shall be
designed to detain the greater discharge.
§ 600-55 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-55
1:476
C. Design.
(1) Runoff calculations. Stormwater runoff calculations shall be
computed for the following conditions as specified in Subsection B
of these standards and submitted for the Borough to review.
(a) Predevelopment.
(b) Postdevelopment.
(c) Land disturbance activities.
(2) Design of storm drainage systems.
(a) Existing storm sewer accessibility. Where existing storm
sewers are reasonably accessible and of adequate capacity,
subdivisions and land developments shall connect to the
existing storm sewers.
(b) Existing water bodies or watercourses. Where a subdivision or
land development is traversed by or contains a pond, lake,
watercourse, drainageway, channel, storm drainage system, or
stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement that
conforms substantially with the line of such pond, lake,
watercourse, drainage way, channel, storm drainage system, or
stream of such width as will be adequate to preserve the
unimpeded flow of drainage (one-hundred-year flow) and to
provide for widening, deepening, relocating, improving, or
protecting such features or drainage facilities. Minimum
easement width shall be 10 feet from each side of the
watercourse, water body, stream, pond, or lake, but the
Borough may require wider easements when necessary. When
required by the Borough, bearings and distances shall be
provided for the boundaries of easements. Any changes in an
existing drainageway shall be subject to the approval of PADEP,
the Army Corps of Engineers, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency when each or all have jurisdiction.
(c) The subdivider/developer shall properly grade and seed slopes,
and fence open ditches when a safety hazard can result. Areas
within easements shall be kept so as to allow maintenance and
entrance.
(d) Drainage easements. Drainage easements shall be provided to
accommodate all storm drainage requirements and shall be a
minimum of 30 feet in width. Storm sewers, as required, shall
be placed in the road right-of-way, parallel to the roadway and
shall be designed as a combination storm sewer and
underdrain. When located in undedicated land, they shall be
placed within an easement not less than 20 feet wide, as
approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 600-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-55
1:477
(e) Drainage facilities design requirements. All drainage facilities
shall be designed to adequately handle surface runoff and
carry it to suitable outlets and shall be designed in accordance
with the following minimum design standards:
[1] All storm drains and drainage facilities such as gutters,
catch basins, bridges, inlets, and culverts shall be installed
and the land graded for adequate drainage as shown on
the grading plan submitted and approved with the final
plan. Construction of these facilities shall generally
conform with PennDOT Specifications Publication 408,
latest version. Storm drains and appurtenances shall be
required to be constructed by the subdivider to take
surface water from the bottom of vertical grades to lead
water away from springs, and to avoid excessive use of
cross gutters at street intersections and elsewhere.
[2] Manholes. Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in
horizontal or vertical alignment; shall be spaced not more
than 300 feet apart on pipe of 24 inches internal diameter
or less, and not more than 450 feet apart where larger
sizes are installed. Inlets may be substituted for manholes
where they will serve a useful purpose. Manhole frames
and covers shall be good quality cast iron; covers shall be
marked "STORM" and have a minimum weight of 220
pounds.
[3] Location within Borough right-of-way. Storm sewer lines
within street rights-of-way shall be placed at locations
acceptable to the Borough. They shall be protected by a
cover of at least 18 inches.
[4] Location within state right-of-way. Drainage structures
that are to be located within state rights-of-way shall be
approved by PennDOT, and a letter from the Department
indicating such approval shall be submitted to the
Borough.
[5] Inlet requirements.
[a] Subsurface storm drainage systems shall have
PennDOT approved inlets located as may be required
by the Borough to intercept runoff. Inlets shall be
designed and located to prevent hazards to vehicles,
bicycles, and pedestrians.
[b] Inlet (Catch Basin) design. Inlet spacing and flow
capacity shall be in accordance with Chapter 10,
Drainage Design, PennDOT Design Manual Part 2,
Highway Design, latest revision.
§ 600-55 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-55
1:478
[6] Endwall requirements. PennDOT approved endwalls shall
be required at ends of all stormwater conveyance
structures. Generally, these structures will be built of
3,000 psi concrete, except in special cases where 3,500 psi
may be required by the Borough upon review by the
Borough Engineer. Special care shall be used by the design
engineer to select the proper endwall to fit the condition.
[7] Drainage collected by a headwall or catch basin. In all
cases where drainage is collected by a headwall or catch
basin, where inlet or outlet control may govern, the pipe
shall be designed as a culvert. The allowable headwater
should be determined by the specific entrance conditions
and sound engineering judgement. The design of culverts
shall not create excessive headwater depths.
[8] Coefficient of roughness (n).
[a] A roughness (n) value of 0.012 shall be used for all
concrete pipe.
[b] Roughness (n) values for other materials should be
fully documented with manufacturer's other reliable
data.
[9] Erosion controls. Provisions shall be made to minimize
erosion within watercourses and at points of discharge
from storm drainage facilities through the use of proper
ground cover or riprap.
(f) Storm sewer pipe requirements. Storm sewers shall be
adequate for the anticipated runoff when the area is fully
developed as permitted by zoning, and capable of carrying the
design storm as specified in this section.
[1] Storm drainage pipe materials. All storm drainage pipes
shall be constructed in accordance with PennDOT Section
408 road construction standards.
[2] They shall have a minimum internal diameter of 15 inches
and a minimum grade of 0.5% (2 of 1%) unless otherwise
recommended by the Borough Engineer.
[3] Maximum internal pipe diameter shall be 60 inches.
Special box culverts or open channels shall be used when a
sixty-inch pipe is not capable of carrying the design storm.
[4] Open channels will not be permitted where a conduit equal
to or less than 60 inches in diameter can be constructed.
[5] When polyethylene pipe is to be used, all pipe ends that
would be exposed to the environment (i.e., at-grade inlets
§ 600-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-55
1:479
or outlets) shall be protected from damage by use of a
concrete headwall or endwall.
[6] At-grade inlets or outlets of concrete pipe may use
concrete end sections.
[7] At-grade pipe outlet and inlets shall be provided with a
flared end section or a headwall.
[8] Permissible flow velocities.
[a] Minimum. The minimum flow velocity shall be 22 feet
per second for the design storm.
[b] Maximum. There is no fixed limitation for the
maximum permitted velocity in storm sewer pipes.
However, the design shall consider minor losses due to
bends, restrictions, manholes, etc. and erosion
potential at pipe outlets. The pipe manufacturer's
suggested maximum velocity, if any, shall also be
considered in the pipe design.
(g) Open channels (swales).
[1] Drainage swales. Drainage swales should be incorporated
into the land development or subdivision to convey
concentrated stormwater flows away from streets and
structures and toward stormwater control devices, storm
sewers, or water bodies. Because of their critical nature,
the design of all vegetated channels shall, at a minimum,
conform to the design procedures outlined in the
Pennsylvania Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Handbook.
[2] Drainage swale crossings. When drainage swales are
transversed by driveways or other crossings, design and
construction details of the crossing shall be provided and
consideration shall be given to the effects the crossing has
on the flow of stormwater through the swale.
[3] Open channels shall be designed in accordance with good
engineering practices, using published design procedures.
[4] Open channels within street right-of-way shall be of the
parabolic type not exceeding six feet in width and one foot
in depth.
[5] The velocity in open channels shall be limited to four feet
per second.
[6] Open channels within street rights-of-way shall be
designed to carry the design storm to a maximum of 10 cfs
with three inches of free board.
§ 600-55 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-55
1:480
[7] In situations where the requirements of this section cannot
be met, storm sewer rather than open channels shall be
used to convey the stormwater.
[8] Open channels shall not be used in street rights-of-way
where curbing is to be installed. Stormwater conveyance
shall be via storm sewer in these cases.
[9] Open channels shall not be used to convey stormwater
within street rights-of-way on slopes exceeding 8%. In
these cases, storm sewer shall be used. Open channels
shall have a minimum slope of 1%, and shall be designed to
avoid ponding and standing water.
(h) Standards for drainage of streets.
[1] Discharge of surface water. All streets shall be designed as
to provide for the discharge of surface water from their
rights-of-way.
[2] Surface cross drainage. Surface cross drainage in
intersections or in tangent sections of roadway will not be
permitted.
(3) Design of detention facilities.
(a) General requirements.
[1] Adequate assurances. Where detention basins are
permitted by the Borough, adequate assurances of
maintenance, indemnification, liability insurance, and
security shall be provided and approved by the Borough.
[2] Design and location. Detention facilities shall be designed
and located so as to not present a hazard to the public
health or safety. Their design shall be approved by the
Borough.
[3] Backwater flooding. Such facilities shall be designed so
that no adverse effects will result from backwater flooding.
[4] PADEP permit. Such facilities shall be acceptable to
PADEP when PADEP requires a permit for said facilities.
The designer shall submit proof of PADEP approval.
(b) General design considerations.
[1] Storage volume requirements. The storage volume for all
detention basins shall be computed in accordance with the
methods found in the United States Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service
Technical Release No. 55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, latest approved revision. Other methods may
§ 600-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-55
1:481
be used only when reviewed by the Borough Engineer
and approved by the Borough prior to plan submittal.
The maximum storage volume shall be the largest volume
required to detain the postdevelopment or land
disturbance peak runoff while releasing the
predevelopment peak runoff of the storm frequency as
found in the following table. The Borough may require the
control of more severe storm events if the need to protect
property, public health, safety, or welfare warrants it.
Detaining While Releasing
Postdevelopment of Land
Disturbance Peak Runoff
for a Storm Frequency
of:
Predevelopment Peak
Runoff for a Storm
Frequency of:
2-year 2-year
5-year 2-year
10-year 5-year
25-year 25-year
50-year 50-year
100-year 100-year
[2] Detention pond number and location. The number and
location of detention facilities are subject to the approval
of the Borough.
[3] Low flow drainage. The detention basins shall be provided
with a positive gravity outlet to a natural channel or storm
sewer of adequate capacity.
[4] Storage duration. The storage duration shall not exceed 24
hours. The Borough may require the fencing of water
storage areas when deemed necessary for public safety.
(c) Emergency spillway discharge requirements. The emergency
spillway for all ponds shall be designed to pass the
postdevelopment peak discharge from the one-hundred-year
frequency storm. The principal spillway shall be considered
completely blocked when designing the emergency spillway.
[1] Any discharge through an emergency spillway shall occur
in a manner that will not damage the integrity of the basin
or the downstream drainage area.
[2] Emergency spillways constructed in fill material shall be
lined with erosion control protection.
[3] Construction details shall be provided for the emergency
spillway.
§ 600-55 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-55
1:482
(d) Outlet structure requirements. Outlet structures shall be
designed and specified in accordance with the following
criteria:
[1] The outlet structure shall be the riser type, and shall be
constructed of concrete and placed on a concrete footing
that is a minimum of two feet below grade.
[2] The lowest stage outlet shall be provided with a trash rack.
[3] Details for construction shall be provided for the outlet
structure.
(e) Pond requirements. Detention ponds shall be designed and
specified in accordance with the following criteria:
[1] Detention pond grading requirements. Minimum/
Maximum side slopes of detention basins shall be 50%
(two units horizontally to one unit vertically) on one side
and 33% on the other (aggregate of five units horizontally
to one unit vertically). Depending upon the location and
intended use of the detention facilities during
nonfunctioning times, a side slope of 33% or less for both
slopes may be required by the Borough. Side slopes shall
be kept as close to the natural contours as practical and a
33% slope or less shall be used wherever feasible.
[2] The minimum bottom slope to the outlet shall be 2%.
Lesser slopes may be approved if an adequate low-flow
channel is provided. Low flow channels shall be concrete
or other permanent material that will eliminate ponding on
the flat grade.
[3] An antiseep collar around the outlet pipe shall be
provided.
[4] A profile of the outlet pipe shall be provided on the plans.
[5] Pipe outlets shall be provided with an energy dissipator,
designed in accordance with good engineering practice.
[6] Specifications for pond constructions shall be provided
and should include at a minimum: topsoil stripping, berm
material, berm compaction methods, key trench, and
dimensions of berm.
[7] The pond depth shall include a one foot freeboard above
the highest water elevation for the twenty-five-year storm.
(4) Specific design considerations for stormwater detention basins.
(a) Detention basins shall be designed to facilitate regular
maintenance and periodic desilting and reseeding. Each
§ 600-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-55
1:483
stormwater wetland should be designed with a separate cell
near the inlet to act as a sediment forebay. This forebay should
have a direct and convenient access for cleanout.
(b) Basins shall not be located within floodplains or floodplain
soils.
(c) In residential subdivisions and residential developments,
shallow broad basins are preferred to steep sided basins.
(d) Method of design. The design of stormwater detention basins
shall be according to the methods in the United States
Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service Technical Release No. 55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds, latest approved revision. Other methods may be
used with approval from the Borough.
(e) Minimum standards for earth fill dams. Detention basins which
are designed as earth fill dams shall incorporate the following
minimum standards:
[1] Height. The height of the dam shall not exceed 15 feet,
unless approved by the Borough.
[2] Minimum top width. The minimum top width of dams up to
15 feet in height shall be equal to 3/4 of the dam height,
but in no case shall the top width be less than eight feet.
[3] The area of basins which have more than 50% of the
perimeter of its sides in slopes of greater than 10% or
basins that retain stormwater for more than 24 hours shall
not be included in the open space required.
[4] The maximum slope of the earthen detention basin
embankments shall be four to one. The top or toe of any
slope shall be located a minimum of five feet from any
property line. The minimum top width of the detention
basin berm shall be 10 feet.
[5] Side slopes. The side slopes of the settled earth fill shall
not be steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.
[6] Cutoff trench and core requirements. A cutoff trench at
least four feet deep of compacted relatively impervious
material (Unified Soil Classification CL or ML) is required.
If the side slopes are three horizontal to one vertical or
flatter, only a key trench is required. The key trench shall
be at least two feet deep, or extend down to stable
subgrade, whichever is deeper. Minimum bottom widths
for the cutoff and key trench shall be four feet. Maximum
side slopes for the cutoff and key trenches shall be one
horizontal to one vertical.
§ 600-55 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-55
1:484
[7] A compacted impervious core at least three feet wide at
the top, having a maximum side slope of one horizontal to
one vertical, shall extend for the full length of the
embankment, and the top elevation shall be set at the tenyear
design water surface elevation.
[8] Cutoff collars. All pipes and culverts through dams shall
have properly spaced concrete cutoff collars.
[9] Allowance for settlement. The emergency spillway and top
of berm shall be constructed at least six inches above the
design elevations to allow for settlement of the
embankment.
D. Plan requirements. Prior to the preliminary approval of subdivision and/
or land development plans, the owner, subdivider, developer or his
agent shall submit a stormwater management plan to the Borough and
receive approval of said plan. No agency who prepares the plan shall be
the agency who approves the plan.
(1) Plan contents. The following items, where appropriate, shall be
included in the plan:
(a) General.
[1] General description of the project.
[2] General description of erosion and sedimentation controls.
[3] General description of stormwater controls both during
and after development.
[4] Expanded project time schedule, including anticipated
start and completion dates.
(b) Map(s) of the project area showing:
[1] The location of the project relative to highways,
municipalities, or other identifiable landmarks.
[2] Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may
be used.
[3] Streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands, or other water bodies
within the project area, or which will be affected by runoff
from the project.
[4] Other physical features, including existing drainage
swales and areas of natural vegetation to be preserved.
[5] Delineation of any existing wetlands as classified by a
qualified environmental scientist experienced in wetland
determination is recommended.
§ 600-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-55
1:485
[6] Location of existing or proposed overhead and
underground utilities, sewers and water lines.
[7] Soils types and boundaries.
[8] Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
[9] Areas to be cut or filled.
[10] Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
[11] Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may
be used.
(c) Stormwater management controls.
[1] Calculations. All calculations, assumptions, and criteria
used in the design of stormwater management facilities
and in the establishment of the calculated
predevelopment, postdevelopment, and land disturbance
peak discharge.
[2] Delineation of drainage areas. A map(s) clearly delineating
and labeling all drainage areas used in the design of storm
sewer facilities, swales, and detention basins.
[3] Plans and profiles. All plans and profiles of proposed
stormwater management facilities (storm sewers, swales,
etc.), including horizontal and vertical location, size, and
type of material. This information shall provide sufficient
information required for the construction of all facilities.
[4] Detention basin staging. For all detention basins, a
plotting or tabulation of storage volumes with
corresponding water surface elevations and outflow rates
for those water surfaces.
[5] Detention basin inflow and outflow. For all detention
basins, the design inflow and outflow and routing
calculations to determine the function of the basin.
[6] Schedule for installation. A narrative describing the
schedule for installation of the control measures and
devices shall be provided.
[7] Drainage right-of-way. A twenty-five-foot wide drainage
right-of-way around all stormwater management
structures and from such structures to a public right-ofway
shall be provided.
(d) Maintenance program. Proposals for the ownership and
maintenance responsibilities for all proposed storm drainage
facilities shall be submitted to the Borough for review and
§ 600-55 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-55
1:486
approval. The Borough shall be satisfied that sufficient
provision has been made for adequate and perpetual
maintenance of all such facilities. All drainage facilities to be
owned by the developer or his assigns shall be maintained to
retain their design capacity.
(2) Plan approval.
(a) Conditions of approval. The Borough shall grant plan approval
only after it has been determined that the proposed work to be
undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of
this and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
(b) Solicitation of comments. A copy of all plans and calculations
for any proposed construction or development to be considered
for approval may be submitted by the Borough to any other
appropriate agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning
Commission, Conservation District, Borough Engineer, etc.) for
review and comment.
(c) Government permits. Prior to the approval of the plan, all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal
laws shall have been obtained, including, but not limited to,
those required by Act 537, the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., the Dam Safety and Encroachments
Act, 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., the United States Clean Water Act,
§ 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1334, and the Pennsylvania Clean Streams
Act, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
(d) Plan review. The Borough or their designee shall review the
plan and comments from any other appropriate agencies and/
or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Conservation
District, Borough Engineer, etc.).
(e) Applicant notification. The Borough shall notify the applicant
within 90 days from receipt of a complete plan submission of
its decision.
(f) Plan disapproval. A disapproval shall contain the reasons for
disapproval and a listing of the plan deficiencies.
(3) Modification of plans. A modification to an approved stormwater
management plan which involves a change in control methods or
techniques, or which involves the relocation or redesign of control
measures, or which is necessary because soil or other conditions
are not as stated on the approved application (as determined by the
Borough or its designee), shall be approved under the procedures
contained in § 600-15 of these standards. The Borough or its
designee shall notify the applicant when such plan modification is
required.
E. Inspections.
§ 600-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-55
1:487
(1) Schedule of inspections.
(a) The Borough or its designee shall inspect all phases of the site,
including, but not limited to:
[1] Completion of preliminary site preparation, including
stripping of vegetation, stockpiling of topsoil, and
construction of temporary stormwater management and
erosion control facilities.
[2] Completion of rough grading, but prior to placing topsoil,
permanent drainage or other site development
improvements and ground covers.
[3] During construction of the permanent stormwater
facilities at such time as specified by the Borough
Engineer.
[4] Upon completion of permanent stormwater management
facilities, including established ground covers and
plantings.
[5] Upon completion of any final grading, vegetative control
measures or other site restoration work done in
accordance with the approved plan.
(b) It is the responsibility of the owner, subdivider, developer, or
his agent to notify the Borough Engineer 24 hours in advance
of the completion of each identified phase of development.
(c) Any portion of the work which does not comply with the
approved plan must be corrected by the developer. No work
may proceed on any subdivision or land development or
building construction until the required corrections have been
made.
(d) If at any stage of the work, the Borough or its designee
determines that the soil or other conditions are not as stated or
shown on the plan, it may refuse to approve further work and
the Borough or its designee may revoke existing approvals
until a revised plan is submitted and approved, as required by
§ 600-15 of these standards.
F. Maintenance.
(1) Maintenance by private entity. In cases where permanent control
facilities are owned by a private entity (such as a homeowners'
association), such entity shall be responsible for maintenance. In
this case a legally binding agreement between the entity and the
Borough shall be made providing for maintenance of all permanent
control facilities, and allowing inspection by the Borough of all such
facilities deemed critical to the public welfare at any reasonable
time.
§ 600-55 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-55
1:488
§ 600-56. Water supply.
(2) Maintenance by individual lot owners. When any stormwater
management facility is located on an individual lot, and when
maintenance thereof is the responsibility of that landowner, a
description of the facility or systems and the terms of the required
maintenance shall be incorporated on a plat of the property. The
plat shall be recorded with the Montgomery County Recorder of
Deeds within 90 days following Borough approval. In addition, the
Borough may require as a condition of approval that any deed
conveying any interest in such lot contain language indicating that
the conveyance is subject to an express covenant by the grantee
that the grantee will maintain the stormwater management facility.
(3) Maintenance note. The following maintenance note shall be
lettered on the record plan for any stormwater management facility
maintained under Subsection F of these standards: "The Borough
shall have the right, but not the duty, to repair, replace or maintain
any drainage facilities shown within the easements provided on the
following lot(s): (List the lot numbers)."
(4) Failure to maintain. If the Borough determines at any time that any
permanent stormwater management control facility has been
eliminated, altered, or improperly maintained, the owner or private
entity which owns the property shall be advised of corrective
measures required and given a reasonable period of time to take
necessary action. If such action is not taken by the property owner,
the Borough may cause the work to be done and lien all costs
against the property in accordance with applicable law.
A. Applicants shall provide a safe, reliable, and adequate water supply
from public water service to support the intended uses approved as part
of a development plan. When water is to be provided by means other
than private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of
lots within a subdivision or land development, applicants shall present
evidence to Borough Council that the subdivision or land development
is to be supplied the Collegeville-Trappe Municipal Authority. A copy of
a certificate of public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative
agreement, or a commitment or agreement to serve to area in question,
whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
B. Fire hydrants shall be located at accessible points throughout the
subdivision and shall be located according to the Borough Engineer. As
a general rule, hydrants should be located at each street intersection
and at intermediate points as recommended by the state Insurance
Services Office. Generally hydrant spacing may range from 350 to 600
feet depending upon the area being serviced. The type and methods of
construction to be employed in the installation of fire hydrants shall be
in accordance with current state and local regulations.
§ 600-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-56
1:489
§ 600-57. Wastewater disposal.
§ 600-58. Solid waste storage.
Central trash storage and recyclable storage areas shall be developed as
follows:
C. Public water supply facilities design. The design for public water supply
facilities shall be in accordance with PADEP Water Supply Manual.
A. Wastewater from a subdivision or land development must be disposed
of in an environmentally safe manner. All sanitary sewers shall be
installed and connected to the Municipal or Authority sanitary sewer
system following review of plans and approval by PADEP and the
Municipal Authority. In areas not presently served by central sanitary
sewers, appropriate sewage disposal must be provided in accordance
with the regulations of PADEP and in addition, the installation and
capping of sanitary sewer mains and house connections may be
required if studies by Borough Council indicate that extension of
sanitary sewers to serve the property subdivided appears probable or
necessary to protect public health. PADEP and the Montgomery County
Department of Health as may be appropriate shall approve the
wastewater disposal systems.
B. Wastewater facilities design standards.
(1) Sewage facilities. The type of sewage facilities developed for a
particular site shall be based upon the recommendations of the
Borough Sewage Facilities Plan developed in accordance with Act
537.
(2) Sewage facilities design. The design and installation of domestic
sewage facilities shall be done in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Domestic Wastewater Facilities Manual prepared by PADEP.
(3) On-site sewage facilities design. The design and installation of onlot
subsurface disposal systems shall be done in accordance with
25 Pa. Code Chapter 73, regulations and the Technical Manual for
Sewage Enforcement Officers and under direction and approval of
the Montgomery County Health Department.
(4) Community sewage facilities. Sewage disposal for more than one
lot on a shared basis, by means of community sewage facilities may
be permitted in compliance with PADEP regulations and Borough
Sewage Facilities Plan.
A. Design.
(1) All trash collection equipment should be placed within enclosures.
Enclosures should be at least large enough to adequately contain
all trash and recyclable material containers. Generally the sizing
and type of storage containers will depend upon the amount of
§ 600-56 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-58
1:490
§ 600-59. Traffic impact study.
trash and recyclables expected to be generated in the buildings
they service.
(2) Enclosures should be six feet high or at least one foot higher than
the proposed collection container.
(3) Enclosures should be made of durable material, including masonry
blocks or steel reinforced wood fencing. In most cases, garden type
fencing or landscaping is not durable enough.
(4) The entrance to the enclosure should be at least 10 feet wide to
accommodate front loading trucks. Gates placed on the entrance
should be durable and equipped with piston type bolts to secure
gates in both a closed and open position.
(5) The trash storage area should be placed on a concrete pad. The
dimensions of the pad are dependent on the number and size of
proposed containers. Ideally, the pad should extend six feet to 10
feet in front of where the proposed container is to be placed to
support the front wheels of the trash truck servicing the site. The
area above the container should be free of obstructions. Generally,
a fifteen-foot clearance above the storage area is sufficient.
B. Locations. In locating a trash storage area several objectives should be
balanced, including spatial demands, distance from source of trash
generation, setback from adjoining property, and access for disposal
trucks. Trash storage may be placed near building service entrances or
loading docks. In apartment or condominium complexes with
centralized waste storage, containers are may be located in an area
which is convenient to each grouping of 10 to 15 units. Spatial
consideration (i.e., loss of parking area or loading space) is important.
During the servicing of these containers (up to five minutes) it is
important that internal circulation at the site is not impeded. Trash
containers ideally should be within a building setback in a given zoning
district. At a minimum, they should be setback in accordance with
accessory structures.
C. Operations. Trash storage containers should be serviced at least once a
week. Recycling containers can be serviced at a less frequent interval.
If a dumpster contains food it should be serviced every three days. A
storage container should have tight fitting lids, secured at all times, and
be leak free. It should also be cleaned out at least two times a year.
A. Purpose. The traffic impact study will enable Collegeville Borough to
assess the impact of the proposed development on the transportation
system, both highways and public transportation, in the Borough.
Purpose of the impact study is to insure that proposed developments do
not adversely affect the transportation network and to identify any
traffic problems associated with access between the site and the
§ 600-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-59
1:491
existing transportation network. The study's purpose is also to
delineate solutions to potential problems and to present improvements
to be incorporated into the proposed development. The study shall
assist in the protection of air quality, conservation of energy and
encouragement of public transportation use.
B. A traffic impact study shall be prepared by a qualified traffic engineer
and/or transportation planner with previous traffic study experience.
Procedures and standards for a traffic impact study are as set forth
herein. Applicant may provide funds to the Borough to enable the
Borough to hire a traffic engineer of its choice to conduct the study, if
this procedure is deemed appropriate and approved by the Borough.
C. Applicability. A traffic impact study shall be submitted as part of all
subdivision, land development and conditional use applications for all
residential subdivisions of 20 lots or more and all commercial, office,
industrial, institutional or other uses requiring land development
approval. Borough Council, at its discretion, may require any other
subdivision or land development application to be accompanied by a
traffic impact study; provided, however, that Borough Council notify the
applicant within 60 days following Borough Council's first meeting to
consider the proposal. Such a notification shall specify the reason for
the requirement, citing the proposal's particular location or existing
problems or type of use. The Collegeville Borough Council, at its
discretion, may waive the requirement for a traffic impact study. If
required by Borough Council, the developer of a land development shall
provide emergency signal preemption for any traffic signals located
within or immediately adjacent to the development. An application
which requires a traffic impact study shall not be considered complete
until the traffic impact study is submitted to the Borough in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
D. Definitions.
ENGINEERING AND TRAFFIC STUDIES — Shall be prepared in
accordance with 67 Pa. Code Chapter 201, Engineering and Traffic
Studies.
LEVEL OF SERVICE — As described in the 2000 Highway Capacity
Manual, indicates how well traffic moves on a particular highway
facility or through a specific intersection. There are six levels of
servicing ranging from "A" through "F." Level of Service "A" indicates
generally free movement. Level of Service "F" represents maximum
capacity of the facility. Level "F" indicates congestion. Level of Service
"C" is considered the design level of service, representing a stable
traffic flow and a relatively satisfactory travel speed.
MAJOR INTERSECTION — Any intersection where traffic generated
by the proposal will have significant impact on the operation of the
intersection and/or any other intersection involving an arterial road.
Where doubt exists, the traffic engineer shall seek guidance from
Borough Engineer prior to the submission of the traffic impact study.
§ 600-59 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-59
1:492
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION — Transportation service for the general
public provided by a common carrier of passengers generally on a
regular route basis, or a private operator offering service to the public.
QUEUE ANALYSIS — This procedure includes the average queue and
maximum queue of vehicles which will be observed in each traffic
stream and intersection approach, measured in both feet and vehicles.
Various statistical and/or computer models may be applied.
STUDY AREA — This area will extend approximately 1/2 mile along
the adjacent roadways in all directions from all access points or the
first major intersection along these roadways. Where doubt exists, the
traffic engineer shall seek guidance from the Borough Engineer prior to
the submission of the traffic impact study.
TRIP GENERATION RATES — The total count of trips to and from a
study site per unit of land use as measured by parameters such as
dwelling units, acres, etc.
VOLUME/CAPACITY ANALYSIS — This procedure compares the volume
of a roadway or intersection approach to its capacity (maximum number
of vehicles that can pass a given point during a given time period). The
procedures described in the 2000 Highway Capacity Manual or latest
Highway Research Board Special Report 209 shall be followed.
WARRANTS FOR TRAFFIC SIGNAL INSTALLATION — This is a series
of warrants which detail the minimum traffic or pedestrian volumes or
other criteria necessary for the installation of a traffic signal. These
warrants are contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways, United States Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 2003, as amended, or
the most recent version, whichever is later.
E. General requirements and standards. A traffic impact study shall
contain the following information:
(1) General site description. The site description shall include the size,
location, proposed land uses, construction staging and completion
date of the proposed subdivision or land development. If the
development is residential, types of dwelling units shall also be
included. A brief description of other major existing and proposed
developments within the study area shall be provided. The general
site description shall also include probable socioeconomic
characteristics of potential site users to the extent that they may
affect the transportation needs of the site (i.e., number of senior
citizens).
(2) Transportation facilities description. The description shall contain
a full documentation of the proposed internal and existing external
transportation system. This description shall include proposed
internal vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation, all proposed
ingress and egress locations, all internal roadway widths and
rights-of-way, parking conditions, traffic channelization and any
§ 600-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-59
1:493
traffic signals or other intersection control devices at all
intersections within the site. The report shall describe the entire
external roadway system within the study area and include
discussion of existing design deficiencies and potential safety
hazards. Major intersections in the study area shall be identified
and sketched. All existing and proposed public transportation
services and facilities within a one-mile radius of the site shall also
be documented. Report shall include review and discussion of all
available accident reports within the study area during the prior
three years. All future highway improvements, including proposed
construction and traffic signalization, shall be noted. The four-year
regional transportation improvement program maintained by the
Delaware Valley Regional Planning Commission and the PennDOT
twelve-year plan shall be used as a source of information when
determining if any future roadway improvements are scheduled for
the adjacent road network. Any proposed roadway improvements
due to proposed surrounding developments shall be recorded.
(3) Existing traffic conditions. Existing traffic conditions shall be
measured and documented for all roadways and intersections in
the study area. Existing traffic volumes for average daily traffic,
peak highway hour(s) traffic, and peak development generated
hour(s), and documentation shall be included in the report. Traffic
counts are to be performed from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and from
3:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. Traffic count data shall not be more than one
year old. Traffic counts shall be taken on a Tuesday, Wednesday, or
Thursday of a nonholiday week. Traffic counts shall be taken during
the school year. Traffic counts shall be collected during average
volume conditions, during fair weather, and in consideration of any
construction activities or special events which may be taking place
in the area. Additional counts (conducted on a Saturday for a
commercial development or residential development in close
proximity to the commercial district or tourist attractions) may also
be required in some cases. The Borough Engineer shall make such
determinations. Traffic counts shall be submitted in electronic
format to the Borough. Roadway characteristics shall be described
and illustrated. Features to be addressed shall include lane
configurations, geometry, signal timing, traffic control devices,
posted speed limits, and sight distance limitations. Existing levels
of service shall be calculated for all intersections and turning
movements within the study area. This analysis will determine the
adequacy of the existing roadway system to adequately serve the
existing traffic demand. Roadways, intersections, or individual
movements experiencing levels of service below C, and/or volume/
capacity ratios greater than or equal to 1.0 shall be noted as
deficient. A volume/capacity analysis based upon existing volumes
shall be performed during the peak highway hour(s) and the peak
development generated hour(s) for all roadways and major
intersections in the study area. Levels of service shall be
determined for each location using the current edition of the
§ 600-59 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-59
1:494
Highway Capacity Manual methodology. All analysis must utilize
Highway Capacity Software, version 4.1e, or latest.
(4) Transportation impact of the development. Estimation of vehicular
trips to result from the proposal shall be completed for the average
daily peak highway hour(s) and peak development-generated
hour(s). Vehicular trip generation rates to be used for this
calculation shall be obtained from the manual, Trip Generation,
Seventh Edition, Institute of Transportation Engineers, 2003 (as
amended). These development-generated traffic volumes shall be
provided for the inbound and outbound traffic movements as
estimated, and the reference source(s) methodology followed shall
be documented. All turning movements shall be calculated. These
generated volumes shall be distributed to the study area and
assigned to the existing roadways and intersections throughout the
study area. Documentation of all assumptions used in the
distribution and assignment phase shall be provided. Traffic
volumes shall be assigned to individual access points. If school
crossings are to be used, pedestrian volumes shall be assigned to
each crossing. Any characteristics of the site that will cause
particular trip generation problems shall be noted.
(5) Analysis of transportation impact. The total future traffic demand
shall be calculated. This demand shall consist of the combination of
the existing traffic expanded to the completion year (using a
background growth rate for the area from PennDOT, Pennsylvania
Traffic Data, latest edition), the development-generated traffic, and
the traffic generated by other proposed developments in the study
area. A separate trip distribution figure shall be provided. A
second/volume capacity analysis shall be conducted using the
future conditions volumes without development. This analysis shall
be performed during the peak highway hour(s) and peak generated
hour(s) for all roadways and major intersections in the study area.
Level of service calculations shall be completed for all major
intersections. A third/volume capacity analysis shall be conducted
using the total future demand and the future roadway capacity. If
staging of the proposed development is anticipated, calculations
for each stage of completion shall be made. This analysis shall be
performed during the peak highway hour(s) and peak developmentgenerated
hour(s) for all roadways and major intersections in the
study area. Level of service calculations shall be completed for all
major intersections. It is usually at these locations that capacity is
most restricted. All access points and pedestrian crossings shall be
examined as to the feasibility of installing traffic signals. This
evaluation shall compare the projected traffic and pedestrian
volumes to the warrants for traffic signal installation.
(6) Sight distance analysis. Sight distance measurements shall be
performed at any proposed driveway and/or existing driveway to
determine sufficient sight distance to the left and right of the
§ 600-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-59
1:495
driveway. Sight distances shall be compared to the desirable sight
distance standards as specified in 67 Pa. Code Chapter 441, Access
to and Occupancy of Highways by Driveways and Local Roads,
January, 1992. Sight distance shall also be compared to PennDOT's
safe stopping sight distance (SSSD) requirements as specified in
A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, of the
American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO), Chapter III, Elements of Design, 1994.
(7) Auxiliary lane analysis. An auxiliary lane analysis shall be
completed utilizing Highway Research Record (HRR) 211. HRR 211
provides graphs based upon the speed of the roadway and the
percentage of left turns. Utilizing the future build with
development traffic volumes, points shall be plotted on the graphs.
Based on the plotted points it should be determined that the study
area intersections associated with the proposed developments do
or do not satisfy the left turn lane warrant. Right turn lane analysis
should be based upon the Access Management, Location and
Design Participant Notebook, Publication Number FHWAHI-
92-033, United States Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration NHI Course Number 15255, October
1991. Deceleration lanes should be provided for all high volume
driveways. For low and medium volume driveways, the designer
should refer to the Colorado and Virginia DOT deceleration lane
warrants.
(8) Conclusions and recommended improvements. Levels of service for
all roadways and intersections shall be listed. All individual turning
movement of roadways and/or intersections showing a level of
service below "C" shall be considered deficient, and specific
recommendations for the elimination of these problems shall be
listed. This listing of recommended improvements shall include,
but not be limited to the following elements: internal circulation
design, site access location and design, external roadway and
intersection design/safety improvements, traffic signal installation
and operation, including signal timing, and transit design
improvements. All physical roadway improvements shall be shown
in sketches. Existing and/or future public transportation service
shall also be addressed. A listing of all actions to be undertaken to
increase present public transportation usage and improve service,
if applicable shall be included. The listing of recommended
improvements for both roadways and transit shall include, for each
improvement, the party responsible for the improvement, the cost
and funding of the improvement and the completion date for the
improvement. The study shall outline mitigation measures and
demonstrate any changes to the level of service achieved by these
measures. Any alternatives or suggested phasing of improvements
shall be described. The mitigation measures may include
recommendations such as roadway widening, turning lanes,
deceleration lanes/tapers, changes to signalization, use of access
§ 600-59 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-59
1:496
management techniques, or a reduction in the proposed intensity
of the use. The responsibility and timing of all recommended
roadway improvements shall be described within the traffic impact
study.
F. Time of submission. The traffic impact study shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission with the preliminary plan submission. Revisions
to preliminary plans may constitute the need for resubmission of the
traffic impact study for the revised conditions. Improvement plans shall
not be submitted to PennDOT until after review by the Montgomery
County Planning Commission and Borough Council.
G. Implementation. Borough Council shall review the traffic impact study
to analyze its adequacy in solving any traffic problems that will occur
due to the land development or subdivision. Borough Council may
determine that certain improvements on and/or adjacent to the site and
within the study area are necessary requirements for land development
or subdivision plan approval and may attach these as conditions to the
approval. If Borough Council determines that such additional
improvements are necessary, the developer shall have the opportunity
to submit alternative improvement designs to obtain plan approval.
H. Emergency response organizations. The Borough shall submit all land
development plans proposing the construction of nonresidential
buildings or multifamily residential dwellings to the Fire Department,
Police Department and any other emergency response organization
having jurisdiction within the area of the proposed development for
review and comment.
§ 600-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-59
1:497

ARTICLE V
Improvement Construction Requirements
§ 600-60. Applicability.
Before the final plan is signed and made ready for recording or prior to
the issuance of any permits needed for construction or occupancy of any
subdivision or land development, all applicants are required to complete
to the satisfaction of Borough Council all required public improvements in
manner set forth in this article.
§ 600-61. Completion or guarantee of required improvements.
No final plan shall be approved until the applicant has either:
A. Completed all of the improvements required by Borough Council for
final plan approval, in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
B. Provided a proper financial security for those improvements, as
required by this article, in compliance with the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., to cover the
estimated costs for completion of those improvements.
(1) The work completed or guaranteed shall be in strict accordance
with the approved plans and the requirements of this chapter.
(2) No lot in a subdivision may be sold, and no permit to erect, alter, or
repair any building upon land in a subdivision or land development
will be issued unless and until a subdivision and/or land
development plan has been approved, and where required,
recorded, and until the required improvements in connection
therewith have either been completed or guaranteed for
completion as required herein.
(3) The applicant shall also guarantee that no lot will be sold or
building constructed in any floodplain area except in compliance
with the floodplain management requirements of this chapter, the
Zoning Ordinance, and the Building Code.178
(4) Deferral or waiver of required improvements. Borough Council may
defer or waive at the time of final plan approval, subject to
appropriate conditions, the provision of any or all required
improvements, as in its judgment, are not requisite in the interests
of public health, safety and welfare, or which are inappropriate due
to the inadequacy or nonexistence of connecting facilities. A
separate public improvement agreement may be executed by
Borough Council guaranteeing completion of any deferred
improvement.
178. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning, and Ch. 270, Uniform Construction Codes,
respectively.
§ 600-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-62
1:499
§ 600-62. Financial security.
A. In lieu of the completion of improvements required for final plan
approval, financial security, in an amount required, shall be guaranteed
to the Borough in compliance with the applicable requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq. Such
financial security shall assure the complete installation of all the
required improvements to be completed on or before the date fixed in
the plan approval, subdivision agreement, and/or development
agreement for completion of such improvements.
B. The amount of such security to be posted for the completion of required
improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the developer. Annually, the Borough may adjust the amount of the
required financial security by comparing the actual cost of
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for
the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of
the ninetieth day after the original scheduled date for completion or a
rescheduled completion date.
C. In determining the cost of the completion of improvements for setting
the amount of financial security required in § 600-62, such cost shall be
based upon an estimate of the cost of completion of required
improvements submitted by the applicant or developer, and prepared
by a professional engineer and certified to be fair and reasonable. The
Borough under recommendation of the Borough Engineer may refuse to
accept the estimate for good reasons provided to the applicant. If the
applicant or developer and the Borough are unable to agree upon an
estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by
another professional engineer which is mutually chosen by the Borough
and the applicant. The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be
presumed to be fair and reasonable and shall be the final estimate.
D. When requested by the applicant in order to facilitate financing,
Borough Council shall furnish the applicant with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the final plan contingent upon the
applicant obtaining a satisfactory financial security. Final plans will not
be signed or recorded until the financial improvements agreement is
executed. The resolution of contingent approval shall expire and be
deemed to be revoked if the financial security agreement is not
executed within 90 days, unless a written extension is granted by
Borough Council.
E. The Borough at its option, may accept financial security in cash in the
form of an irrevocable letter of credit, escrow account or surety bond
with a bonding company or commonwealth or federal chartered lending
institution chosen by the party posting financial security provided said
institution or company is authorized to conduct such business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 600-62 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-63
1:500
§ 600-63. Release from liability.
Borough Council may release all or parts of the posted financial security
as completion of improvements proceeds, in compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq.
A. Partial release of security. As the work of the installation of the required
public improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial security
may request the Borough to release or authorize the release, from time
to time, such portions of the financial security necessary for the
payment of the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any
such request shall be done in writing addressed to the Borough. Upon
receipt of the request for release of a portion of the improvement
security, the Borough shall within 45 days allow the Borough Engineer
to certify, in writing, that such portion of the public improvements has
been completed in accordance with the approved plan at which time the
Borough shall authorize the release to the applicant or his designee by
the bond company or lending institution of an amount of funds that the
Borough Engineer feels fairly represents the value of the work
completed. If the Borough fails to act upon a request for release of
security within 45 days, the Borough shall be deemed to have approved
the full release of security as requested.
B. Incomplete improvements. If the required improvements are not
completely installed within the period fixed or extended by Borough
Council, Borough Council may:
(1) Declare the financial security in default and require that all
improvements be installed regardless of the of the extent of the
building development at the time the agreement is declared in
default.
(2) Suspend final plan approval until the development improvements
are completed and record a document to that effect for the purpose
of public notice.
(3) Obtain funds under the security and complete improvements.
(4) Assign the right to receive funds under the security to any third
party, including a subsequent owner of the property wherein
improvements were not completed in exchange for that subsequent
owner's promise to complete improvements.
(5) Exercise any other available rights under the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
C. Postcompletion security. The applicant shall be responsible for
maintenance of all improvements until they are offered for dedication
and accepted by the Borough. Fifteen percent of the financial security
may be held back to ensure that the public improvements are
maintained until they are dedicated.
§ 600-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-64
1:501
§ 600-64. Inspection of work and materials.
§ 600-65. Off-site improvements.
Certain improvements beyond the geographical boundaries of a site to
be subdivided and/or developed, including but not limited to road
improvements, may be required to be constructed where it can clearly be
demonstrated that such improvements have been made necessary solely
through the additional burden imposed by the subdivision and/or
development of the site. All such improvements or contributions for future
off-site improvements shall be considered voluntary and will not be
refunded to the developer. The developer may also be requested to cover
certain costs which must be incurred by the Borough or other governmental
jurisdiction in order to make these improvements feasible. The legal and
financial arrangements to cover costs of the off-site improvements shall be
the same as those prescribed in § 600-62.
§ 600-66. Conditions of acceptance.
A. Notice. The Borough Engineer shall be notified 48 hours in advance of
the commencement of any construction or installation operation, in
order that provision may be made for inspection by the Borough.
Construction and installation operations shall also be subject to
inspection by the Borough during the progress of the work. The
subdivider, developer or builder shall pay the reasonable and necessary
expenses for inspections, in accordance with the fee schedule
established by resolution of Borough Council.
B. Improvement specifications. All required road improvements should be
constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
PennDOT, Form 408, current edition, including the latest revisions and
other applicable regulations. All other required improvements shall be
constructed in accordance with approved specifications found in the
Borough's engineering standards.
(1) Specifications. The specifications will be furnished to the applicant
by the Borough. If any of the specifications are unavailable at the
Borough office, the Borough Engineer shall provide the applicable
specifications.
(2) Sample of materials. During or after construction of any required
improvement, if the Borough requires a sample of materials, said
sample shall be furnished by the appropriate contractor, in a form
specified by the Borough Engineer.
C. Delivery slips. Copies of all delivery slips for materials used in the
construction of any storm sewers, sanitary sewers, roads, curbs,
sidewalks, or any other facility within a Borough right-of-way or
easement shall be supplied to the Borough.
§ 600-64 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-66
1:502
§ 600-67. Guarantee of completed improvements.
When Borough Council accepts dedication of required improvements
following their completion, Borough Council may require posting of
financial security by the applicant to secure the structural integrity and
functioning of these improvements in accordance with the design and
specifications as depicted on the approved final plan.
A. Conditions. The Borough shall have no obligation to accept dedication
of any street or other improvement unless:
(1) The required improvements, utility mains and laterals, and
monuments, shown on the approved plan or plans have been
constructed to meet all requirements, and are free of defects or
deterioration.
(2) It is established to the satisfaction of Borough Council that there is
a need for the dedication of improvements.
B. Acceptance. The Borough shall have no responsibility with respect to
any street or other improvement, notwithstanding the use of the same
by the public, unless the street or other improvement is accepted by an
ordinance (or resolution) adopted by Borough Council.
C. Offer of dedication.
(1) The applicant shall submit a written offer of dedication to the
Borough for the streets or other improvements, including the
following:
(a) A deed of dedication covering the improvements.
(b) A copy of a title insurance policy establishing the applicant's
clear title to the property.
(2) The items required in Subsection A(1), above, shall be submitted to
the Borough Engineer and Solicitor for their review and
recommendations.
(3) Borough Council may accept dedication of the streets or other
improvements by passing a resolution to that effect.
A. Said financial security shall be of the same type as otherwise required
by § 600-62, herein.
B. The amount of financial security shall be 15% of the actual cost of
installation of the improvements.
C. The term of the guarantee shall be 18 months from the date of
acceptance of dedication.
§ 600-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-68
1:503
§ 600-68. Private maintenance of improvements.
Where the maintenance of improvements is to be the responsibility of
individual lot owners, a homeowners' association or similar entity, or an
organization capable of carrying out maintenance responsibilities, Borough
Council shall require that maintenance responsibilities be set forth in
perpetual covenants or deed restrictions binding on the landowners'
successors in interest, and may further require that an initial maintenance
fund be established in a reasonable manner.
§ 600-69. Required contracts.
Before Borough Council shall cause its approval to be endorsed upon the
final plans of any subdivision or land development (except in the case
of minor subdivisions wherein Borough Council impose no condition or
conditions for the approval of the plan), and as a requirement for the
approval thereof, the owners shall enter into a written agreement with the
Borough in the manner and form set forth by the Borough Solicitor which
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. To construct or cause to be constructed, at the owner's expense, all
streets, curbs, sidewalks, fire hydrants, streetlights, drainage facilities,
water and sewer facilities, street signs, monuments, capped sewers,
parks, and other improvements shown on said final plan when required
to do so by Borough Council in accordance with the standards and
specifications of the Borough.
B. To maintain at the owner's cost the said streets, curbs, sidewalks,
drainage facilities, water and sewer facilities, street signs, parks,
monuments, fire hydrants, streetlights, capped sewers, and other
improvements, until the same are accepted or condemned by the
Borough for public use, and for a period of 18 months thereafter to
repair and reconstruct the same of any part of one of them when such
repair or reconstruction shall be specified by Borough Council as
necessary by reason of faulty construction, workmanship, or materials,
and, at or before acceptance of such improvements by the Borough.
C. To install, or cause to be installed, at the owner's expense and without
any cost to the Borough for any part of such installation, streetlighting
facilities on all streets abutting the subdivision.
D. To pay all costs, charges or rates, of the utility furnishing electric
service for the lighting of the streets on or abutting said subdivision,
from the lights installed by the owner, until such time as the streets
shown on the subdivision plans shall be accepted as public streets of
the Borough by resolution approved by the Court of Quarter Sessions or
condemnation proceedings, and to indemnify and hold harmless the
Borough from and against all suit, actions, claims, and demands for
electric service to the streets shown on said plans, or any part thereof,
to the time that said streets shall be accepted as public streets of the
Borough in the manner hereinabove set forth.
§ 600-68 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-69
1:504
E. Pay the inspection fees required by the Borough.
F. To obtain the easements and releases required when any street,
drainage facility or other improvement wherein a subdivision abuts or
traverses land of persons other than the person holding legal title to the
lands of the subdivision at his own cost, and obtain from the owner of
the lands so abutted or traversed full releases from all damages which
may change in grade, construction, or otherwise, of the street, drainage
facility or other improvements and such releases shall insure to the
benefit not only of the owner of the subdivision but to the Borough as
well.
G. To promptly remove or cause to be removed snow from the streets as
may be required for safe traverse of the streets prior to dedication.
H. To promptly reimburse to the Borough reasonable attorney's and
engineer's fees.
I. Such other provision(s) as deemed necessary or desired by Borough
Council.
§ 600-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-69
1:505

ARTICLE VI
Administration, Fees, and Enforcement
§ 600-70. General administration.
All provisions of this chapter shall be administered by Borough Council
or their officially designated representatives. All matters relating to this
chapter shall be submitted to the Borough Manager who will handle the
matter in accordance with current Borough policies, procedures, and
guidelines established by Borough Council.
§ 600-71. Records.
The Borough shall keep a public record of its correspondence, findings,
recommendations, and actions relating to plans filed for review, in
accordance with the policies, procedures, and guidelines established by
Borough Council and Planning Commission.
§ 600-72. Fees and costs.
A. No sketch plan review shall be performed by any Borough consultant,
including, but not limited to, the Borough Engineer and/or Borough
Solicitor, or any other Borough consultant until such time as the owner/
developer and/or applicant have entered into a professional services
agreement substantially in the form attached hereto as Exhibit "A"179
with the Borough and deposited escrow in the amount set forth in a duly
adopted Borough fee and escrow resolution. Additionally, no application
for preliminary or final plan approval shall be received and processed
until such time as the owner/developer and/or applicant enters into a
professional services agreement substantially in the form attached
hereto as Exhibit "A" and any and all required fees and/or escrow
deposits as established by resolution duly adopted by Borough Council
shall have been paid in full to the Borough. [Amended 3-5-2014 by
Ord. No. 567]
B. Borough Council shall adopt and amend by resolution a schedule of fees
and escrows, payable by the owner/developer or applicant to the
Borough, for review of sketch plans and for the filing of preliminary and
final plans. [Amended 3-5-2014 by Ord. No. 567]
C. Borough Council shall adopt and amend by resolution a schedule of
escrow deposits to be paid by the applicant to the Borough at the time
of filing of an application, sufficient to pay all Borough expenditures
anticipated in the course of its review and disposition of plans.
(1) Costs incurred by the Borough in excess of the escrowed amount
shall be paid by the applicant prior to the granting of approvals or
permits.
179. Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 600-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-72
1:507
(2) If costs incurred by the Borough are less than the escrowed
amount, the difference shall be refunded to the applicant following
disposition of the plans.
D. Borough expenditures subject to escrow as in § 600-72C, above, include
but are not limited to the following:
(1) Engineering and other technical services such as plan review and
construction inspections.
(2) Materials and facilities tests.
(3) Services of the Borough Solicitor in reviewing and/or preparing
documents related to the plan reviews.
(4) Actual costs of recording.
(5) An administrative charge of 15% of the total costs described in the
previous five subsections.
E. Disputes. In the event that the applicant disputes the amount of any
such review fees, the applicant shall within 10 days of the billing date of
the notice of withdrawal by the Borough of an amount for deposit, notify
the Borough that the fees are disputed, in such case the Borough shall
not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development due to the
applicant's request over disputed fees. The following steps shall be
taken to resolve disputes over contested review fees:
(1) In the event that the Borough and the applicant cannot agree on
the amount of any review fees which are reasonable and necessary,
then the Borough and applicant shall jointly by mutual agreement,
appoint another professional engineer to examine the disputed
review fees and make a determination as to the amount thereof
which are fair and reasonable within 50 days.
(2) Following the independent engineer's decision, the applicant shall
pay the entire amount determined immediately.
(3) If the Borough and applicant cannot agree on an independent
engineer within 20 days of the billing date, then upon application of
either party, the President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of
the judicial district in which the municipality is located shall
appoint an engineer who shall be neither the Borough Engineer or
any professional engineer who has been retained by, or performed
services for, the Borough or applicant within the preceding five
years.
(4) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary review fees shall be paid by the applicant
if the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment is less than
the original bill by one $1,000 or more, the Borough shall pay the
professional engineer's fees. Otherwise, the applicant and
§ 600-72 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-72
1:508
§ 600-73. Waiver of requirements.
Upon review and recommendation by the Borough Planning Commission,
Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements of one or
more provisions of this chapter, if the literal enforcement of them would
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land
in question, provided that such modification(s) will not be contrary to the
public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is observed.
All requests for modification(s) shall:
§ 600-74. Enforcement.
Township should each pay one-half of the fees of the professional
engineer.
A. Be in writing and part of an application for subdivision and/or land
development.
B. State the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based.
C. List the provision(s) of this chapter involved.
D. State the minimum modification necessary.
A. Preventative remedies.
(1) In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and
maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover
damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building.
(2) The Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve any real property which has been
developed or has resulted from a subdivision in violation to this
chapter. As an additional condition for the issuance of any permit or
approval, the Borough may require compliance with the conditions
that would have been applicable to the property at which time the
applicant acquired it.
B. Any person, partnership, or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including the
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
C. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied, or be payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
Judge.
D. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure.
§ 600-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-74
1:509
E. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership, or corporation violating this chapter to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial
District Judge and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
F. All fines collected for such violations shall be paid to the Borough.
§ 600-74 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-74
1:510
ARTICLE VII
Amendments, Validity, and Repealer
§ 600-75. Amendment procedure.
Borough Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify, or repeal this chapter by proceeding in accordance with the
regulations of this article. Borough Council shall, by resolution adopted at a
regular or special meeting, fix the time and place of a public hearing on the
proposed amendment and cause public notice thereof to be given according
to the definitions of public hearing and public notice set forth in Article II of
this chapter.
§ 600-76. Referral to Planning Commission.
All proposed amendments before adoption shall be referred to the Borough
and Montgomery County Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
public hearing, for recommendation and report, which shall be advisory.
§ 600-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 600-76
1:511
Chapter 612
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tax Collector — See Ch. 196.
§ 600-76 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 600-76
1:512
ARTICLE I
Earned Income and Net Profits Tax
[Adopted 5-18-1970 by Ord. No. 228 (Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. C, §§ 3-2041
through 3-2060, of the 1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 612-1. Definitions. [Amended 7-2-2003 by Ord. No. 496]
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for
the purpose of this article, the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other
unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other
undertaking of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or
ordinarily conducted for profit whether by a person, partnership,
association, or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or any other state, territory, foreign country or
dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home
and to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed
place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent
rather than transitory. Domicile is the place in which a man has
voluntarily fixed the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere
special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a
permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some
other permanent home. In the case of businesses, or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and
the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME —
All salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses and incentive payments
whether based on profits or otherwise, fees, tips and similar
remuneration received for services rendered whether directly or
through an agent and whether in cash or in property except income
derived from the United States Government for active duty outside
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a member of its armed
forces and other compensation as determined under Section 303 of
the Tax Reform Code of 1971 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part I,
Subpart B, Article V (relating to personal income tax).180 Employee
business expenses are allowable deductions as determined under
Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971.181 The amount of any
(1)
180. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7303 and 61 Pa. Code § 101.1 et seq., respectively.
§ 612-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-1
1:513
housing allowance provided to a member of clergy shall not be
taxable as earned income.
The term "compensation" shall not mean or include:
Periodic payments for sickness and disability other than
regular wages received during a period of sickness or
disability; or
(a)
Disability, retirement or other payments arising under
workmen's compensation acts, occupational disease acts and
similar legislation by any government; or
(b)
Payments commonly recognized as old age or retirement
benefits paid to persons retired from service after reaching a
specific age or after a stated period of employment; or
(c)
Payments commonly known as "public assistance," or
unemployment compensation payments by any governmental
agency; or
(d)
(e) Payments to reimburse actual expenses; or
Payments made by employers or labor unions, including
payments made pursuant to a cafeteria plan qualifying under
Section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (Public
Law 99-514, 26 U.S.C. § 125), for employee benefit programs
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death,
supplemental unemployment benefits or strike benefits,
provided that the program does not discriminate in favor of
highly compensated individuals as to eligibility to participate,
payments or program benefits; or
(f)
Any compensation received by United States servicemen
serving in a combat zone; or
(g)
Payments received by a foster parent for in-home care of foster
children from an agency of the Commonwealth or a political
subdivision thereof or an organization exempt from federal
tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954 which is licensed by the commonwealth or a political
subdivision thereof as a placement agency; or
(h)
Payments made by employers or labor unions for employee
benefit programs covering social security or retirement; or
(i)
Personal use of an employer's owned or leased property or of
employer-provided services.
(j)
(2)
181. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7301 et seq.
§ 612-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-1
1:514
§ 612-2. Imposition of tax.
A tax for general purposes is hereby levied as follows:
EARNED INCOME TAX COLLECTOR — Person, public employee or
private agency designated by the Borough to collect and administer the
tax on earned income and net profits.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation,
institution, governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity
employing one or more persons for salary, wage, commission or other
compensation.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, after provision for all
costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof determined either
on a cash or accrual basis in accordance with accepted accounting
principles and practices but without deduction of taxes based on
income or as otherwise determined under Section 303 of "The Tax
Reform Code of 1971" and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Part I, Subpart B,
Article V (relating to personal income tax).182 The term does not include
income which is not paid for services provided and which is in the
nature of earnings from an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the
business, profession or activity of farming, the term shall not include:
NONRESIDENT — A person, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled outside of the Borough.
PERSON OR INDIVIDUAL — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — A person, partnership, association, or other entity
domiciled in the Borough.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, partnership, association or other entity
required hereunder to file a return of earned income or net profits or to
pay a tax thereon.
Any interest earnings generated from any monetary accounts or
investment instruments off the farming business;
(1)
(2) Any gain on the sale of farm machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
(3)
(4) Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
182. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7303 and 61 Pa. Code § 101.1 et seq., respectively.
§ 612-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-2
1:515
§ 612-3. Declaration and payment of tax.
A. One percent of all earned income earned on and after July 1, 1970 by
residents and nonresidents of the Borough of Collegeville.
B. One percent of the net profits earned on and after July 1, 1970 of
businesses, professions, and other activities conducted by residents
and nonresidents of the Borough of Collegeville.
C. The tax levied under this article shall be applicable to earned income
received and to net profits earned by residents in the period beginning
July 1 of the current year and ending December 31 of the current year,
or for taxpayers fiscal year beginning in the current year, and the tax
shall continue in force on a calendar year basis or taxpayer fiscal year
basis without annual re-enactment, unless the rate of the tax is
subsequently changed. The Borough may by ordinance change the rate.
Such change shall become effective on the date specified in the
ordinance.
A. Tax on net profits.
(1) Beginning with the calendar year January 1, 1971 every taxpayer
who makes any net profits shall on or before April 30 of the then
current year and each year thereafter make and file with the Tax
Collector a declaration of his estimated net profits during the
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of the then
current year. Taxpayer shall pay to the then Earned Income Tax
Collector the total amount of tax determined to be due under the
estimate as follows183:
(a) First payment on or before April 30 with declaration.
(b) Second payment on or before July 31.
(c) Third payment on or before October 31.
(d) Final payment with Final Return between January 1 and April
15.
(2) If a taxpayer after the calendar year 1970 anticipates net profits
after April 30 of the calendar year, then he shall make and file a
declaration on or before July 31, October 31, and April 15 of the
then current year whichever of these dates next follows the date on
which the taxpayer first anticipates such net profits. Taxpayer shall
pay to the Tax Collector in equal installments the amount of tax due
thereon on or before the quarterly payment dates which remain
after the filing of his first declaration.
(3) On April 15 of each calendar year every taxpayer shall file with the
Tax Collector or a final income tax return showing the amount of
183. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(1), which immediately preceded this subsection and
was only applicable to the period from 7-1-1970 through 12-31-1970, was repealed.
§ 612-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-3
1:516
the net profits earned during the period beginning (after 1970)
January 1 of the then current year and ending December 31 of the
then current year the total amount of tax due thereon and the total
amount of tax heretofore paid with the estimated return. At the
time of filing a final return taxpayer shall pay to the Earned Income
Tax Collector the balance of tax due or shall make demand for a
refund or credit in the case of any overpayment. Any taxpayer may
in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of his estimated
tax elect to and make and file with the Tax Collector his final return
on or before January 31 of the succeeding year and to pay the tax
in full at that time.
(4) The Borough shall provide by regulation for the making and filing
of adjusted declarations of estimated net profits for the payments
of the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has filed the
declaration hereinabove required anticipates additional net profits
not previously declared or finds that he has over-estimated his
anticipated net profits.
(5) Discontinuance of business — If a taxpayer discontinues his
business before September 30 of the current year he shall within
30 days after the discontinuance of the business file his final return
as hereinabove required and pay the tax due or make demand for
the refund or credit in the case of an overpayment.
B. Earned income.
(1) Annual earned income tax return — Every taxpayer shall, on or
before April 15 of the succeeding year, make and file with the
Earned Income Tax Collector on a form prescribed, prepared and
supplied by the Earned Income Tax Collector, a final return
showing the total amount of earned income received during the
period beginning July 1, 1970 and ending December 31, 1970 for
the current year and for each year thereafter for the period
beginning January 1 and ending December 31, the total amount of
tax due thereon, the amount of the tax thereon that has been
withheld in the event the provisions relating to withholding
hereinafter set forth have been invoked by the Borough and the
balance of the tax due. At the time of the filing of the final return
the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the tax due or may make a
demand for refund or credit in the case of an overpayment.184
(2) After the calendar year 1970 every taxpayer who is employed for
salary, wage, commission or other compensation who received any
earned income not subject to the provisions relating to collection at
the source, shall make and file with the Earned Income Tax
Collector on a form prepared, supplied and prescribed by the
Earned Income Tax Collector a quarterly return on or before April
184. Editor's Note: Original Subsection B(2), which immediately followed this subsection and
applied only to earned income not subject to withholding earned from 7-1-1970 through
12-31-1970, was repealed.
§ 612-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-3
1:517
§ 612-4. Collection at source.
30 of the current year; July 31 of the current year; October 31
of the current year and January 31 of the succeeding year setting
forth the aggregate amount of earned income not subject to
withholding by him during the three-month period ending March
31 of the current year, June 30 of the current year, September 30 of
the current year, and December 31 of the current year respectively
and subject to the tax together with such other information as the
Earned Income Tax Collector shall require. Every taxpayer who
makes such a return shall at the time of the filing of the return with
the Earned Income Tax Collector pay to the collector the amount of
the tax shown as due thereon.
A. Every employer as hereinbefore described and defined, shall be
obligated from July 1, 1970 and thereafter so long as this article is in
effect to withhold from wages of employees subject to the tax imposed
by this article, the amount of tax due in accordance with the
withholding procedure set forth hereinafter.
B. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough, who employs one or
more persons, other than domestic servants, for salary, wage,
commission or other compensation, who has not previously registered,
shall within 15 days after becoming an employer, register with the
Earned Income Tax Collector his name and address and such other
information as the officer may require.
C. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough who employs one or more
persons other than domestic servants for salary, wage, commission or
other compensation, shall deduct at the time of payment thereof, the
tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his employee or
employees, and shall on or before April 30 of the current year, July 31 of
the current year, October 31 of the current year and January 31 of the
succeeding year, file a return and pay to the Earned Income Tax
Collector the amount of taxes deducted during the preceding three
month periods ending March 31 of the current year, June 30 of the
current year, September 30 of the current year and December 31 of the
current year respectively. Such return, unless otherwise agreed upon
between the Earned Income Tax Collector and employer, shall show the
name and social security number or identification number supplied by
the Tax Collector of each such employee, the earned income of such
employee during such preceding three-month period, the tax deducted
therefrom, the political subdivisions imposing the tax, the total earned
income of all such employees during such preceding three-month
period, and the total tax deducted therefrom and paid with the return.
D. Monthly reporting. Any employer who for two of the preceding four
quarterly periods has failed to deduct the proper tax, or any part
thereof, or has failed to pay over the proper amount of tax to the
§ 612-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-4
1:518
§ 612-5. Earned Income Tax Collector; powers, duties and
regulations; penalty for unlawfully divulging confidential
information.
Borough, may be required by the earned income Tax Collector to file his
return and pay the tax monthly. In such cases, payments of tax shall be
made to the Earned Income Tax Collector on or before the last day of
the month succeeding the month for which the tax was withheld.
E. On or before February 28 of the succeeding year, every employer shall
file with the Earned Income Tax Collector:
(1) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income paid,
the total amount of earned income paid, the total amount of tax
deducted, and the total amount of tax paid to the Earned Income
Tax Collector for the period beginning January 1 of the current year
and ending December 31 of the current year. (July 1, 1970 to
December 31, 1970 for the first year.)
(2) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year, setting
forth the employee's name, address, social security number or
identification number supplied by the Tax Collector, the amount of
earned income paid to the employee during said period, the amount
of tax deducted, the political subdivision imposing the tax upon
such employee, the amount of tax paid to the Earned Income Tax
Collector. Every employer shall furnish two copies of the individual
return to the employee for whom it is filed.
F. Termination of business. Every employer who discontinues business for
any reason prior to December 31 of the current year shall, within 30
days after the discontinuance of business, file the returns and
withholding statements, hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
G. Every employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
deductions required by this section shall be liable for the payments of
the taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent that such
taxes have not been recovered from the employee.
H. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this section shall not relieve any employee from the
payment of the tax or from complying with the requirements of this
article to the filing of declarations and returns.
A. The office of Earned Income Tax Collector is created by this article and
the Borough shall from time to time by separate ordinance appoint a
person or company to administer the provisions of this article who will
be designated the "Earned Income Tax Collector."
B. The Earned Income Tax Collector shall be bonded as Council may
determine, said bond to cover all moneys coming into his hands on
§ 612-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-5
1:519
behalf of the Borough, the costs of the bond to be paid by the Borough.
Before entering upon his official duties, the Earned Income Tax
Collector shall give and acknowledge the bond to the Borough. That
bond shall be in compliance with Act 511 in all respects and subject to
the approval of the Borough Solicitor.
C. The Earned Income Tax Collector shall collect and receive all such
taxes, shall furnish a receipt for payment when requested to do so by a
taxpayer, and shall keep a record showing the amount received by him
for each taxpayer under this article, together with the date of the
receipt of such payment.
D. The Earned Income Tax Collector is empowered to prescribe rules and
regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article,
subject, however, to the approval of council. Those regulations shall be
inscribed by the Earned Income Tax Collector into a book kept for that
purpose and open to the inspection of the public and thereupon shall
have the same force and effect as if it had been incorporated into this
article.
E. The Earned Income Tax Collector, or any other person designated by
the Borough is authorized to examine any of the books, papers, and
records of any employer, supposed employer, taxpayer in order to verify
the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made, to ascertain
the amount of tax due by any person under this article. Every such
employer, supposed employer, taxpayer, or supposed taxpayer shall give
to the Earned Income Tax Collector or such other authorized person the
means, facilities and opportunities for such examination and
investigations authorized by the subsection.
F. The Earned Income Tax Collector is authorized to examine any person
under oath concerning any income which was or should have been
returned for taxation, and shall have the power and is hereby
authorized to issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of persons
whom he deems necessary to examine as witnesses, and to compel the
production of books, records and papers relating to any account being
examined.
G. The Earned Income Tax Collector, or any other official agent of the
Borough, shall have the power to reexamine returns, correct erroneous
returns, consent to make refunds, and authorize the refunding of taxes
erroneously or improperly collected from or paid by, the taxpayers, for
any period of time not to exceed six years subsequent to the date of
payment of the sum involved.
H. Any information gained by the Earned Income Tax Collector or any
other official or agent of the Borough, as a result of any return,
investigation, hearing or examination required or authorized by this
article shall become confidential except for official purposes, or except
in accordance with proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by
§ 612-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-5
1:520
§ 612-6. Suit for collection of tax.
law. Any disclosure of any such information, contrary to the provisions
of this section, shall constitute a violation of this article.
I. Any person who, except as permitted by the provisions of the foregoing
Subsection H of this section, divulges any information which is
confidential under the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof before any Magisterial District Judge, or court of competent
jurisdiction be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 for each
offense and costs, and in default of payment of such fine and costs, to be
imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days.
A. The Earned Income Tax Collector may sue in the name of the Borough
for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due, within three years after
the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no declaration or return was filed by any person although a
declaration or return was required to be filed by him under
provisions of this article, there shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the declaration or return filed by any
person, or of other evidence relating to such declaration or return
in the possession of the Earned Income Tax Collector, reveals a
fraudulent evasion of taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability, 25% or
more, and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article and has failed to pay the amount so deducted to the Earned
Income Tax Collector, or where any person willfully failed or
omitted to make the deductions required by this article, there shall
be no limitation.
(5) This article shall not be construed to limit Council from recovering
the delinquent taxes by any other means provided in the Local Tax
Enabling Act.185
C. The Earned Income Tax Collector may sue for recovery of an erroneous
refund, provided such suit is begun two years after making such refund,
except that the suit may be brought within five years if it appears that
any part of the refund was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of
material fact.
185. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 612-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-7
1:521
§ 612-7. Interest and penalties.
If, for any reason, the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Where suit is
brought for the recovery of any such tax the person liable therefor shall, in
addition, be liable for legal costs of collection and for interest and penalties
herein imposed.
§ 612-8. Fines; violations and penalties.
§ 612-9. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to: personal property or persons to whom or
which is beyond the legal power of the Borough to impose the tax herein
provided; the net profits of any institution, organization, trust, association
or foundation operated for public, religious, educational or charitable
purposes; provided that this subsection shall not operate to relieve or
exempt any such entity from collection at source of earned income of its
employees and remittance of such collections to the Earned Income Tax
Collector.
§ 612-10. Effective date; continuing nature of tax.
This article shall become effective the first day of July 1970 for the period
July 1, 1970 to December 31, 1970, and for all calendar years thereafter.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration or
return required by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register or to pay the taxes deducted from his employees, or
fails, neglects or refuses to deduct withholding taxes from his
employees, any person who refuses to permit the Earned Income Tax
Collector or any agent designated by him to examine his books, records
and papers and any person who knowingly makes any incomplete, false
or fraudulent return, or to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full
disclosure of the amount of his net profits or earned income in order to
avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax imposed by this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, before any Magisterial
District Judge, or court of competent jurisdiction, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $500 for each offense and costs, and, in default of
payment of such fine and cost to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
B. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
C. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the declaration or returns required by this article shall not
excuse him from making such declaration or return.
§ 612-7 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-10
1:522
ARTICLE II
Penalty for Unpaid Taxes
[Adopted 12-1-1976 by Ord. No. 273 (Part 3, Ch. 1, § 3-1002, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 612-11. Penalty established for unpaid taxes.
Pursuant to the authority granted by the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania by Act 126 of 1976, amending Section 10
of the Act of May 25, 1945, P.L. 1050, the Local Tax Collection Law,186 the
Council of the Borough of Collegeville does hereby establish: A penalty of
10% on all taxes which remain unpaid four months after the date of the tax
notice, which penalty shall be added to the taxes due by the tax office and
collected by it.
186. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 5511.1 et seq.
§ 612-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-11
1:523

ARTICLE III
Amusement Device Tax
[Adopted 7-2-1982 by Ord. No. 311 (Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. B, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 612-12. Definitions and interpretations.
§ 612-13. Imposition of tax.
There is hereby imposed a tax, for general Borough purposes, under the
authority of the Act of General Assembly, approved the 31st of December,
1965, P.L. 1257, and its amendments known as "The Local Tax Enabling
Act,"187 upon the privilege of using for profit within the Borough of
Collegeville, any jukebox or mechanical amusement device, as defined in
§ 612-12. Primary liability for the tax imposed under this article shall be
with the actual owner of the amusement device, however, the Borough may,
in assessing the tax, seek payment from any lessee of any device.
§ 612-14. When tax due and payable; annual basis.
The tax imposed under this article shall be payable to the Borough at the
Borough office, on or before the 31st of January of each calendar year. In
the case of machines that are installed after the 31st of January of each
calendar year, the tax imposed under this article shall be paid prior to the
use of the machine or device. No deduction or refund of any tax payable
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated in this article, the following terms
shall have for the purpose of this article the meanings respectively
indicated by this section:
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which,
upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot,
crevice or other opening, operates or may be operated for the emission
of song, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any device, other than a
"jukebox" which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or
disc, may be operated for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score and whether or not a prize is offered.
PERSON — Any natural person, association, copartnership, firm or
corporation owning or operating an amusement device for profit.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. On each mechanical amusement device, $100 for the calendar year or
any portion thereof.
B. On each jukebox, $25 for the calendar year or any portion thereof.
187. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 612-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-14
1:525
under this article shall be granted in the case of any tax payable for less
than a full fiscal year or in the case of the device being destroyed, stolen,
sold or otherwise disposed of, or transferred out of the Borough, after
payment of the tax.
§ 612-15. Certificate furnished to taxpayer; tax payable on
additional machines located on premises.
§ 612-16. Penalty added to unpaid tax.
If any tax levied in pursuance of this article shall not be paid when due, a
penalty of 15% per month of the amount of the tax due and unpaid shall be
added thereto.
§ 612-17. Determination of tax due; access to premises; confidential
nature of information gained.
A. The secretary shall procure, at the expense of the Borough, a sufficient
number of certificates upon each of which the following information
shall be printed or inserted in ink or by typewriter:
(1) The name of the Borough.
(2) The number of the certificate.
(3) The name and address of the person paying the tax.
(4) The year for which the tax shall have been paid.
(5) The date on which the tax shall have been paid.
(6) The amount of the tax paid, name of device.
(7) The location of the premises where the machine is to be operated.
(8) The number of machines on the premises.
B. The secretary shall procure and give to each person having machines in
the Borough a certificate for the person to list the information set forth
above, which is to be completed in duplicate and supplied to the
secretary with payment for the number of devices located on a
premises. The original certificate is subject to approval by the secretary
and shall then be returned to the person paying the tax for retention at
the location where the machines are used. If additional machines are
located on the premises the person, either the owner of the machine or
the proprietor of the premises, shall pay the necessary additional tax to
the secretary.
A. The secretary is authorized and empowered to make a determination of
the tax due by the persons described herein, based upon the facts
contained in the certificate, or upon any information within her
possession, and for this purpose, the secretary, or any authorized agent
or officer of the council is authorized to examine the books, papers and
§ 612-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-17
1:526
§ 612-18. Recovery of unpaid taxes, interest and penalties.
All taxes imposed by this article together with all penalties, interest and
costs, shall be recoverable by the solicitor as debts of like amount are by
law recoverable.
§ 612-19. General revenue status of taxes, interest and penalties.
All taxes, interest and penalties collected or recovered by the secretary or
any other Borough officer or person for or in behalf of the Borough shall be
paid into the Borough treasury as general revenue to be used for general
revenue purposes.
§ 612-20. Administrative expenses payable by Borough.
All expenses incurred in the administration of this article shall be paid by
the Borough.
§ 612-21. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to any person or property as to whom or which
it is beyond the legal power of council to impose the tax or duties provided
for in this article.
§ 612-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall be convicted before any Magisterial District Judge for
violation or failing to carry out any provision or requirement of this article
or of neglecting, failing or refusing to furnish complete and correct returns
or to pay over any tax levied by this article at the time required, or of
knowingly making any incomplete, false or fraudulent return; or of doing
or attempting to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax imposed under this article shall be liable to a fine
or penalty not exceeding $300 for each and every offense and the costs of
prosecution thereof, and in default of payment of any such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided that such fine or penalty
shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other section of this
article.
records of any person taxable under this article, to verify the accuracy
of any certificate or payment made under the provisions thereof or to
ascertain whether the taxes imposed by this article have been paid.
B. Any information gained by the secretary or any other agent or official of
the Borough as a result of any returns, investigations or verification
required or authorized by this article shall be confidential, except for
official purposes and except in accordance with the proper judicial
order or as otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any
information contrary to the provisions of this section shall constitute a
violation of this article.
§ 612-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-23
1:527
§ 612-23. Effective date; continuing nature of tax.
This article shall go into effect 30 days after enactment and the tax levied
under this article shall be imposed for the calendar year ending December
31, 1982, and each calendar year ending on December 31 thereafter.
§ 612-23 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-23
1:528
ARTICLE IV
Real Estate Transfer Tax
[Adopted 1-7-1987 by Ord. No. 340 (Part 3, Ch. 2, Art. D, of the
1985 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 612-24. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Collegeville Borough Real Estate
Transfer Tax Ordinance."
§ 612-25. Imposition of tax; legal authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situate within
Collegeville Borough, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 612-26. Definitions.
The following words or phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
BOROUGH — Collegeville Borough, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint stock association, business trust, or
bank institution which is organized under the laws of this commonwealth,
the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign country or
dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 612-31.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
§ 612-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-26
1:529
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing. Individuals related by the halfblood
or legal adoption shall be treated as if they were related by the wholeblood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Borough, including
without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees,
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance or land, but excluding
permanently attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 612-26 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-26
1:530
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, or presenting for
recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate, or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximately those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber of are charged against other real
estate: Provided, that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under Subsections A or B of this definition,
above, the actual monetary worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
D.
§ 612-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-26
1:531
§ 612-27. Imposition and rate of tax; when due and payable;
evidence of payment; interest added to unpaid tax. [Amended
1-3-2006 by Ord. No. 525]
§ 612-28. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth, or any of its or their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from
payment of the tax imposed by this article. The exemption of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a
transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 612-29. Excluded transactions.
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. For so long as the Perkiomen Valley School District shall continue to
levy and impose a real estate transfer tax on the same person or
transfer then the tax levied hereunder shall be limited to one-half of the
rate fixed under Subsection A of this section as to the person or transfer
subject to a real estate transfer tax by both municipal bodies.
D. Any tax imposed under Subsection A that is not paid by the date the tax
is due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent
municipal claims, under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53
P.S. § 7101, et seq.), as amended, known as "Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate
imposed upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as provided in § 806 of
the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176)(72 P.S. § 806), as amended,
known as "The Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate permitted
under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
A. The tax imposed by § 612-27 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
§ 612-26 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-29
1:532
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, Borough, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, Borough, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no consideration or for nominal actual consideration
which corrects or confirms a transfer previously recorded, but
which does not extend or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no consideration or for nominal
actual consideration of property passed by testate or intestate
succession and held by cotenants; however, if any of the parties
take shares greater in value than their undivided interest, tax is
due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree of divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no consideration or for nominal actual consideration
of property passing by testate or intestate succession from a
personal representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or
heir.
(8) A transfer for no consideration or for nominal actual consideration
to the trustee of an ordinary trust where the transfer of the same
property would be exempt if the transfer was made directly from
the grantor to all of the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such
beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. No such
exemption shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is
presented with a copy of the trust instrument that clearly identifies
the grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no consideration or for nominal actual consideration
from a trustee to a beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
§ 612-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-29
1:533
(10) A transfer for no consideration or for nominal actual consideration
from trustee to successor trustee.
(11) A transfer: for no consideration or for nominal actual consideration
between principal and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent
or straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal,
no tax would be imposed under this article. Where the document by
which title is acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set
forth that the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the
benefit of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more that two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: (i) the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and (ii) the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
§ 612-29 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-29
1:534
§ 612-30. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 612-29, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 612-31. Acquired companies.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)], and which has, as its primary
purpose, the preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
§ 612-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-31
1:535
§ 612-32. Credits against tax.
§ 612-33. Extensions of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 612-34. Priority of tax out of proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax imposed in this article shall be fully paid, and have priority out of
the proceeds or any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition to the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate, which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 612-31 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-34
1:536
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 612-35. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 612-36. Statement of value.
Each document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording, shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Borough
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Borough.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the tenth of each month, the recorder shall pay over to the
Borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission shall be paid to
the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the recorder shall rerecord the deed or
record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the state
and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 612-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-37
1:537
§ 612-37. Effect of underpayment of tax due to fraud; effect of
failure to record declaration.
§ 612-38. Lien of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated,
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Borough, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments, or interest therein, are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when
the tax under this article is due and payable, and continue until discharge
by payment, or in accordance with the law, and the Borough Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas
of Montgomery County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Tax Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements
and amendments.
§ 612-39. Recovery of tax, interest and penalties.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 612-40. Powers and duties of Borough Treasurer; certain state
regulations incorporated by reference.
The Treasurer of the Borough is charged with enforcement and collection of
the tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable regulations
for the enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which have
been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under 72
P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month of fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 612-37 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-40
1:538
ARTICLE V
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-7-2007 by Ord. No. 532]
§ 612-41. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Collegeville Borough
Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 612-42. Definitions.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for
the purpose of this article, the meaning herein indicated:
COLLECTOR or TAX COLLECTOR — The person appointed by the
Borough Council to collect the local services tax levied by this article
and to administer the provisions thereof.
CORPORATION — Any corporation or joint stock association, organized
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or any other state, territory, or foreign country or
dependency.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, or unit or agency or other entity who or that
employs one or more persons on a compensation basis.
INCOME FROM ALL SOURCES — All income such as earned income
and net profits from sources within the political subdivision.
NONRESIDENT — An individual, fiduciary, partnership or other entity
domiciled outside Collegeville Borough.
OCCUPATION — Any enterprise, activity, profession, or undertaking
of any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit,
whether by an individual, association, or any other entity, whereby any
wage, salary, commission or other remuneration is earned.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, association, corporation
or fiduciary. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing
a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations shall mean
the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
RESIDENT — An individual, partnership, association or other entity
domiciled in Collegeville Borough.
SALARIES, WAGES, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER COMPENSATION —
Includes salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments,
fees and tips that may accrue or be received by an individual for
services rendered, whether directly or through an agent and whether in
cash or in property but shall not include periodic payments for sick or
disability benefits and those commonly recognized as old-age benefits,
retirement pay, or pensions paid to persons retired from service after
§ 612-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-42
1:539
§ 612-43. Imposition and rate.
§ 612-44. Exemption.
§ 612-45. Collection at source.
reaching a specific age or after a stated period of employment, nor
public assistance or unemployment compensation payments, nor any
wages or compensation paid by the United States to any person for
active service in the Army, Navy or Air Force of the United States nor
any bonus or additional compensation paid by the United States or the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any other state for such services.
TAXPAYER — A person required hereunder to file a return on earnings
or net profits or to pay a tax thereon.
B. The singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall include the
feminine and the neuter.
A. A tax is levied at the maximum amount authorized by the State
Legislature, which is currently $52 per year for any of the following
purposes:
(1) Police, fire or emergency services (25% of the revenue shall be
used in this category).
(2) Road construction and maintenance.
(3) Property tax reduction.
(4) Property tax relief through a homestead/farmstead exclusion
(implementation date for any property tax reduction is January 1,
2009).
B. The taxes levied under Subsections B(1) and (2) shall relate to and be
imposed as follows:
(1) Upon all nonresidents who carry on an occupation in Collegeville
Borough.
(2) Upon all residents who carry on an occupation in Collegeville
Borough.
A. Those persons who are subject to the tax pursuant to § 612-43 of this
article, but earn less than $12,000 annually of income from all sources
shall be exempted herefrom upon the filing of an exemption certificate
with their employer that they anticipate earning less than such stated
amount due to seasonal employment or otherwise.
B. Also exempt are disabled veterans and members of the Armed Forces
Reserves who are on active duty during the tax year. Any disabled
veteran claiming exemption shall provide documentation of disabled
status from the United States Veterans Administration.
§ 612-42 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-45
1:540
§ 612-46. Appointment of Tax Collector.
The Borough Council of Collegeville Borough shall designate a Tax Collector
by resolution, and the compensation of such Collector for the collection
of the local services tax shall be fixed by the Council by resolution. The
Collector shall collect and receive all taxes imposed by this article, furnish
receipts for their payment, keep records showing amounts received by him
from all taxpayers and the dates of such receipts, and keep such other
records as may be from time to time required by the Borough Council.
§ 612-47. Powers of Collector; penalty for unlawfully divulging
confidential information.
The Tax Collector is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions
of this article and is authorized and empowered as follows:
A. Every self-employed person or employer who employs one or more
persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis
whose earnings are subject to the tax imposed by this article shall
deduct the amount of tax levied by this article from the salaries, wages
or compensation paid to the employee. The tax shall not be withheld in
a lump sum but shall be deducted in equal installments calculated by
dividing the total tax amount by the number of payroll periods.
B. The tax shall be paid to the collector on a form furnished by the
collector, and shall include the employee's home address and social
security number. Taxes are due within 30 days after the end of each
quarter.
C. If an employee claiming an income exemption ultimately earns more
than $12,000 annually of income from all sources, the employer shall
withhold the amount then due and owing in a lump sum and continue
payroll deductions for the balance of the calendar year.
A. To administer and enforce the provisions of this article and all rules and
regulations prescribed, adopted, and promulgated by Borough Council
relating to the enforcement and administration hereof and consistent
with such rules and regulations shall have the power and authority to
reexamine and correct any and all returns filed hereunder, and to
compute, settle, resettle and discharge any or all taxes hereby levied.
B. The Collector or any agent or employee of the Borough authorized in
writing by the Collector is hereby authorized and empowered to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or taxpayer in
order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return was
made, to ascertain the tax imposed by this article. Every such employer
or taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to the said Collector
or a duly authorized agent or employee of the Borough the means,
facilities and opportunity for such examination and investigations as
are hereby authorized. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine
any person under oath concerning any income which was or should
§ 612-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-47
1:541
§ 612-48. Additional regulations authorized.
The Borough Council of Collegeville Borough shall be empowered to adopt
by resolution additional rules and regulations pertaining to this article.
§ 612-49. Interest on late payment.
All taxes imposed by this article remaining unpaid after they become due
shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per year and shall be payable by the
employer (the party responsible for collecting and/or paying the tax to the
Collector) or by the taxpayer if he or she is self-employed.
§ 612-50. Recovery.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all interest accruing thereon,
shall be recoverable by the Borough as other debts are recoverable.
§ 612-51. Violations and penalties.
Any violator of any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and costs and, in default of
payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to exceed
30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 612-52. Applicability.
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to any person as to whom it is
beyond the legal power of Collegeville Borough to impose the tax or duties
herein provided.
§ 612-53. Refunds.
Taxpayers who fail to file a certificate of exemption may seek a refund if the
taxpayer earns less than $12,000 in annual income from all sources or if the
have been returned for taxation, and to this end may compel the
production of books, papers and records and the attendance of all
persons before him, whether as parties or witnesses, who he believes
to have knowledge of such income.
C. Any information gained by the Collector or any authorized agent or
employee of the Borough as a result of any returns, investigations/
hearings or verification required or authorized by this article, shall be
confidential except for official purposes and except where disclosure of
the contents thereof is required by proper judicial order or decree, or as
otherwise provided by law, and any person or agent who divulges any
information so obtained shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine or penalty not to exceed $600 and costs for each offense, or to
undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days for the nonpayment of
such fine or penalty and costs.
§ 612-47 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 612-53
1:542
taxpayer falls into another exemption category or is due a refund because
of cumulative payment of the tax.
§ 612-54. When effective.
This article and the tax herein levied shall be effective for the year 2008
and on a continuing annual basis, unless the rate of said tax is subsequently
changed.
§ 612-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 612-54
1:543
Chapter 621
TREES AND SHRUBS
§ 621-1. Duties and responsibilities of property owners; notice;
abatement by Borough.
A. It shall be the duty of every owner of real estate located in the Borough
to trim and keep trimmed all trees and shrubbery located upon his
property, or upon the abutting street or sidewalk, so that:
(1) There shall at all times be a clear space of at least 14 feet between
the lowest branch or other overhanging portion of every such tree
and the surface of the street below; and
(2) There shall at all times be a clear space of at least eight feet
between the lowest branch or other overhanging portion of every
such tree and the paved surface of the sidewalk below; and
(3) No portion of any such tree or shrubbery shall extend horizontally
onto any street at any point less than 14 feet above the surface of
the street or onto any sidewalk at any point less than eight feet
above the surface of the sidewalk; and
(4) There shall be no contact with electric, telephone or other utility
wires and a clear and unobstructed space for those wires shall be
left, but without unnecessary cutting of any tree or any branch or
top of a tree; and
(5) The illumination from any streetlight shall not unnecessarily be
obstructed.
B. It shall be the duty of every owner of real estate located in the Borough
to remove all trees located upon his property or upon the abutting
street or sidewalk if that tree:
(1) Is so diseased or in such a state of decay as to present a threat or
source of danger to pedestrians, motorists and other users of the
street or sidewalk and/or to vehicles parked or driven upon the
street;
(2) Is growing in such a manner as to cause the upheaval or
disturbance of the abutting street or sidewalk, in which case the
property owner shall remove the roots causing that upheaval or
disturbance and then, as directed by Council, to make or pay for
the necessary repairs or reconstruction work to eliminate the
disturbance or upheaval.
C. The work required by Subsections A and B of this section may be done
on the initiative of the property owner referred to, and shall be done by
him within 15 days after notice from Council to do so. All costs and
expenses of the work, including any remedial or restorative work to any
§ 612-54 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 621-1
1:544
§ 621-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine or not more than $600 and costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment
for not more than 30 days. Provided, the fine and costs imposed under
this section may be in addition to any costs and penalties imposed under
§ 621-1C.
Chapter 640
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire lanes — See Ch. 321.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 592.
Zoning — See Ch. 680.
street, sidewalk or sidewalk area necessitated by removal of any tree or
tree roots, shall in all cases be the responsibility of the property owner.
If a property owner fails, neglects or refuses to do any work required
by Subsections A or B of this section within the time limit stated in
the notice, or to satisfactorily complete the work, Council shall have
the authority to have the work done by the Borough or under contract
with the Borough, and to collect the resultant cost and expenses in any
manner authorized for collection of debts against boroughs.
D. Any failure on the part of a property owner to perform any duty
required by this section shall constitute a violation by him of this
article.
§ 621-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 621-2
1:545

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 640-1. Definitions and interpretations.
§ 640-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted as
ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of this
Borough, except where the law specifically authorizes less formal action for
the purpose.
§ 640-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of 1976 P.L. 162, No. 81,
as amended),188 except that, in this chapter, the word "street" may be
used interchangeably with the word "highway," and shall have the same
meaning as the word "highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The word "holiday," as used in this chapter, shall mean and include:
New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
C. Although the streets in the Borough run generally in a northwestsouthwest
and northeast-southeast direction, for the purpose of this
chapter, Main Street and the streets running parallel or generally
parallel to Main Street shall be deemed to run in a north-south
direction, with the northern terminus towards Pottstown and the
southern terminus toward Norristown. Streets intersecting with Main
Street or parallel or generally parallel with those streets shall be
deemed to run in an east-west direction, with their eastern terminus
toward Perkiomen Township and Shippack Township and their western
terminus toward Upper Providence Township. Streets that intersect
with and extend on both sides of Main Street are designated "East" for
the section or portion east of Main Street and "West" for section or
portion west of Main Street.
D. In determining distances from an intersection in this chapter, the point
of intersection shall be the intersection of the curblines of the two
streets, that curbline being on the side of the street as stated.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
188. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 640-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-3
1:547
§ 640-4. Experimental regulations; violations and penalties.
Council may, from time to time, designate places upon and along the streets
in the Borough where, for a period of not more than 90 days, specific
traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in
force and effect, and shall designate those locations by proper signs and
markings. These regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective
just as if they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall drive or
park a vehicle in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction,
and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking
erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any person who
violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to
the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation
of that nature and, in case of a violation where no specific penalty is
set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of $25 and
costs. Provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for the test and
experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent
changes in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 640-5. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events; violations and penalties.
(2) In the case of emergency public works or public events of limited
scope or duration, to restrict or prohibit traffic and/or parking in
limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
B. Those temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who drives or parks a vehicle in violation of any such regulation,
or who moves, removes, destroys, injures or defaces any sign or
marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such regulation
shall be guilty of a violation, and upon conviction, shall be liable to the
penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of
that nature, and in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of $25 and costs.
A. Council shall have authority to close any street or any specific part of a
street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police officers
at each end of the closed portion, while construction or maintenance
work is underway or a special event is being conducted on the closed
portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle
upon any such closed portion.
B. Council shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic area upon
any street where construction or maintenance work is underway, and to
station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when a flagman is displaying a sign directing
that vehicle to stop, or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other
device, not to proceed.
§ 640-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-5
1:548
§ 640-6. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough are given authority to direct traffic on the
streets in the Borough and at intersections of those streets, in public parks
and in other places where the Vehicle Code189 or this chapter applies.
§ 640-7. Posting of traffic control signs on utility poles. [Added
5-4-2011 by Ord. No. 549]
The Borough may erect and maintain any temporary or permanent sign on
any utility pole within the Borough for the direction of traffic, the regulation
of parking or the designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historic
site, or public service, property, or facility.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
189. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 640-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-7
1:549

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 640-8. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
§ 640-9. Traffic signals at certain intersections.
A. No person shall drive any vehicle upon any portion of a street or
highway in the Borough listed in Appendix I-A, that is incorporated by
reference into and made a part of this section, at a greater rate of speed
than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street or highway in
that appendix.
Appendix I-A
(1) The maximum speed limit on all Borough streets, except for Main
Street, Second Avenue South of Main Street, and First Avenue
North of Main Street, shall be 25 miles per hour. [Amended
12-1-1999 by Ord. No. 465]
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person
exceeding a maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five
miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. Official traffic signals shall be erected (or are ratified if previously
erected) at those intersections listed in Appendix I-B, which is
incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section, and
traffic at those intersections shall be directed by those signals.
Appendix I-B
East Main Street and Fifth Avenue [Amended 6-4-1997 by Ord. No.
442]
East Main Street and First Avenue [Amended 6-4-1997 by Ord. No.
442]
East Main Street and Ninth Avenue [Added 2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437; amended 6-4-1997 by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street and Second Avenue [Amended 6-4-1997 by Ord.
No. 442]
East Main Street and Sixth Avenue (yellow light signal only) [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 437; amended 6-4-1997 by Ord. No. 442]
Second Avenue and Collegeville Shopping Center Driveway [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 437]
Second Avenue and Freeland Drive/Collegeville Market Place Drive
[Added 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 437]
Second Avenue and Park Avenue [Added 2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
§ 640-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-9
1:551
§ 640-10. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
§ 640-11. One-way streets established.
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of an official traffic
signal shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and
costs.
A. Those intersections listed in Appendix I-C, that is incorporated by
reference into and made a part of this section, are established as
intersections where drivers of vehicles headed in the direction or
directions indicated are prohibited from making a right turn (or a left
turn from a one-way street into a one-way street) on a steady red signal.
Appendix I-C
Intersection
Vehicles Traveling
On Direction of Travel
Fifth Avenue and East
Main Street
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
West Fifth Avenue Eastbound
First Avenue and East
Main Street [Added
11-2-2005 by Ord.
No. 514; amended
4-4-2007 by Ord.
No. 528]
First Avenue Westbound (4:00 p.m.
to 7:00 p.m.)
First Avenue and East
Main Street [Added
10-3-2018 by Ord.
No. 591]
First Avenue Westbound
Third Avenue and
East Main Street
[Added 11-2-2005
by Ord. No. 514]
West Third Avenue Eastbound
B. Any driver of a vehicle who makes a turn on a red signal, in violation of
this section shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and
costs.
A. One-way streets are established as listed in Appendix I-D, which is
incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon a one-way street
other than in the direction established for traffic upon that street.
§ 640-9 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-11
1:552
§ 640-12. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
§ 640-13. No-passing zones established.
§ 640-14. Through highways established.
Appendix I-D
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Walnut Street Fourth Avenue Third Avenue Eastbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. Appendix I-E, which is incorporated by reference into and made a part
of this section, lists intersections where turns are restricted or
prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type
indicated, traveling upon the first-named street at any intersection
named in that appendix, in the direction or directions indicated in each
case, to make a left turn and/or a right turn into a second-named street,
as indicated at any time when a turn is prohibited by that appendix.
Appendix I-E
Vehicle
Traveling
on
Direction of
Travel Not to Make Into
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable to
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. No-passing zones are listed in Appendix I-F, which is incorporated by
reference into and made a part of this section. It shall be unlawful for
the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another vehicle or drive on
the left side of the roadway in any no-passing zone.
Appendix I-F
Street Between Direction of Travel
East Main Street
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street and
Borough line
Northbound and
southbound
First Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street and
Perkiomen Township
line
Northbound and
southbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 640-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-14
1:553
§ 640-15. Stop intersections established.
A. Through highways are listed in Appendix I-G, which is incorporated by
reference into and made a part of this section, and stop or yield signs
shall be erected at every intersection of every through highway (except
those intersections where traffic signals are erected and maintained as
provided in § 640-9), facing traffic approaching the through highway on
intersecting highways. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
through highway on any intersecting street where there is a stop or
yield sign shall stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(b) or
Section 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, as the case may be, and shall not
proceed into or across the through highway until he has followed all
applicable requirements of that section of the law.
Appendix I-G
Highway Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs of prosecution.
A. Those intersections listed in Appendix I-H, which is incorporated by
reference into and made a part of this section (in addition to streets
intersecting with the through highways established by § 640-14) are
established as stop intersections and official stop signs shall be erected
(or are ratified if previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street upon the first-named street at
each stop intersection, in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection
upon the first-named street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(b) of the Vehicle
Code and shall not proceed into or across the second-named street until
he has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law.
Appendix I-H
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction of Travel
Avon Avenue Clahor Avenue Eastbound
Avon Avenue Stratford Avenue Westbound
Carmen Drive
[Amended 2-5-1997
by Ord. No. 437]
Park Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Chestnut Street Eighth Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Chestnut Street Park Avenue Northbound
Chestnut Street Sixth Avenue Southbound
Chestnut Street West Ninth Avenue Northbound
§ 640-14 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-15
1:554
Appendix I-H
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction of Travel
Chestnut Street West Third Avenue Southbound
Chestnut Street
Extension
Second Avenue Northbound
Clahor Avenue Locust Street Northbound
Clahor Avenue Park Avenue Southbound
Clamer Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street Westbound
College Avenue East Ninth Avenue Southbound
Colonial Avenue Clahor Avenue Eastbound
Colonial Avenue Stratford Avenue Southbound
Derr Drive [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Freeland Drive Northbound and
westbound
East Fourth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street Westbound
East Ninth Avenue First Avenue Eastbound
East Third Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street Westbound
Eighth Avenue Clahor Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Eighth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street Eastbound
Eleventh Avenue School Street Eastbound
Eleventh Avenue
[Added 2-5-1997 by
Ord. No. 437]
Zvarick Road Southbound
Freeland Drive [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Freeland Drive Eastbound
Glen Farms Drive East Ninth Avenue Southbound
Glen Farms Drive First Avenue Eastbound
Glenwood Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street Westbound
§ 640-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-15
1:555
Appendix I-H
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction of Travel
Hunsicker Drive
[Added 2-5-1997 by
Ord. No. 437]
Freeland Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Jonlyn Lane Chestnut Street Eastbound
Larkin Lane Park Avenue Eastbound
Lloyd Avenue Clahor Avenue Eastbound
Lloyd Avenue Maykut Avenue Westbound
Locust Street Eighth Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Locust Street West Fifth Avenue Southbound
Locust Street [Added
12-27-1988 by Ord.
No. 362]
Locust Street Eastbound
Maykut Avenue Clahor Avenue Eastbound
McCarthy Circle Maykut Avenue Westbound
Miner Circle Maykut Avenue Eastbound
Park Avenue [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Third Avenue Northbound and
southbound
Park Avenue [Added
11-2-1997 by Ord.
No. 418]
West Third Avenue Northbound and
southbound
R-Glad Avenue [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Clahor Avenue Eastbound
Richard Way [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Clahor Avenue Northbound
Richard Way [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Richard Way Northbound
Ruby Drive [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Shelly Drive Southbound
Ruby Drive [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Stine Drive Eastbound
Russell Circle East Ninth Avenue Northbound
§ 640-15 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-15
1:556
Appendix I-H
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction of Travel
Saylor Lane Locust Street Westbound
School Street Eighth Avenue Southbound
School Street West Fifth Avenue Southbound
Seventh Avenue Chestnut Street Eastbound
Shakespeare Drive
[Added 2-5-1997 by
Ord. No. 437]
R-Glad Way Northbound
Shangler Circle
[Added 2-5-1997 by
Ord. No. 437]
Freeland Drive Southbound
Shelly Drive [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Freeland Drive Westbound
Shelly Drive [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Stine Drive Eastbound
Sixth Avenue Locust Street Westbound
Sixth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street Eastbound
Sonnet Lane [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Shakespeare Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Stine Drive [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Freeland Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Stine Drive [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Second Avenue
(Route 29)
Northbound
Stratford Avenue Clahor Avenue Eastbound
Tenth Avenue Chestnut Street Eastbound and
westbound
Tenth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street Eastbound
Tenth Avenue School Street Westbound
Walnut Street West Fourth Avenue Southbound
Walnut Street West Third Avenue Southbound
§ 640-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-15
1:557
§ 640-16. Yield intersections established.
Appendix I-H
Stop Street Intersecting Street Direction of Travel
West Fifth Avenue
[Added 2-5-1997 by
Ord. No. 437]
Clahor Avenue Westbound
West Fifth Avenue Park Avenue Eastbound
West Fourth Avenue Chestnut Street Eastbound and
westbound
West Fourth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street Eastbound
West Fourth Avenue Park Avenue Westbound
West Third Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street Eastbound
West Third Avenue
[Added 2-5-1997 by
Ord. No. 437]
Fifth Avenue Westbound
West Third Avenue
[Amended 11-2-1994
by Ord. No. 418;
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Park Avenue Eastbound and
westbound
Zvarick Road [Added
2-5-1997 by Ord. No.
437]
Clahor Avenue Eastbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. Those intersections listed in Appendix I-I, which is incorporated by
reference and made a part of this section (in addition to streets
intersecting with the through highways established by § 640-14) are
established as yield-right-of-way intersections, and official yield signs
shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected) in such a position
as to face traffic approaching the second-named street upon the firstnamed
street at each yield intersection, in the direction or directions
indicated for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching
the intersection upon the first-named street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by Section
3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, and then yield the right-of-way as required
by that subsection of the Vehicle Code.
§ 640-15 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-16
1:558
§ 640-17. Vehicle weight limits established.
§ 640-18. Truck traffic restricted on certain streets.
Appendix I-I
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Route 29 [Added
4-1-1987 by Ord. No.
344]
Park Avenue Southbound
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. On those streets and portions of streets listed in Appendix I-J, which is
incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section, vehicle
weight limits are established by authority granted by Section 4902(a) of
the Vehicle Code, and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate on
any of those streets or portions of streets as the case may be, any
vehicle or combination having a gross weight in excess of the maximum
prescribed for that street or portion of street.
Appendix I-J
Street Between
Maximum Gross
Weight
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 and costs, and an
additional penalty of $75 for each 500 pounds or part thereof, in excess
of 3,000 pounds over the maximum allowable weight as prescribed by
Section 4902(e-1) of the Vehicle Code.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle other than a
passenger car on any street or portion of a street listed in Appendix I-K,
which is incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section,
except that nothing in this section shall prohibit anyone from driving a
commercial vehicle or truck on any part of any such street listed in
Appendix I-L where necessary in order to pick up or deliver any goods,
wares, merchandise, or material from or to any premises located on any
such street or portion of a street.
§ 640-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-18
1:559
§ 640-19. Snow and ice emergency routes established.
Appendix I-K
Street Between
East Ninth Avenue [Amended
6-4-1997 by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street and Park Avenue
Fifth Avenue [Amended
6-4-1997 by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street and Park Avenue
First Avenue Route 29 and north Borough line
Glen Farms Drive Ninth Avenue and Route 29
Park Avenue Route 29 and Fifth Avenue
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. Snow and ice emergency routes are established on those streets and
portions of streets listed in Appendix I-L, which is incorporated by
reference into and made a part of this section. In order to facilitate the
movement of traffic and to combat the hazards of snow and ice on those
snow and ice emergency routes, the Mayor, at his discretion, may
declare a snow and ice emergency, and afterward may declare the
emergency terminated. Information on the existence of the emergency
may be given through radio, newspaper or other available media, and
notification of the termination of the emergency may be given by use of
the same media.
Appendix I-L
Street Between
Clahor Avenue Route 29 and northwest Borough
line (at Trappe Borough)
East Fifth Avenue [Amended
6-4-1997 by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street and eastern
terminus of Fifth Avenue
East Main Street [Amended
6-4-1997 by Ord. No. 442]
First Avenue and northwest
Borough line (at Trappe Borough)
East Ninth Avenue [Amended
6-4-1997 by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street and Route 29
(First Avenue)
First Avenue [Amended
6-4-1997 by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street and northeast
Borough line (at Perkiomen
Township)
Park Avenue West Fifth Avenue and Route 29
(Second Avenue)
Second Avenue [Amended
6-4-1997 by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street and northeast
Borough line (at Upper Providence
Township)
§ 640-18 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-19
1:560
Appendix I-L
Street Between
West Eighth Avenue [Amended
6-4-1997 by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street and Clahor Avenue
West Fifth Avenue [Amended
6-4-1997 by Ord. No. 442]
East Main Street and Park Avenue
B. While a snow and ice emergency is in effect, it shall be unlawful, at any
time during the continuance of the emergency, for any person to park a
motor vehicle, or to allow the vehicle to remain parked, on any snow
and ice emergency route; or for any person to drive a motor vehicle, not
equipped with snow tires or chains, on a snow and ice emergency route.
C. If, at any time during a period of snow and ice emergency, a person
parks a motor vehicle anywhere upon a snow and ice emergency route,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of this section, and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $15 and costs.
D. If, at any time during a period of snow and ice emergency, a person
drives a motor vehicle not equipped with snow tires or chains upon a
snow and ice emergency route, that person shall be guilty of a violation
of this section, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$25 and costs.
§ 640-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-19
1:561

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 640-20. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Whenever a space shall be marked off on any highway for the parking of an
individual vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within
the lines bounding that space and it shall be a violation of this article for
any person to park a vehicle otherwise.
§ 640-21. Parking and standing of vehicles unlawful in certain
locations. [Amended 7-5-1990 by Ord. No. 376]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle,
whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or improved main traveled
portion of any street or portion thereof listed in Appendix II-A, which is
incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section.
Appendix II-A
Street Side Between
Avon Avenue [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
South Clahor Avenue and
Stratford Avenue
Carmen Drive [Added
6-3-1987 by Ord. No.
345; amended
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
North Park Avenue and the
eastern terminus of Carmen
Drive
Carmen Drive [Added
6-3-1987 by Ord. No.
345; amended
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
South Park Avenue and a point 65
feet east of Park Avenue
Chestnut Street [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
East Fourth Avenue and Park
Avenue
Chestnut Street [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
East Sixth Avenue and Eighth
Avenue
Chestnut Street [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
West Eighth Avenue and the
north Borough line
Clahor Avenue [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
North and east Locust Street and Zvarick
Road
§ 640-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-21
1:563
Appendix II-A
Street Side Between
Clahor Avenue [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
West Park Avenue and the north
Borough line
Clamer Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
North East Main Street and a
point 50 feet east of East
Main Street
Clamer Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
South East Main Street and the
eastern terminus of Clamer
Street
Colonial Avenue [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
South Clahor Avenue and
Stratford Avenue
East Fifth Avenue
[Amended 12-7-2000
by Ord. No. 474]
North Main Street and a point 290
feet east of Main Street
East Fifth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
South East Main Street and the
eastern terminus of Fifth
Avenue
East First Avenue
[Amended 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 355; 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
North East Main Street and the
eastern Borough line
East First Avenue
[Amended 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 355; 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
South East Main Street and the
eastern Borough line
East Fourth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
North East Main Street and the
eastern terminus of Fourth
Street
East Fourth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
South East Main Street and a
point 50 feet east of East
Main Street
East Main Street
[Amended 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 355]
East A point 100 feet south of
Clamer Avenue and a point
50 feet north of Clamer
Avenue
East Main Street
[Amended 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 355]
East A point 200 feet south of
Fifth Avenue and the north
Borough line
§ 640-21 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-21
1:564
Appendix II-A
Street Side Between
East Main Street
[Amended 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 355]
East A point 242 feet south of
Fourth Avenue and a point
50 feet north of Glenwood
Avenue
East Main Street
[Amended 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 355]
East A point 50 feet south of
Glenwood Avenue and a
point 50 feet north of
Glenwood Avenue
East Main Street
[Amended 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 355]
East South Borough line and
Third Avenue
East Main Street
[Amended 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 355; 7-5-1990
by Ord. No. 376;
3-23-1988 by Ord. No.
355; 6-4-1997 by Ord.
No. 442]
West A point 100 feet north of
Clamer Avenue and a point
409 feet south of the first
point
East Main Street
[Amended 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 355; 7-5-1990
by Ord. No. 376;
3-23-1988 by Ord. No.
355; 6-4-1997 by Ord.
No. 442]
West A point 145 feet south of
Fourth Avenue and a point
50 feet north of Fourth
Avenue
East Main Street
[Amended 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 355; 7-5-1990
by Ord. No. 376;
3-23-1988 by Ord. No.
355; 6-4-1997 by Ord.
No. 442]
West A point 170 feet south of
Fifth Avenue and Fifth
Avenue
East Main Street
[Amended 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 355; 7-5-1990
by Ord. No. 376;
3-23-1988 by Ord. No.
355; 6-4-1997 by Ord.
No. 442]
West South Borough line and
Third Avenue
East Ninth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
North East Main Street and Route
29
§ 640-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-21
1:565
Appendix II-A
Street Side Between
East Ninth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
South East Main Street and a
point 50 feet east of East
Main Street
East Third Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
North East Main Street and a
point 50 feet east of East
Main Street
East Third Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
South East Main Street the
eastern terminus of Third
Avenue
Eighth Avenue
[Amended 7-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 376; 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
North East Main Street and a
point 100 feet east of East
Main Street
Eighth Avenue
[Amended 7-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 376; 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
South East Main Street and the
west Borough line
Eleventh Avenue [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
North School Street and Zvarick
Road (when road is
dedicated to Zvarick Road)
Glen Farms Drive North and west Route 29 and Ninth Avenue
Glenwood Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
North East Main Street and a
point 50 feet east of East
Main Street
Glenwood Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
South East Main Street and the
eastern terminus of
Glenwood Avenue
Jonlyn Lane [Added
6-3-1987 by Ord. No.
345]
North Chestnut Street and a point
175 feet south of Chestnut
Street
Lloyd Avenue [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
South Clahor Avenue and Maykut
Avenue
Locust Street [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
North Zvarick Road and Clahor
Avenue
Locust Street [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
South Zvarick Road and Clahor
Avenue
§ 640-21 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-21
1:566
Appendix II-A
Street Side Between
Locust Street [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
West West Fifth Avenue and
Zvarick Road
Maykut Avenue [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
South and east Clahor Avenue and Richard
Way (when dedicated) or
the southern terminus of
Maykut Avenue
Park Avenue [Added
7-__-2000 by Ord. No.
468]
South and west Carmen Drive and Larkin
Lane
Park Avenue [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
East Route 29 and Fifth Avenue
Park Avenue [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
West Route 29 and Clahor
Avenue
Park Avenue [Added
9-2-1992 by Ord. No.
396; amended
5-9-1995 by Ord. No.
423]
West Third Avenue and a point
180 feet south of West Third
Avenue
School Street [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
East West Fifth Avenue and the
northern terminus of School
Street
School Street [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
West Eighth Avenue and the
northern Borough line
School Street [Added
9-2-1992 by Ord. No.
396]
East West Fifth Street and a
point 50 feet north of West
Fifth Street
Second Avenue
[Amended 7-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 376; 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
North East Main Street and the
western Borough line
Second Avenue
[Amended 7-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 376; 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
South East Main Street and the
western Borough line
§ 640-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-21
1:567
Appendix II-A
Street Side Between
Seventh Avenue
[Amended 7-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 376; 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
North Chestnut Street and the
western terminus of
Seventh Avenue
Sixth Avenue [Amended
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376; 6-4-1997 by Ord.
No. 442]
North East Main Street and a
point 100 feet west of East
Main Street
Sixth Avenue [Amended
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376; 6-4-1997 by Ord.
No. 442]
South East Main Street and
Locust Street
Stratford Avenue
[Added 7-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 376]
North and west Clahor Avenue and
Shakespeare Drive (when
dedicated) or the northern
terminus of Stratford
Avenue
Tenth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
North East Main Street and
School Street
Tenth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
South East Main Street and a
point 50 feet west of East
Main Street
Walnut Street [Added
6-3-1987 by Ord. No.
345]
East A point 110 feet north of
West Third Avenue and a
point 225 feet north of West
Third Avenue
Walnut Street [Added
6-3-1987 by Ord. No.
345]
East Fourth Avenue and the
northern terminus of
Walnut Street
Walnut Street [Added
6-3-1987 by Ord. No.
345]
West Third Avenue and the
northern terminus of
Walnut Street
West Fifth Avenue
[Amended 7-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 376]
North East Main Street and
Clahor Avenue (when West
Fifth Avenue is extended to
Clahor Avenue)
West Fifth Avenue
[Amended 3-2-1988 by
Ord. No. 355; 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
South East Main Street and
Chestnut Street
§ 640-21 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-21
1:568
Appendix II-A
Street Side Between
West Fourth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
North East Main Street and Park
Avenue
West Fourth Avenue
[Amended 6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
South East Main Street and a
point 50 feet west of East
Main Street
West Ninth Avenue
[Amended 6-3-1987 by
Ord. No. 345]
North East Main Street and a
point 135 feet west of East
Main Street
West Ninth Avenue
[Amended 6-3-1987 by
Ord. No. 245; 7-5-1990
by Ord. No. 376
South East Main Street and
Chestnut Street
West Third Avenue
[Amended 7-5-1990 by
Ord. No. 376; 6-4-1997
by Ord. No. 442]
North East Main Street and Fifth
Avenue (when West Third
Street is dedicated from
Park Avenue to Fifth
Avenue)
West Third Avenue
[Added 10-3-2001 by
Ord. No. 482]
South 90 feet east and 90 feet
west of the Post Office
driveway
West Third Avenue
[Added 9-2-1992 by
Ord. No. 396]
South Park Avenue and a point 50
feet east of Park Avenue
West Third Avenue
[Added 9-2-1992 by
Ord. No. 396]
South Park Avenue and a point 50
feet west of Park Avenue
Zvarick Road [Added
7-5-1990 by Ord. No.
376]
South and west Locust Road and Clahor
Avenue
§ 640-22. Parking prohibited in certain locations, certain days and
hours.
In the locations listed in Appendix II-B, which is incorporated by reference
into and made a part of this section, parking shall be prohibited at all times
on the days and between the hours indicated in that appendix.
§ 640-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-22
1:569
Appendix II-B
Street Side Between Days Hours
Carmen Drive
[Added
7-5-1990 by
Ord. No.
376]
North Park Avenue
and the eastern
terminus of
Carmen Drive
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Chestnut
Street
West Sixth Avenue
and north
Borough line
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Chestnut
Street
West Third Avenue
and Fourth
Avenue
Every day 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
East Fifth
Avenue
[Amended
6-4-1997 by
Ord. No.
442]
North A point 114 feet
east of East
Main Street and
the eastern
terminus of
Fifth Avenue
East
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
East Main
Street
[Amended
6-4-1997 by
Ord. No.
442]
Both North Borough
line and south
Borough line,
except where
prohibited at all
times
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
East Main
Street [Added
6-7-2017 by
Ord. No.
582]
East A point 80 feet
south of Fourth
Avenue and 195
feet north of
Fourth Avenue
Every day All hours
Eighth Avenue
[Added
9-2-1992 by
Ord. No.
396]
North A point 570 feet
west of School
Street and a
point 720 feet
west of School
Street
Monday to
Friday
7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Eighth Avenue
[Amended
6-4-1997 by
Ord. No.
442]
North Chestnut Street
and a point 100
feet west of
East Main
Street
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ 640-22 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-22
1:570
Appendix II-B
Street Side Between Days Hours
Larkin Lane
[Added
7-5-1990 by
Ord. No.
376]
North Park Avenue
and the western
terminus of
Larkin Lane
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
McCarthy
Circle [Added
7-5-1990 by
Ord. No.
376]
North Maykut Avenue
and the eastern
terminus of
McCarthy
Circle
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Miner Circle
[Added
7-5-1990 by
Ord. No.
376]
North Maykut Avenue
and the western
terminus of
Miner Circle
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Municipal
Parking Lot on
East Third
Avenue
[Added
5-4-2011 by
Ord. No.
549]
— — Every day 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Russell Circle
[Added
7-5-1990 by
Ord. No.
376]
West East Ninth
Avenue and the
southern
terminus of
Russell Circle
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Saylor Lane
[Added
7-5-1990 by
Ord. No.
376]
North Locust Street
and the eastern
terminus of
Saylor Lane
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
School Street
[Added
11-6-2013 by
Ord. No.
562]
Both Cul-de-sac at
the end of
School Street
200 feet west of
West Fifth
Avenue
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ 640-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-22
1:571
Appendix II-B
Street Side Between Days Hours
Seventh
Avenue
[Added
3-3-2004 by
Ord. No.
499]
East Chestnut Street
and where
Chestnut Street
dead-ends
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Sixth Avenue
[Amended
6-4-1997 by
Ord. No.
442]
North A point 100 feet
west of East
Main Street and
a point 200 feet
west of School
Street
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Tenth Avenue
[Amended
6-4-1997 by
Ord. No.
442]
South East Main
Street and
Chestnut Street
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
West Fifth
Avenue
[Amended
6-4-1997 by
Ord. No.
442]
South A point 200 feet
west of East
Main Street and
a point 317 feet
north of
Chestnut Street
Every day 1:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
West Fourth
Avenue
South Park Avenue
and a point 345
feet east of Park
Avenue
Every day 9:30 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
§ 640-23. Parking time limited in certain locations certain days and
hours.
In the locations listed in Appendix II-C, which is incorporated by reference
into and made a part of this section, no person shall park a vehicle, or allow
it to remain parked, for longer than the time indicated, at any time on the
days and between the hours stated for the location.
§ 640-22 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-23
1:572
Appendix II-C
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
East Main
Street
[Added
8-6-1986
by Ord.
No. 337;
amended
6-4-1997
by Ord.
No. 442]
Both Third
Avenue
and Fifth
Avenue,
except
where
parking is
prohibited
at all times
Every day At all
times
2 hours
Fourth
Avenue
[Added
8-6-1986
by Ord.
No. 337]
South Main
Street and
Chestnut
Street
Monday
through
Friday
8:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
2 hours
§ 640-24. Special purpose parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited.
Special purpose parking zones are established in the locations listed in
Appendix II-D, which is incorporated by reference into and made a part of
this section, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, or to
allow a vehicle to remain parked, in any such zone, except as specifically
provided in that appendix for that zone.
Appendix II-D
Street Side Between
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicles
Clamer Avenue
[Added
7-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 588]
North A point 150 feet
east of East Main
Street and a point
40 feet east of the
first point
Residents and
guests of 8
Clamer Avenue
Clamer Avenue
[Added
7-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 588]
North A point 210 feet
east of East Main
Street and a point
40 feet east of the
first point
Residents and
guests of 11
Clamer Avenue
§ 640-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-24
1:573
Appendix II-D
Street Side Between
Authorized
Purpose of
Vehicles
Clamer Avenue
[Added
7-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 588]
North A point 250 feet
east of East Main
Street and a point
40 feet east of the
first point
Residents and
guests of 13
Clamer Avenue
Clamer Avenue
[Added
7-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 588]
North A point 290 feet
east of East Main
Street and a point
40 feet east of the
first point
Residents and
guests of 15
Clamer Avenue
Clamer Avenue
[Added
7-7-2018 by
Ord. No. 588]
North A point 330 feet
east of East Main
Street and a point
25 feet east of the
first point
Residents and
guests of 17
Clamer Avenue
East Fourth
Street
[Amended
6-4-1997 by
Ord. No. 442]
South A point 50 feet east
of East Main Street
and a point 50 feet
east of the first
point
Patients visiting
physician
Fourth Avenue
[Added
3-5-2008 by
Ord. No. 535]
North A point 161 feet
west of East Main
Street and a point
20 feet west of first
point
Handicap parking
Fourth Avenue
[Added
4-4-2018 by
Ord. No. 587]
North A point 140 feet
west of East Main
Street and a point
21 feet west of first
point
Handicap parking
Glenwood
Avenue [Added
3-5-2008 by
Ord. No. 535;
repealed
8-5-2015 by
Ord. No. 572]
West Fourth
Avenue [Added
12-27-1988 by
Ord. No. 362]
South Park Avenue and a
point 75 feet east of
Park Avenue
Handicap parking
§ 640-24 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-25
1:574
§ 640-25. Unlawful to park certain trucks in residential districts.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle of Class 5 or over (in excess of
11,000 pounds gross or combined weight) on any street in Residential
District R-1, R-2 or R-3, as designated on the Zoning Map of the Borough.190
§ 640-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and costs, provided:
police officers and other parking enforcement personnel, (if and when the
Borough shall appoint such other parking enforcement personnel) shall
have authority to place on any vehicle parked in violation of any provision
of this article or of any other parking prohibition or restriction in force in
the Borough, including any provision of Chapter 321 of this Code, a tag or
ticket stating the violation and the fine prescribed by this article, and giving
notice that if the violator shall appear at the Borough's Police Headquarters
within 48 hours of the time of the violation, as indicated on the tag or ticket,
and voluntarily pays to the Borough the sum of $10, that payment shall
constitute the full and only penalty for the violation. Provided further, in
lieu of appearing by the violator at the Police Headquarters and making
payment, as provided above, the notice and the payment of $10, by check
or money order, may be enclosed in an envelope, addressed to Collegeville
Police Department, Collegeville, PA 19426, with correct first-class postage
prepaid, and deposited in any United States mailbox so as to be postmarked
within the forty-eight-hour period. Provided further, the failure of a violator
to make the payment of $10, either at the police station or by United States
Mail, within the forty-eight-hour period, shall render that person liable to
prosecution under the Vehicle Code,191 and subject to the fine and $15 and
costs, as prescribed above.
190. Editor's Note: See Ch. 680, Zoning.
191. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 640-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-26
1:575

ARTICLE IV
Pedalcycles
§ 640-27. Riding and parking or pedalcycles on sidewalks along
certain streets unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on
the sidewalk along the portions of streets listed in Appendix IV-A, which
is incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section. Any
person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $10 and costs.
Appendix IV-A
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 640-28. Registration of pedalcycles.
As a convenience to owners of pedalcycles, and for the development of a
means for aiding in identifying missing or stolen pedalcycles, as well as
identifying pedalcyclists who may have suffered accident or injury within or
outside the Borough, the Borough may establish and maintain a pedalcycle
registration system, through the Police Department or the Secretary. The
Borough may expend moneys from the general fund of the Borough for
supplies, registration certificates and/or registration tags or other
evidences of registration and ownership to be affixed to pedalcycles. The
Borough may accept donations of funds or services from any individual or
organization for the purpose of pedalcycle registration. At the discretion
of Council, the Borough may impose a fee for registration. Although
registration shall not be mandatory on the part of owners of pedalcycles, the
Borough shall encourage all persons owning pedalcycles to register their
pedalcycles upon acquisition or at their earliest convenience thereafter,
and further to report the fact of disposal or transfer of ownership of the
pedalcycle. The Borough shall, from time to time, make an effort to keep
the pedalcycle register current, by requesting reregistration or by whatever
means it may decide upon for checking ownership.
§ 640-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-28
1:577

ARTICLE V
Pedestrians
§ 640-29. Pedestrians to obey traffic control signals.
In all locations in the Borough where official traffic-control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestriancontrol
signals installed under § 640-30, shall obey the directions of those
traffic-control signals, as follows:
§ 640-30. Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
§ 640-31. Locations where pedestrian crossing in unmarked
crosswalks restricted.
Appendix IV-C, which lists locations where there are pedestrian crossing
restrictions not covered in Appendix IV-B, is incorporated by reference
into and made a part of this section and of § 640-32. In locations listed
in that appendix as "No Pedestrian Crossing" it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian, except where authorized by a police officer or other
appropriately attired person with authority to direct, control or regulate
traffic, to cross the roadway at that location.
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk;
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway; and
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. At the locations listed in Appendix IV-B, which is incorporated by
reference into and made a part of this section, pedestrian-control
signals shall be erected (or are ratified if previously erected).
Appendix IV-B
Street Location
(Reserved)
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady signal exhibiting "Don't Walk" shall
not start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal, shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't Walk"
signal is showing.
C. Whenever the "Don't Walk" indication is flashing, pedestrians shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication shall proceed to a sidewalk of safety zone, and all drivers of
vehicles shall yield to the pedestrian.
§ 640-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 640-32
1:579
§ 640-32. Locations where pedestrians may cross street only in
crosswalk.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
§ 640-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of $5 and costs.
A. To cross any roadway in a business district within the Borough except in
a crosswalk; and
B. In locations listed as "Cross in crosswalk only" in Appendix IV-C, which
is incorporated by reference into and made a part of this section, to
cross the roadway except in a crosswalk.
Appendix IV-C
Street Location Type of Restriction
Main Street South portion of
intersection with
Second Avenue
No pedestrian crossing
§ 640-32 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 640-33
1:580
Chapter 648
VEHICLES, STORAGE OF
§ 648-1. Findings.
Council finds that, although:
§ 648-2. Applicability.
§ 648-3. Temporary outside storage of certain motor vehicles.
Whenever any motor vehicle, as referred to in § 648-2, is stored or parked
out of doors on private land, the owner or occupant of the land (unless that
storage or parking constitutes a trespass of which the owner or occupant
has no knowledge), or the owner, custodian or driver of the vehicle shall
promptly, but not later than 72 hours after the parking or storage is
discovered or occurs, notify the Police Department or any other duly
authorized and constituted representative of the Borough of that storage
and parking, giving the name and address of the owner or occupant of the
land and, if known, the name of the owner, or custodian of the vehicle or
A. The Vehicle Code192 contains adequate provisions on the subject of
"abandoned vehicles," defined as "a vehicle (other than a pedalcycle):
(i) that is inoperable and is left unattended on public property for more
than 48 hours; (ii) that has remained illegally on public property for a
period of more than 48 hours; (iii) without a valid registration plate or
certificate of inspection or title left unattended on or along a highway;
or (iv) that has remained on private property without the consent of the
owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours;" and
B. Sections 5-2001 through 5-2004193 of this Code of Ordinances deal
adequately with vehicles that are abandoned, discarded or junked on
private property; there is need for additional provisions on certain
motor vehicles stored out of doors on private property temporarily or
for repair. This article is intended to meet that need for additional
provisions to cover those situations mentioned in these findings that are
not covered by the Vehicle Code or Sections 5-2001 through 5-2004.
A. The term "motor vehicle" as used in this article shall apply to a motor
vehicle that is wrecked, damaged, dismantled or partially dismantled or
dilapidated.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any bona fide junkyard or automobile
graveyard when it is authorized to operate and is lawfully operated in
the Borough.
192. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
193. Editor's Note: Original Sections 5-2001 through 5-2004 of the 1985 Code of Ordinances
were superseded by Ord. No. 552 and no longer exist in the Code. See now Ch. 495,
Property Maintenance, Art. II.
§ 640-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 648-3
1:581
driver, the license number, if any, the reason for the storage or parking,
the location of the vehicle, the time when it was stored or parked, and the
provision made or to be made for its removal. The vehicle shall not remain
stored or parked out of doors after the expiration of 30 days from the time
it was so stored or parked, provided the storage or parking is not for the
purpose of the bona fide repair of the vehicle.
§ 648-4. Temporary outside storage for repair by person not
engaged in business of automotive repair.
Where the storage or parking of a motor vehicle, as referred to in § 648-2,
is for the purpose of bona fide repair of the motor vehicle and the owner or
occupant of the land and the owner or occupant of the land or the owner,
custodian or driver of the motor vehicle, is not engaged in the business of
automotive repair, but intends to make such repair, the owner or occupant
of the land or the owner, custodian or driver of the motor vehicle, as
the case may be, shall apply to the Police Department, or any other duly
authorized and constituted representative of the Borough, for a permit for
the outside storage or parking of the motor vehicles during the course of its
repair, the permit to be good for a period of 60 days from the date of storage
or parking.
§ 648-5. Temporary outside storage for repair by person engaged in
business of automotive repair.
Where the owner or occupant of the property is engaged in the business
of automotive repair and a motor vehicle has been placed in the custody
of the owner of the property for storage, parking and/or repair, the owner
or occupant of the property shall apply to the Police Department or any
other duly authorized and constituted representative of the Borough for a
permit for the outside storage or parking of the vehicle while waiting or
during the course of its repair, that permit to be valid for a period of 60 days
from the date of the storage or parking; provided the owner or occupant
presents proof to the Police Department or any other duly authorized and
constituted representative of the Borough, that there is a bona fide contract
or agreement between himself and the owner or custodian of the vehicle
for the repair of that vehicle. Otherwise, the vehicle shall not remain stored
or parked out-of-doors after the expiration of 30 days from the date of the
storage or parking thereof as provided in § 648-3.
§ 648-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails to conform with any provision of this article
or who knowingly aids, abets or assists in any such violation or failure to
conform shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
subject to the penalty prescribed by § 1-2.
Chapter 659
WATER
§ 648-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 659-1
1:582
§ 659-1. Introductory note.
§ 659-2. Application for water service; conditions for grant.
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to be supplied with water from the
Borough shall make application to the water superintendent according to
the form prescribed by Council. The superintendent of the water works and/
A. Beginning with Ordinance No. 51, when the Borough authorized
Horace L. Saylor, his successors, lessees or assigns, to construct and
operate a water system, the Borough encouraged establishment of
water systems through private enterprise. The Saylor Water Company
served customers on Third Avenue. Ordinance No. 54 (February 8,
1922) granted what was intended to be a more inclusive franchise to
Francis W. Wack and his assigns, which seems to have been nullified
automatically through failure of that grantee to have a system in
operation within two years of the date of final passage of the ordinance,
as provided in the ordinance. Then, in 1933, Ordinance No. 82 granted
a fifty-year water franchise to Louis J. Cota, his heirs, administrators or
assigns, again with a two-year completion date stipulated. By
Ordinance No. 87 (1/7/1936) the Borough: (a) repealed Ordinance No.
82 on the grounds that Cota had not started and completed the work
within the time stated in the ordinance; (b) prohibited the further grant
of water franchises by the Borough; and (c) declared the intention of
the Borough to unite with the Borough of Trappe in establishing a joint
waterworks system to serve both Boroughs. The joint system went into
effect soon afterward, and the first regulations were adopted by
Ordinance No. 89 (August 10, 1936).
B. The Collegeville-Trappe Joint Water System is governed by a joint water
committee composed of three members from each of the two Boroughs,
chosen by the respective Borough Councils from their own
membership. The Committee elects one of its members as joint
Chairman, and appoints the Water Superintendent and any other
needed employees, as well as a Secretary-Treasurer. The Committee
meets quarterly.
C. The joint system takes care of the waterworks property, including wells,
storage tanks and pumps.
D. Each member Borough, using money from its general fund, installs and
maintains locally within its own limits, determining in each case the
location and size of the mains. It further regulates use of the mains, by
ordinance. This chapter comprises the water regulations for
Collegeville.
E. Although the joint system pays the personnel and makes contracts,
social security and municipal retirement for the personnel is
administered through Collegeville, because of the social security
requirement that papers and documents must be signed by the proper
officials of one of the Boroughs.
§ 659-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 659-2
1:583
or the Borough Engineer shall determine the size of the service pipes and
meter. The lateral from the water main to the property line shall be laid at
the expense of the Borough and owned and maintained by the Borough; the
lateral from the property line to the premises connected or to be connected
shall be laid, owned and maintained by the party or parties desiring the
connection. All service pipes to be installed by the applicant must be at least
three-fourths-inch inside diameter, copper under ground tubing, Mueller
type K or equal, and must be laid in a trench at least 42 inches deep in
order to guard against freezing. By signing the application the applicant
agrees to be bound by this chapter and save the Borough harmless from
any damages that may arise by reason of the work as originally done or
thereafter maintained and agrees to pay for all injury or damage to meters
arising from his neglect or carelessness.
§ 659-3. Restrictions on installation of new water wells. [Added
11-6-1991 by Ord. No. 389]
Any property that has access to public water (water service is less than 150
feet from the building improvement or is located less than 300 feet from any
subdivision public improvements) shall not be permitted to install a well for
the purpose of withdrawing ground water from the aquifer.
§ 659-4. Responsibility for installing stop cocks and meters and for
repairing leaks.
Every applicant shall install two stop cocks immediately inside the
foundation wall of the premises one on each side of the meter for the
protection of the premises from injury or damage by leaks or bursting of
pipes, and the Borough shall furnish all water meters and the consumer
shall provide a readily accessible location for the installation of such meters,
so they may be easily examined and read. All leaks in service pipes and
fixtures, in and upon the premises supplied beyond the curb stop, must be
promptly repaired by the owner or occupant.
§ 659-5. Imposition of tapping fee. [Added 10-7-1987 by Ord. No.
349; amended 9-9-1989 by Ord. No. 365; 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 422;
9-6-1995 by Ord. No. 427; 5-6-2015 by Ord. No. 571]
A. Assessment and payment of tapping fee.
(1) Any person, firm or corporation applying for water service shall pay
a tapping fee of $3,238 with respect to any residential, commercial,
industrial, institutional or other construction which is to be
connected to the Collegeville-Trappe Joint Water System, for each
equivalent dwelling unit ("EDU") of use (defined as 167.7 gallons
per day). The tapping fee amount may be amended by resolution as
deemed necessary or desirable by Borough Council. [Amended
3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 594]
(2) Said payment shall be made to the Collegeville-Trappe Joint Public
Works Committee at such time as the final subdivision and
§ 659-2 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 659-5
1:584
§ 659-6. Charges for connection fee and customer facilities fee.
[Amended 4-6-1983 by Ord. No. 319; 10-7-1987 by Ord. No. 349;
5-6-2015 by Ord. No. 571]
development agreement is approved or a building permit is
requested, whichever first occurs.
B. In the event of subdivision, subsequent expansion of commercial,
industrial, residential, institutional or any other construction use, each
unit will be obligated to pay the before mentioned charge in proportion
to the number of EDUs subdivided or expanded. This capital
contribution charge shall include conversions of single-family homes
into two-family homes for each additional EDU, or fraction thereof,
where the property has been previously connected to the Collegeville-
Trappe Joint Water System. In case of commercial, industrial,
institutional or other nonresidential construction, or subsequent
expansion, the initial EDUs will be estimated based on information
provided by the commercial, industrial or institutional establishment
and as accepted by the Collegeville-Trappe Joint Water System's
engineer. At the end of a one-year period, or in subsequent annual
evaluation at the discretion of the Collegeville-Trappe Joint Water
System, the said system will review the commercial, industrial,
institutional or other nonresidential establishment and its water usage,
divide the water usage per quarter by the then current value of water
usage per EDU to determine the number of EDUs or fraction thereof.
Should the EDUs calculated by the above method be greater than the
anticipated EDUs paid at the time that the owner sought a building
permit, the commercial, industrial, institutional or other nonresidential
establishment shall pay the Borough the additional EDUs. That
payment will be within 30 days of the date of notice form the
Collegeville-Trappe Joint Water System to the property owner. If the
payment is not made, the Joint Water System may turn off the water
supply to the property owner until payment is received. In the event
that the EDUs calculated is less than the initial EDUs anticipated, no
reimbursement will be made.
A. Connection fee. There is hereby fixed and imposed upon the owner of
each property located in Collegeville Borough making any connection
to the water system operated and maintained by the Collegeville-
Trappe Joint Public Works Committee a connection fee equal to the
actual cost of installation of water service facilities from the water main
to the curb stop, including, but not limited to, opening the street,
installing a service line and curb stop and restoring the roadway,
curbing, sidewalk and any other disturbed area to PennDOT and
Borough specifications.
B. Customer facilities fee. There is hereby fixed and imposed upon the
owner of each property located in Collegeville Borough making any
connection to the water system operated and maintained by the
Collegeville-Trappe Joint Public Works Committee a customer facilities
§ 659-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 659-6
1:585
§ 659-7. Water rates; meter rates in case of disputed accounts.
[Amended 1-4-1978 by Ord. No. 281; 10-7-1981 by Ord. No. 310;
4-6-1983 by Ord. No. 319; 12-3-1986 by Ord. No. 339; 12/--/2001 by
Ord. No. 486]
§ 659-8. Responsibility for application for water; security deposit.
All applications for the supply of water shall be made by the owner of the
premises to be furnished, who shall guarantee the payment of the water
rent, provided however, that if the owner refused to so guarantee then
the tenant may make the application and upon the payment of $10 or a
larger sum if in the judgment of the Water Works Committee it be deemed
necessary to be held as security for the payment of any water consumed.
§ 659-9. When water rates due and payable; water shut off for
nonpayment NSF checks. [Amended 1-4-1978 by Ord. No. 281;
4-6-1983 by Ord. No. 319; 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 576; 3-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 594]
fee equal to the actual cost of installation of a water meter and backflow
preventer and inspection of facilities installed by the owner.
C. The lateral shall not be covered until the tap on the main is made and
the lateral is connected and tested.
D. In cases of state highways, the Collegeville-Trappe Joint Public Works
Committee will, at the request of the owner, make an application for the
opening of the street, the cost of the application to be at the expense of
the owner.
A. The rates for supplying of water shall be established by resolution of
Borough Council from time to time as deemed necessary or desirable by
Borough Council. [Amended 2-6-2013 by Ord. No. 556]
B. There shall be a yearly charge of $100 for unmetered fire hydrants
installed on by resolution as deemed necessary or desirable by Borough
Council. [Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 594]
C. In case of a disputed account involving a question as to the accuracy of
the meter, such meter will be tested upon request of the applicant. The
consumer may either personally or through a representative witness
the testing of the meter. The consumer may require the meter to be
sealed in his presence before removal, which seal shall not be broken
until the test is made in his presence if he so desires. If the meter so
tested shall be found to be accurate within the limits of a 4% allowance
for error, the consumer shall bay a charge of $10 for meters up to two
inches. If the meter is in excess of two inches, the charge shall be the
actual cost of material used and labor supplied plus 10% of the total of
the material and labor cost. If the meter is found to be in error, in excess
of the allowance of 4%, bills will be corrected accordingly and no
charge will be made for the testing.
§ 659-6 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 659-9
1:586
§ 659-10. Statement prepared when water rates or assessments
delinquent.
When any water rates or other municipal assessment remains unpaid, as
stated in § 659-9, the Borough Secretary and/or Superintendent of Water
Works shall prepare in duplicate a statement of the same showing the
character and location of the property which has received such water, the
name of the owner or owners thereof and the tenant, if any, the amount of
water furnished, the rate of the furnishing of same and the charge therefor.
§ 659-11. Notice to property owners of shutoff for delinquency.
[Amended 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 576]
A. All water rates are due and payable quarterly at the time and place
designated on the bill. When bills are not timely paid, a penalty of 10%
shall be added to such rates, and the delinquent consumer shall be
given 10 days' notice to pay the rates and penalty, in writing. If at the
expiration of said time the rate is not paid, the Director of Public Works
or other person designated by Council shall thereupon shut off the
water supply of the delinquent consumer and the same shall not be
turned on again until the water rates of such consumer are paid in full,
along with a fee of $50 for turning on the water.
B. There shall be imposed a fee of $30 upon any person who tenders a
check as payment which is returned for nonsufficient funds (NSF).
C. The fee amounts under this section may be amended by resolution as
deemed necessary or desirable by Borough Council.
A. The notice referenced in § 659-9 shall have printed or written on it the
following statement:
"To Owner or Owners of the above-described property: You are hereby
notified that if the above-stated municipal claim now due and owing is
not paid within 10 days from service of this notice, the same will be
collected according to law and in addition thereto, service of water to
said property may be discontinued until all rates and service charges
are paid, including the charge for restoring such service."
B. The notice referenced in § 659-17C shall have printed or written on it
the following statement:
"To Owner or Owners of the above-described property: You are hereby
notified that if access to your premises by the Borough, through its
agents, is not granted within 10 days from service of this notice, service
of water to said property may be discontinued until access is granted
and the charge for restoring such service is paid."
C. These statements shall be dated and the notices shall be signed by the
Borough Secretary and/or the Director of Public Works.
§ 659-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 659-12
1:587
§ 659-12. Service of notice of nonpayment or denial of access.
[Amended 12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 576]
§ 659-13. Statement and notice delivered to solicitor; collection of
claim.
In case said water rates are not paid within the time specified in the notice,
then the Borough Secretary and/or Superintendent of Water Works shall
deliver to the solicitor a copy of said statement and notice, and thereupon
the said claim shall be collected according to law, together with all costs
and penalties.
§ 659-14. Right of Borough to file lien.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall in any way be construed as a waiver
of the right of the Borough to file a lien against a property to which water
is supplied by the Borough for unpaid water rents or other charges made
in connection with the supplying of water, but on the contrary the Borough
expressly reserves said right and hereby declares the same to be a lien
against the particular property to which the water or service is furnished by
the Acts of Assembly in such cases provided.
§ 659-15. Independent connection for each building; requirements
for multiple-unit buildings.
A. The notice set forth in § 659-11 shall be served upon the property being
furnished with water, by posting written notice conspicuously on the
main entrance of the property.
B. Such notice shall also be mailed to the customer liable for payment, as
well as the owner or property manager of the property, if different than
the customer.
A. An application must be filed for each building connected or to be
connected and each building must be supplied by independent service
pipes from the supply main. In case of a double dwelling where a single
service pipe supplies the double house each side thereof must be
provided with separate meters and each domestic consumer shall be
provided with a separate meter, which will enable the water
department to shut off the supply of water to an offending consumer
without affecting a nonoffending consumer.
B. In the case of a multiple dwelling having not more than four living units
a separate meter shall be provided for each living unit.
C. In the case of a multiple dwelling having more than four living units an
application may be made for less than one meter for each living unit, as
the owner or manager of the said multiple dwelling house shall
determine; providing that the minimum charge per quarter shall be not
less than $7 times the number of living units in the multiple dwelling.
§ 659-12 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 659-15
1:588
§ 659-16. Discontinuance of service on request of customer.
Any consumer desiring to discontinue the use of water for any reason
must give written notice to the Borough Secretary or Superintendent of
Water Works, whereupon the water will be shut off from such premises. No
charge for water will be rebated nor any reduction made unless such notice
has been given and then only in case the service has been ordered to be
discontinued at least three months before the date water is desired to be
shut off.
§ 659-16.1. Certification of final meter reading. [Added 3-20-2019
by Ord. No. 594]
When requested for a real estate sale or transfer, there shall be fee of $30
for water or sewer certification statement from the Collegeville-Trappe Joint
Public Works Department. The fee amount may be amended by resolution
as deemed necessary or desirable by Borough Council.
§ 659-17. Rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations relative to the introduction and management of
water pipes and water supply in the Borough shall be as follows, to wit:
D. A supply of water for building or other special purposes, except on a lot
or premises already supplied with water by meter, must be specially
applied for, all applications for water for building purposes, when water
is not supplied through meter at meter rates, must be signed by the
owner or his duly authorized agent, and shall be interpreted to mean
the water is to be used only from a builder's hydrant, and shall not be
introduced into any of the house fixtures. There shall be a charge for
each quarter or part thereof at the rate applicable for the meter size
that it is anticipated shall be used for the building or buildings in
question as determined by the water superintendent. Meters shall be
installed wherever possible and consumption of water without a meter
shall be held to a minimum.
A. No owner or occupant of any building or premises will be permitted to
supply water from said premises to the owner or owners of any other
building or premises.
B. Consumers using water by meter shall not be permitted to have any
hose connections, faucets or other openings between the meter and the
water main and all the water used in the premises shall pass through
the meter.
C. Any damage done to a meter through freezing or neglect must be paid
by the owner of the property. The Borough, through its agents, reserves
to itself the right to disconnect the service pipes and remove the meter
if it shall find it necessary to do so in order to protect itself against
abuse or fraud. Additionally, the Borough, through its agents, shall have
free access at all reasonable hours to all parts of the property to which
§ 659-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 659-17
1:589
§ 659-18. Qualifications of plumbers; conditions for persons doing
own plumbing.
Any plumber wishing to do plumbing in connection with the water works
system must give to the Water Works Committee satisfactory evidence that
he is an experienced workman and willing to be governed by the rules and
regulations which are or may be hereafter adopted by Council, and any
person desiring to do his own plumbing must first obtain permission from
water is supplied in order to make necessary inspections, maintenance,
repairs or replacements of any portion of the water service facilities
located on said property. Should access either not be given or be
denied, the consumer or property owner shall be given notice that if
said access is not granted within 10 days, the water supply of the
delinquent consumer or property owner shall be shut off and the same
shall not be turned on again until said access is given, and in addition,
there shall be a charge as shall be set by resolution of the Borough
Council, from time to time, for turning on the water. [Amended
12-2-2015 by Ord. No. 576]
D. If the meter fails to register or is tampered with, a bill will be rendered
based upon the previous average consumption.
E. Fire hydrants or flushing valves shall only be used for the purpose for
which they were installed, unless permission for other uses is granted
by the Water Works Committee.
F. As necessity may arise in case of breakdown, emergency, or for any
other unavoidable cause, the Borough shall have the right to cut off the
water supply temporarily in order to make necessary repairs,
connections, etc., but the Borough will use all reasonable and practical
measures to notify the customer of such discontinuance of service. In
such case, the Borough shall not be liable for any damage or
inconvenience suffered by the customer, or any claim against it at any
time for interruption in service, lessening of the supply, inadequate
pressure, poor quality of water, or for any causes beyond its control.
When a supply of water is to be temporarily cut off, notice will be given,
when practicable, to all customers affected by the shutting off, stating
the probable duration of the interruption of service, and also the
purpose for which the shutoff is made.
G. Any owner or occupant of any building or premises who disrupts a
radio-frequency transmission from a radio-frequency-based water
meter or rejects the installation radio-frequency-based water meter,
shall be charged a quarterly meter reading fee of $30. Any owner or
occupant of any building or premises who has the Public Works
Department convert their radio-based water meter to a non-radiofrequency
water meter will be subject to a one-time conversion charge
of $50. The one-time conversion charge and quarterly fee may be
amended by resolution as deemed necessary or desirable by Borough
Council. [Added 6-5-2019 by Ord. No. 595]
§ 659-17 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 659-18
1:590
the Water Works Committee and the work shall be done to the satisfaction
of that committee.
§ 659-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Any person or persons, firms, partnerships or corporations violating any
of the foregoing rules or regulations or the terms of this chapter shall
forfeit all payments made by him or it, on account of said water supply and
the supply of water may be at once and without notice shut off and the
same shall not be restored unless the offending part shall pay an additional
charge of $10 for such restoration of water service, and shall further pay the
sum of not less than $5 nor more than $1,000 for each and every offense, to
be recovered as debts of like amount are by law recoverable.
Chapter 667
WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 427. Property maintenance — See Ch. 495.
§ 667-1. Growth of weeds and tall grass constitutes public nuisance.
It shall constitute a public nuisance for any person, firm or corporation,
being the owner or occupant of premises situate in the Borough, to permit
the growth or accumulation of Canada thistles or weeds commonly known
as "Canada thistles," "cichorium intybus," the weed commonly known as
"chicory" or "succory" or "blue daisy," or other weeds, tall grasses, ragweed,
poison ivy or obnoxious or objectionable vegetation on those premises.
§ 667-2. Owner or occupant to cut certain weeds to prevent their
going to seed.
It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of premises as mentioned
in § 667-1 on which any Canada thistles or cichorium intybus, the weed
commonly known as chicory or succory or blue daisy may be growing, to cut
all such weeds so as to prevent them from going to seed and the seed from
ripening, and every owner or occupant of premises who fails, neglects or
refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall forfeit and pay a
fine of not less than $10 and not more than $25 to the Borough, that fine and
costs to be collected by a summary proceeding before a Magisterial District
Judge having jurisdiction, or recovered in the same manner as debts of like
amount are by law recoverable, and, in default of payment of that fine and
costs, that owner or occupant shall be sentenced to imprisonment in the
Montgomery County prison for not less than five days or not more than 15
days.
§ 659-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 667-3
1:591
§ 667-3. Accumulation of certain vegetation constituting health or
fire hazards may be declared public nuisance.
Whenever Council shall, in its discretion, consider the growth or
accumulation of weeds, tall grasses or other obnoxious or objectionable
vegetation on any premises, to be prejudicial to the public health or to
create a fire hazard, the same may be declared as a public nuisance.
§ 667-4. Owner or occupant of premises notified to abate public
nuisance.
Whenever Council declares the growth or accumulation of Canada thistle,
blue daisies or other weeds, tall grasses, ragweed, poison ivy, obnoxious
or objectionable vegetation to constitute a public nuisance, it shall notify
the owner or occupant of the premises on which the public nuisance is
present to abate that nuisance within five days from the service of the
notice. The service of the notice shall be upon the owner or the occupant of
the premises either by depositing the notice with the United States Postal
authorities, delivering the notice to that owner or occupant personally,
delivering the notice to and leaving it with any adult person in charge of the
premise, or, in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing
the notice in a conspicuous position upon the premises.
§ 667-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-1-1989 by Ord. No.
363]
Every owner or occupant of any premises who fails, neglects or refuses to
abate a public nuisance as provided in § 667-4 shall forfeit and pay a fine
of not less than $10 and not more than $1,000 to the Borough, that fine
and costs to be collected by a summary proceeding before a Magisterial
District Judge having jurisdiction, or recovered in the same manner as debts
of like amount are by law recoverable, and, in default of payment of that
fine and costs, that owner or occupant shall be sentenced to imprisonment
in Montgomery County prison for not less than five days or not more than
15 days.
§ 667-6. Authority for Borough to abate public nuisance at expense
of owner or occupant in default.
If any owner or occupant of premises on which a public nuisance referred
to in this chapter exists fails, neglects or refuses to comply with an order
of Council for the abatement or removal of that public nuisance, Council or
its agents or employees may enter upon the premises to which that order
relates, and abate or remove the nuisance. The expense of that abatement
or removal shall be paid by the owner or occupant of the premises, and
that expense shall be a lien upon the lands upon which the nuisance
was maintained; for which a lien may be filed by Council in the name
of the Borough, in the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County,
Pennsylvania, within six months from the date of the completion of the
work of abatement or removal, subject to the same proceedings for entry
§ 667-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 667-6
1:592
and revival of judgment and execution as are provided by law for other
municipal liens. Council may also maintain an action against that owner
or occupant in the name of the Borough to recover the amount of such
expense, in the same way as debts of like amount are by law recoverable;
and the same when recovered either by enforcement of the lien or by
personal action, shall be paid to the Treasurer, to be held and used for
Borough purposes, but a final recovery of the amount in one proceeding
shall be a bar to the further continuance of the other.
Chapter 680
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 154.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 270.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 345.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
600.
§ 667-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 667-6
1:593

ARTICLE I
General
§ 680-1. Short title and effective date.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Collegeville Borough
Zoning Ordinance of 1948," as amended by comprehensive amendment
enacted April 7, 2004, and may be referred to as "the Zoning Ordinance"
or "this chapter" throughout this document. It shall become effective upon
enactment.
§ 680-2. Declaration of legislative intent.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety,
morals, and the general welfare of the Borough. The chapter is in
accordance with a Comprehensive Plan and is designed to lessen congestion
on the roads and highways, to promote safety from fire, panic, and other
danger, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding of
land, to avoid undue congestion of population, to facilitate the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other
public requirements, to conserve the value of buildings, and to encourage
the most appropriate use of land throughout the Borough.
§ 680-3. Statement of community development objectives.
This chapter is enacted in conformance with the requirements of the
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247,194 as last amended. It is the intent
of this chapter to implement the goals and objectives set forth in the
Collegeville Borough Comprehensive Plan of 1972, which is hereby
incorporated by reference into this chapter. In addition, the following
specific objectives are intended to guide the Borough's future development:
A. To guide the future growth and development of the Borough in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and provide and encourage
the following:
(1) A diversity of residential housing, while regulating development in
a pattern compatible with the Borough's street and road network
and its ability to provide efficient municipal services for its
residents.
(2) Suitable buffering strips between nonresidential and residential
sectors.
(3) Coordinated and concentrated development plans rather than a
proliferation of commercial and industrial uses.
(4) Innovative plans of land development, especially plans which
provide for the preservation of public open space and recreation
areas.
194. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 680-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-3
1:595
(5) Location of development where the movement of people and goods
can best be accommodated by the Borough's street and road
network, while preserving and protecting the open space that
remains.
B. To assure that new residential development will not place an undue
burden on the school system or adversely affect the ability of the
Borough to provide police and fire protection, sanitation control, road
maintenance, and other necessary services and facilities.
C. To require commercial and limited industrial development to conform
to the following characteristics:
(1) Sufficient off-street parking in relation to the use of and anticipated
traffic from the structures erected.
(2) Channeled vehicular ingress, egress, and access points to eliminate
the creation of traffic hazards on streets and roads.
(3) Appropriate safeguards to prevent or regulate proposed operations
and enterprises which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment
of neighboring properties or are detrimental to the natural
environment and property values.
§ 680-3 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-3
1:596
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 680-4. Word usage.
For purposes of this chapter, certain words shall be interpreted as follows:
§ 680-5. Definitions. [Amended 12-1-2004 by Ord. No. 508; 3-1-2006
by Ord. No. 518; 7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 519; 3-7-2007 by Ord. No.
526]
Words and terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings given in this
article. Unless expressly stated otherwise, any pertinent word or term not
a part of this listing, but vital to the interpretation of this chapter, shall be
construed to have its legal definition, or in absence of a legal definition, its
meaning as commonly accepted by practitioners, including civil engineers,
surveyors, architects, landscape architects, and planners.
ACCESS DRIVE — A privately owned, constructed, and maintained
vehicular access from a public or private right-of-way to off-street parking
or loading spaces.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A structure or building
detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use.
ACCESSORY USE — A use on the same lot and customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal building or use.
ACCESS STRIP — A piece of land which provides physical access to and
legal road frontage for a lot, but which does not comply with the minimum
lot width regulations of this chapter. Access strips provide access to flag,
A. Words used in present tense include the future.
B. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
C. The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended
for," "maintained for," and "occupied for."
D. The word "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership,
incorporated association, and/or any other similar entity.
E. The words "include" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specified examples, but are intended to extend the meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
F. The words "building" or "structure" shall always be construed as if
followed by the words "or part thereof."
G. The word "may" is permissive, and the words "shall" and "will" are
always mandatory.
§ 680-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:597
rear, or interior lots. The area of an access strip shall not be included in the
minimum lot area required under the provisions of this chapter.
ACT 247 — See Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.195
ADDITION — An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building
or structure.
ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY — Any premises operated for profit or not
for profit in which older adult daily living services, as defined herein, are
simultaneously provided for four or more adults who are not relatives of the
operator. The following types of adult day-care facilities are regulated by
this chapter:
ADULT USE — Any business, club, or other similar operation which permits
patrons, clients, visitors, or members to hear, view, read, lease, purchase,
trade, exchange, and/or participate in activities, publications, movies, video
tapes, and/or live or televised performances which have as their dominant
theme or themes explicit sexual activities and/or the exhibition of portions
of the human or animal anatomy which are not normally seen in public or
in commercial or other club-type operations, including the genital areas,
buttocks, and female breasts, and which operations may or may not exclude
minors by virtue of age. Included in the term "adult use" are bookstores,
movie theaters, restaurants, bars, and any other operation which qualifies
for inclusion by virtue of the definition above, regardless of the type of other
uses or operations which may also be conducted on or in the property or
properties involved.
AGRICULTURE — The cultivation of the soil, and the raising and harvesting
of products of the soil, including, but not limited to, nursery, horticulture
and floriculture operations and animal and poultry husbandry. This
definition also includes all necessary accessory uses for packing, treating,
and storing agricultural products; provided, however, that the operation
of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal
agricultural activities.
ALLEY — A minor vehicular right-of-way, public or private, on which no
principal structures front, which serves as the secondary means of access
to two or more properties which otherwise front on a public street.
ALTERATION — As applied to building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or mechanical equipment, or any
enlargement or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally
ADULT DAY-CARE HOME — Any adult day-care facility in which
services are provided to between four and eight adults, and where the
day-care areas are being used as a family residence.
A.
ADULT DAY-CARE CENTER — Any adult day-care facility in which
services are provided to eight or more adults, and where the day-care
areas are not being used as a family residence.
B.
195. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:598
or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to
another.
ANCILLARY USE — A subordinate use that is controlled by a larger
permitted use. An example is a garage which also sells tires, batteries, and
other auto accessories or garden shop controlled by a department store.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A place where animals or pets are given medical or
surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care
incidental to the hospital use.
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — The raising and keeping of livestock, fish, furbearing
animals, honeybees, or poultry for any commercial purpose. The
keeping of livestock, fish, fur-bearing animals, honeybees, or poultry as
farm pets or for domestic purposes shall not be construed as animal
husbandry.196
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any pole, telescoping mast, tower,
tripod, or any other structure which supports a device used in the
transmitting or receiving of radio frequency energy.
APPLICANT — A person who has filed an application for approval of
subdivision, land development plan, variance, special exception, or
conditional use, including his/her heirs, successors, agents, and assigns.
The term also includes landowner, developer, builder, and/or other persons
responsible for the plans and construction or building or other
improvements on any parcel of land.
AQUIFER — An underground bed or stratum of earth, gravel, or porous
stone that contains water.
AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — The exposed ground level portion of an
aquifer.
ARCADE — A place of business where three or more coin-operated video
screen or pinball game machines are located.
AREA, GROSS or NET — See "acreage, gross or net."197
ASSEMBLAGE —
AUDITORIUM — A building containing a stage and seating for meetings
and/or performances.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION — Any premises used for supplying
gasoline and oil, tires, accessories and/or services for motor vehicles at
The merging of adjacent properties into a single unit of ownership or
use.
A.
B. The property so merged, considered as a unit.
196. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "antenna" and "antenna height," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 11-1-2017 by Ord. No. 584. See now §
680-61, Wireless communication facilities.
197. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:599
retail direct to the motorist consumer, including the making of automotive
repairs.
AUTO SALVAGE — The dismantling or disassembling of used motor vehicles
or recreation vehicles, or the storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete, or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
BANK — Financial or fiduciary institution, including savings and loan,
finance companies, credit unions, and other similar institutions.
BASEMENT — A space having one-half or more of its floor-to-ceiling height
above the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling
height of not less than 6 1/2 feet. A space which does not meet the above
criteria is a cellar.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOME — A home occupation that provides one to
six rooms (limited to two persons or one family per unit/room) for occasional
paying guests on an overnight basis for periods not to exceed 14 days with
breakfast being available on the premises at no additional cost. A bed-andbreakfast
home is allowable only in a building originally constructed as a
single-family detached dwelling.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — A commercial building that provides up to 20
rooms (limited to two persons or one family per unit/room) for paying guests
on an overnight basis for periods not to exceed 14 days with breakfast being
available on the premises at no additional cost. This use is not permitted in
a single-family dwelling.
BLOCK — A unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets
and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or any other barrier to
development.
BOARDINGHOUSE or ROOMING HOUSE — A building consisting of a
single dwelling unit and no more than five rooms or suites, where lodging is
provided with or without meals to tenants for periods generally longer than
30 days, for compensation.
BOROUGH SERVICES — All Borough buildings, structures and uses,
including, but not limited to, governmental offices, garages for the storage
of tools, equipment and vehicles, Borough-sponsored police and emergency
services, including those volunteer fire departments and emergency
services departments which are partially or wholly funded by the Borough
of Collegeville, and the use of land for stockpiling of materials used by the
Borough in its Borough functions.[Added 6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 550]
BUFFER — An area designed and functioning to separate the elements
and uses of land which abut it and to ease the transition between them.
Unless otherwise specified, "buffer" may be included as part of the required
setbacks and yard areas.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind or nature. (Also see
"accessory structure or building" and "principal building.")
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:600
BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL — The Building Inspector or other person
officially appointed by Borough Council to administer and enforce the
Borough building code.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio obtained by dividing the maximum
horizontal cross-section of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot
(including covered balconies, covered decks, covered porches, carports,
and breezeways, but excluding patios) by the total area of the lot upon
which the buildings are located.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The area of a lot within which a principal building
may be erected. This area is defined by the limits of the minimum front,
side, and rear yard areas, and encompasses the area of the lot not found in
the yard areas and rights-of-way.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — See "building code official."
BUILDING LINE — The line which serves as the rear boundary of the
minimum front yard and which is used for the purpose of measuring lot
width (see also "yard line").
CALIPER — Tree diameter measured at a depth of breast height (dbh).
CAMPGROUND — A plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are
located, established, or maintained for occupancy by camping units of the
general public as temporary living quarters for recreation, education, or
vacation purposes.
CAREGIVER — The person responsible for the direct care, protection,
supervision, and guidance of individuals in a day care setting.
CARPORT — A building open on two or more sides and used in conjunction
with a dwelling for the storage of private motor vehicles.
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street or highway designed for
vehicular traffic.
CELLAR — That portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade, and having more than one-half of its height below grade (see
"basement").198
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
deceased, including columbaria, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries
when operated in conjunction with the cemetery and within its boundaries.
CENTRAL SEWER OR WATER — A sewage disposal network and facilities,
or water supply network serving a group or series of property owners in
common; may be publicly or privately owned.
CHILD — A person under 16 years of age.
CHILD DAY-CARE FACILITY — The following types of child day-care
facilities are regulated by this chapter:
198. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "cell site" and "cellular telephone," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 11-1-2017 by Ord. No. 584. See now §
680-61, Wireless communication facilities.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:601
CHURCH — One or more buildings or structures which by design and
construction are primarily intended for the conducting of organized
religious services and accessory uses associated therewith.
CLOSED CUP FLASH POINT — The temperature at which a liquid sample
produces sufficient vapor to flash, but not ignite, when in contact with a
flame in a closed cup tester.
CLUB — A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue
common goals, interests, or activities and usually characterized by certain
membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings, and
a constitution and/or bylaws.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land within a development
site designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of the residents of
the development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas
set aside for public facilities. Common open space shall not be part of
individual residential lots, and shall be substantially free of structures but
may contain such recreational facilities for residents as are shown in the
approved development plan.
COMMON USE AREA — That area which is set aside for public use and
enjoyment as part of a planned commercial center or mixed use office and
commercial development, where required by this chapter. A common use
area may contain green area, recreation facilities, courtyards, plazas, and
other public amenities, but shall be substantially free of structures.199
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Collegeville Borough Comprehensive Plan
and amendments thereto, including maps, charts, and/or descriptive matter
officially adopted by the Borough Planning Commission and Borough
Council, indicating recommendations for the continuing development of
the municipality and including all elements required by the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.200
CONDITIONAL USE — A form of permitted use, authorized by this chapter,
under the jurisdiction of the Borough Council. The Borough Council is
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility in which care is provided for seven or
more children at any one time, where the child care areas are not being
used as a family residence.
A.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any premise other than the child's own
home, in which child day care is provided at any one time to four, five,
or six children who are not relatives of the caregiver, and where the
child care areas are being used as a family residence.
B.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A facility in which care is provided for
more than seven but less than 12 children at any one time, where the
child care areas are being used as a family residence.
C.
199. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "communication antenna," "communications
equipment building," and communications tower," which immediately followed this
definition, were repealed 11-1-2017 by Ord. No. 584. See now § 680-61, Wireless
communication facilities.
200. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:602
empowered to grant permission for conditional uses, consistent with the
public interest, in compliance with the standards and procedures
established in this chapter, following thorough examination of the proposal,
and under any reasonable safeguards necessary to implement the purposes
and intent of this chapter and to protect the general welfare of the Borough.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions, created under either the
Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of July 3, 1963, or the Pennsylvania Uniform
Condominium Act.201
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building or structure,
including the placement of mobile homes.
CONTIGUOUS — Sharing a boundary; for purposes of this chapter,
properties on opposite sides of a public right-of-way shall not be considered
contiguous.
CONVENIENCE STORE — An establishment which includes the sale of
retail items, including, but not limited to, dry goods, prepared foods and
foods prepared on site which can be consumed on premises in seating
provided or off premises, and the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel (including
gasoline and diesel) on property where the subject lot is at least 1 1/2 acres,
has street frontage on three sides, and whose principal building on the
subject lot exceeds 5,000 square feet. Motor vehicle fuel pumps shall be
located under the cover of a canopy.[Added 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 583]
CONVERSION — The remodeling or alteration of a structure so as to
accommodate more leasable or saleable units or a different use than what
had originally been intended for the structure. Includes the alteration of a
nonresidential structure into a dwelling unit(s) for at least one family, the
modification of a single-family structure to accommodate more units than
originally intended, the alteration of existing dwellings into a commercial
use, and the alteration of an existing dwelling into a mixed commercial and
residential use.
COUNTY — The County of Montgomery, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
CULVERT — A drain, ditch, or conduit not incorporated in a closed system,
that carries drainage water under a driveway, roadway, or paved area.
CURATIVE AMENDMENT — An amendment, submitted either by a citizen
or by the municipality, to be considered by the Borough Council as a
potential cure for a successful challenge to the substantive validity of a land
use ordinance.
CURATIVE CHALLENGE — A substantive challenge to the validity of the
land use ordinance and/or map, brought before the Zoning Hearing Board
for consideration.
201. Editor's Note: The Unit Property Act was repealed 7-2-1980, P.L. 286, No. 82. See 68
Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:603
DAY-CARE FACILITY — See "child day-care facility," "adult day-care facility."
DECIBEL (dB) — The unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a
specific location.
DECK — An unroofed structure projecting from the front, side or rear wall
of a building.
DEED — A written instrument whereby an estate in real property is
conveyed by a grantor to a grantee.
DEED RESTRICTION — A restriction upon the use of a property placed in a
deed.
DEED, WARRANTY — A deed in which, either expressly or by implication,
the grantor guarantees that the title which he undertakes to transfer has
not been previously conveyed by him and is free from defects and that
the property is unencumbered except as stated, and for himself and heirs,
agrees to defend and protect the grantee against any loss which may be
suffered by reason of the existence of any other title or interest in the
property existing at the time the deed was executed and not accepted
therein.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per net acre.
DETENTION BASIN OR POND — A facility for the temporary storage of
stormwater runoff.
DETONABLE MATERIALS — Materials which decompose by detonation.
Such materials include explosives, unstable compounds, and fissionable
matter.
DETONATION — A rapid buildup of a destructive pressure wave caused by
chemical reaction and/or the sudden release of energy.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate including buildings or other structures, streets and other paving,
utilities, mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling
operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for guiding development,
including a plan of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location and
bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, parking facilities, ways, common open space, and
public facilities.
A. BA — The A-weighted unit of sound pressure level.
B. BC — The C-weighted unit of sound pressure level.
WEIGHTING — — The electronic filtering in sound level meters that
models human hearing frequency sensitivity.
C.
WEIGHTING — — The electronic filtering of sound level meters that
models a flat response (output = input) over the range of maximum
human hearing sensitivity.
D.
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:604
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking, or placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner
that the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the
environment, is emitted into the air, or is discharged to the waters of the
commonwealth.
DRAINAGE — The natural or man-made features of land that are specifically
designed to store or carry surface water runoff.
DRIVE-IN USE — An establishment which by design, physical facilities,
service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to
receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their
motor vehicles.
DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOW — A customer service facility designed for the
convenience of the motoring public accessory to an office, bank, restaurant,
or retail establishment which is intended to enable the customer to transact
business with a person located within a structure or with a machine without
exiting the motor vehicle.
DRIVEWAY — A private cartway providing vehicular access between a
public street and a lot or property.
DUMP — See "solid waste disposal facility."
DWELLING TYPES — For the purposes of this chapter, the following are the
definitions of the various types of dwelling units:
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling designed for
and occupied exclusively as a residence for only one family and not
attached to any other building or dwelling units.
A.
TWO-FAMILY BUILDING — A residential building containing two
dwelling units and which is not attached to any other building. A twofamily
building counts as two dwelling units for density purposes.
TWIN (SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED) — A two-family building
with dwelling units placed side by side, and joined to each other
by a vertical common party wall but otherwise surrounded by yard
areas. When lotted, each dwelling unit may be on a separate lot,
with the common boundary between the two lots running along
the common party wall. Separate ingress and egress is provided to
each unit.
(1)
DUPLEX (TWO-FAMILY DETACHED) — A two-family building with
one dwelling unit placed above the other so that they share a
common horizontal partition. When lotted, a duplex shall be
entirely on one lot. Separate ingress and egress is provided to each
unit.
(2)
B.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit
having its own independent outside access, with no other dwelling units
located directly and totally above or below it, and having party walls
in common with at least one but not more than three adjacent similar
C.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:605
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms designed, occupied, or intended
to be occupied as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and
sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of
a single family maintaining a household.
EASEMENT — A vested or acquired right to use land other than as a tenant,
for a specific purpose, such right being held by someone other than the
owner who holds title to the land.
ELEVATION —
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration, or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies, of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam, water or sewer
dwelling units, and located in a building comprised of at least three
dwelling units. Each dwelling unit may be individually lotted, or owned
as a condominium. This dwelling type shall include, but not be limited
to, dwelling units commonly known as "townhouses," "row houses,"
"triplexes," "quadriplexes," and "multiplexes."
TOWNHOUSE (ROW HOUSE) — A single-family attached dwelling
in a row of at least three units, with one dwelling unit from ground
to roof, with individual outside access. Although these units are in
rows, their design should de-emphasize a lined-up appearance.
(1)
MULTIPLEX — An attached dwelling arranged in a group of no
more than six units, in a variety of configurations: side-by-side,
back-to-back, or vertically. Because of the variety of configurations,
a multiplex can be designed to look like a large, single-family
detached house; this feature is encouraged.
(2)
MULTIFAMILY BUILDING — A detached residential building containing
three or more dwelling units. Units may not be arranged entirely in
vertical rows (like townhouses), and are generally located entirely
above or below one another. Units may share outside access and/or
internal hallways, lobbies, and similar facilities. The dwelling units
cannot be individually lotted, but instead, share the lot or tract on
which the building containing them is located. The development is
usually under one operating unit, as a rental or condominium
development. This dwelling type includes, but is not limited to, garden
apartments, flats and multifamily conversions, as defined below:
MULTIFAMILY CONVERSION — A multifamily dwelling containing
not more than four dwelling units, that results from the conversion
of a single-family or two-family dwelling.
(1)
D.
APARTMENT — A single dwelling unit in a multifamily building or
duplex or a single dwelling unit located above a first floor commercial
or office use in a mixed use structure.
E.
A. A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference level.
B. A flat scale drawing of the front, rear or side of a building.
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:606
transmission, or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply, or
disposal systems and their essential buildings, excluding communication
towers and communication antennas, as defined herein.
EXPLOSIVE MATERIAL — A material which produces flammable or
explosive gases or vapors under ordinary temperature conditions, and
includes liquids which have a closed cup flash point of less than 105° F.
FAMILY —
FARM OPERATION — A premises which is used for the production of
agricultural commodities in their unmanufactured state, such as raising
livestock, and which shall include those activities which are customarily
associated with such production, including the application of manure and/
or fertilizers for crop production.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — Restaurant where most customers order and
are served their food at a counter or in a motor vehicle in packages
prepared to leave the premises, or able to be taken to a table or counter to
be consumed.
FLAMMABLE — Subject to easy ignition and rapid flaming combustion.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourses, and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source. Those areas subject to
inundation by the waters of the one-hundred-year flood as delineated in
the Flood Insurance Study for the Borough of Collegeville, Montgomery
Any number of individuals living together on a nontransient basis as
a single housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises;
when said individuals are related by blood, marriage, or adoption,
no more than three unrelated individuals living together as a single
housekeeping unit and doing their cooking on the premises, except
when an application for a special exception to enable a greater number
of unrelated individuals to occupy a dwelling unit is reviewed and
approved by the Zoning Hearing Board, as provided herein. The
definition of "family" shall not apply to the occupants of a club,
fraternity, or sorority house, lodge, residential club or student home.
A.
Notwithstanding the definition in the preceding subsection, a family
shall also be deemed to include any number of mentally or physically
handicapped persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single, nonprofit
housekeeping unit, if such occupants are handicapped persons as
defined in Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the
Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.202 Such unrelated individuals
shall have the right to occupy a dwelling unit in the same manner and
to the same extent as any family unit as defined in the first subsection
of this definition.
B.
202. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:607
County, Pennsylvania, of June 1996, as prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN-RELATED TERMS —
BASE FLOOD — The flood which has been selected to serve as the basis
upon which the floodplain management provisions of this and other
ordinances have been prepared. For the purposes of this chapter, it
shall be the one-hundred-year flood as referenced in the current Flood
Insurance Study and delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the
Federal Insurance Administration.
A.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation
as referenced in the Flood Insurance Study. Within the approximated
floodplain, alluvial soils floodplain, or other similarly documented
areas, the one-hundred-year flood elevation shall be established as a
point on the boundary of the floodplain nearest to the construction site
in question.
B.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — Space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to permit the
passage of water and water vapor.
C.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding; except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage,
the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
D.
FEMA and FIA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the Federal Insurance Administration who have jurisdiction over the
National Flood Insurance Program and its related studies and
regulations. FEMA is the parent agency of the FIA.
E.
FLOOD — A temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas.
F.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP — The official FIA map which shows
special hazard zones and risk areas for insurance rating purposes. For
the purposes of this chapter, it also delineates floodplain areas.
G.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The examination and determination of
flood hazards by the FIA. The flood elevations contained in this study
are used for floodplain management purposes as related to this chapter
and other ordinances.
H.
FLOODPLAIN — A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a stream,
river, or watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete inundation
during a one-hundred-year flood, or any area subject to the unusual and
rapid accumulation of surface water from any source; also referred to
as flood-prone area.
I.
FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS — Those floodplain districts specifically
designated in this chapter as being inundated primarily by the onehundred-
year flood. Included would be areas identified as the Floodway
J.
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:608
District (FW), Flood-Fringe District (FF), and General Floodplain
District (FA).
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The application of a program or
activities which may consist of both corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood damages.
K.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. Such measures
are set forth in floodproofing regulations published by the Office of the
Chief Engineers, United States Army, Publication No. EP 1165 2 314
(June 1972, and as subsequently amended). Floodproofing measures
for all new construction and substantial improvements of structures
shall satisfy the requirements of the completely dry spaces (W1) and
essentially dry spaces (W2) classes referenced in these regulations. In
said publication, where reference is made to "below" (or above) the
"BFD" (base flood datum), it shall be interpreted as meaning below (or
above) the base flood elevation.
L.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land area required to carry and discharge a flood of the onehundred-
year magnitude as specifically defined in this chapter.
M.
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert,
building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along,
across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or designated
floodplain district which may impede, retard or change the direction
of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris
carried by such water, or is placed where the flow of the water might
carry the same downstream to the damage of life and property.
N.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that has one chance in 100
or a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any one year. For the
purposes of this chapter, the "one-hundred-year flood" (base flood) is as
defined by the Federal Insurance Administration in the Flood Insurance
Study.
O.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION (RFE) — The one-hundred-year
flood elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
P.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure either before the improvement
or repair is started, or, if the structure has been damaged and is
being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of
the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
Q.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:609
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of the exterior
walls, or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings, but not
including interior vehicular parking or loading, or any space where the
floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular parking
and loading, and all floor below the first or ground floor except when used
or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the public. The
area excluded as unusable may not exceed 15%.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — A ratio derived by dividing the total (gross) floor
area of all buildings on a lot by the buildable lot area.
FRONTAGE — The length of the lot line abutting a street right-of-way.
GREEN AREA — In a development, green area includes all landscape
features such as planters, planted islands, landscaped buffers and screens,
lawn areas, woods, hedgerows, and any area that is not covered by
buildings or paving. It is available and used for retention and maintenance
of natural vegetation and for absorption of stormwater for groundwater
recharge. Decorative stone and mulch ground covers may be included if
placed upon an earth surface.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and upper
floors, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of
partitions and from outside wall faces. It is the space for which tenants
pay rent, including sales areas and integral stock areas. It does not include
public or common areas, such as public toilets, corridors, stairwells,
elevator lobbies, or enclosed mall spaces.
GROUP HOME FOR THE HANDICAPPED — A dwelling with no more than
six handicapped persons, excluding resident staff, who live together as a
single housekeeping unit and in a long-term, family-like environment in
which staff persons provide care, education, and participation in community
activities for the residents with the primary goal of development or
exercising the residents' basic skills for daily living. As used herein, term
"handicapped" shall have the meaning: (1) a physical or mental impairment
which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities
so that such person is incapable of living independently; (2) a record of
having such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having such an
impairment. However, "handicapped" shall not include current, illegal use
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions.
(1)
Any alteration of a structure listed on a national register of historic
places or a state inventory of historic places.
(2)
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:610
of or addition to a controlled substance (as defined in Section 102 of
the Controlled Substance Act, 35 P.S. § 780-102), nor shall it include any
person whose residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals. The term "group home for the
handicapped" shall not include nursing homes, alcoholism or dry treatment
centers, work-release facilities for convicts or ex-convicts or other housing
facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration. The term "handicapped"
is interchangeable with a person with a disability.
GUEST ACCOMMODATIONS — See "bed-and-breakfast," "hotel," and
"motel."
HEALTH SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in furnishing
medical, surgical, or other services to individuals, including the offices
of physicians, dentists, and other health practitioners, medical and dental
laboratories, outpatient care facilities, blood banks, and oxygen and
miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services.
HEALTH-CARE FACILITY — A facility or institution, whether public or
private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance,
diagnosis, or treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity, or physical
condition, including a general hospital, public health center, diagnostic
center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extended care facility, skilled
nursing home, nursing home, intermediate care facility, chronic disease
hospital, maternity hospital, outpatient clinic, dispensary, home health care
agency, or personal care facility.203
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the existing grade at the location of the building to the highest
point of a flat or multilevel roof, or for gable, hip, or gambrel roofs to
the mean height between the eaves and ridge. Chimneys, spires, towers,
mechanical penthouses, tanks, and similar projections not intended for
human occupancy shall be excluded.
HOME OCCUPATION — The accessory use of a residence involving the
conduct of an art or profession, the offering of a service, the conduct of
a business, or the production of handicrafts on a residential site, pursuant
to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter. The use is incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes, and shall not
change the character of the residential use or adversely affect the uses
permitted in the residential district of which it is a part.
HOOKAH BAR/LOUNGE — Any establishment that is dedicated, in whole or
in part, to the smoking of a water pipe with a smoke chamber, a bowl, a
pipe and a hose, commonly referred to as a "hookah," and also known as
a narghile, shisha, hubble-bubble, and goza, or any similar device.[Added
4-4-2018 by Ord. No. 586]
203. Editor's Note: The former definition of "height of a communications tower," which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 11-1-2017 by Ord. No. 584. See now §
680-61, Wireless communication facilities.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:611
HOTEL — An establishment providing transient accommodations,
containing a minimum of five rental rooms, and having the following
characteristics:
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Those surfaces which are covered in any way
so as not to allow the ground beneath to absorb water at a natural rate,
including, but not limited to, buildings, walks, roofs, swimming pools, manmade
ponds, and paved or stoned areas.[Amended 7-9-2014 by Ord. No.
569]
IMPROVEMENTS — The physical additions, installations and changes
required to render land suitable for the use proposed, including streets,
curbs, sidewalks, utilities, and drainage facilities.
INDUSTRY — Those fields of economic activity, including forestry,
construction, manufacturing, transportation, communication, extraction,
utility services, and wholesale trade. (See "industry, light" and "industry,
heavy.")
INDUSTRY, HEAVY — Industrial activities which do not meet the definition
of "light industry."
INDUSTRY, LIGHT — Industrial activities which are carried on entirely
within an enclosed building, and involve no outdoor processes or outdoor
storage of primary raw materials.
JUNK — Includes refuse, rubbish, debris, and scrap, whether salvable or not
and made from any and all material other than solid waste as defined by
the Solid Waste Management Act204 and amendments, as would normally be
disposed of at a sanitary landfill as defined herein. (See "salvage," "waste,"
"recyclable materials.")
JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD — Any outdoor establishment or place of business
which is maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying, or
selling junk, and for the purposes of this section, the term shall include
refuse, rubbish, garbage, and debris whether salvable or not and made of
any or all materials. It shall not include, however, refuse or garbage kept in
proper containers for the purposes of prompt disposal.
KENNEL, ANIMAL — Any structure or premises in which more than six
dogs or domesticated small animals more than one-year old are housed,
groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold.
LAKES AND PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain
water year-round. Artificial ponds may be created by dams, or result from
excavation. The shoreline of such water bodies shall be measured from the
A. Access to rooms is provided through a lobby and internal hallways.
B. Building height is two or more stories.
Often provides meeting rooms, banquet facilities, and ancillary
commercial shops within the building, with internal hallway access.
C.
204. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:612
maximum condition rather than permanent pool if there is any difference.
Lakes are bodies of water two or more acres in extent. Ponds are any water
body less than two acres in extent.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option of contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LOADING SPACE — A space, accessible from a street, in a building or on a
lot, for the temporary use of vehicles while loading or unloading materials
or merchandise.
LOT — A contiguous tract, parcel, or unit of land held by a landowner and/
or intended for use, development, lease, or transfer of ownership, and for
which a deed description is recorded or is intended to be recorded at the
office of the Recorder of Deeds for Montgomery County.
LOT AREA, BUILDABLE — Net lot area contained by the building line,
minus the area of any land in a floodplain conservation district, in a steep
slope conservation district, or in a wetlands area.
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts,
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure.
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups, or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
A.
Except that the following activities shall not be considered land
developments:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium.
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building.
(2)
B.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:613
LOT AREA, GROSS — Calculated land area contained within the deeded
boundaries of a lot.
LOT AREA, NET — Gross lot area minus areas of public and private rightsof-
way, easements, ultimate rights-of-way and access strips for flag lots.
LOT, CORNER — A lot having contiguous frontage on two or more
intersecting roads. The yard setback for each road frontage shall be the
front yard setback for the district in which the lot is located.
LOT, FLAG — A lot not fronting or abutting a public roadway and where
access to the public roadway is limited to a narrow private right-of-way. This
definition does not include the commonly used wedge shaped lots located
on a cul-de-sac turnaround.
LOT LINE — Any property boundary line of a lot, further defined as follows:
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured
at the building line, parallel or concentric to the ultimate right-of-way line.
For a corner lot, lot width shall be measured parallel or concentric to
the ultimate right-of-way line of the higher classification of street, where
applicable.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE STRUCTURES — A transportable structure
intended for permanent residential occupancy, office, or place of assembly,
contained in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which
arrives at a site completed and ready for occupancy except for minor or
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it
may be used with or without a permanent foundation. The term includes
park trailers, travel trailers, recreational, and other similar vehicles which
are placed on a site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED PARK — A parcel of land which has been planned and
improved for the placement of two or more manufactured structures for
nontransient use.
MANUFACTURING — The process or operation of making wares or
products from raw materials by hand or by the use of machine(s).
Front lot line is the line identical with the street ultimate right-of-way
line (also known as "street line").
A.
Rear lot line is the line or lines most nearly parallel or concentric to the
front lot line.
B.
Side lot lines are the lines most nearly perpendicular or radial to the
front lot line. On a corner lot, the side lot line shall be the line or
lines most nearly perpendicular or radial to the higher classification of
street, where applicable. The remaining line shall be considered the
rear lot line.
C.
A lot which fronts on more than one street shall have a front lot line on
each street frontage.
D.
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:614
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one or more units, built on a permanent
chassis, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed
so that it may be used with or without a permanent foundation. It may
not meet local building codes but does meet the standards of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, as indicated by the
structural engineering bulletin(s) provided to the Borough Council by the
applicant. This term does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MODULAR HOME — A single-family dwelling unit for permanent
occupancy, made by assembling one or more factory-produced, threedimensional
sections into one integral building, not capable of easily being
separated for repeated towing, whose construction materials must conform
to those of conventionally built units, as required by the Borough's building
code, and must be placed on a permanent foundation. A copy of the
structural engineering bulletin(s) must be provided to the Borough Council,
indicating approval of the dwelling or its components by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
MOTEL — An establishment providing transient accommodations,
containing a minimum of six rental rooms and having the following
characteristics:
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AGENCY — A commercial use for the sale and
repair of motor vehicles, including new and used cars, trucks, recreational
vehicles, and/or farm equipment; having both indoor and outdoor display
areas, and providing maintenance and repair services for vehicle owners.
MOTOR VEHICLES — All vehicles propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power and intended for use on public highways or in agricultural
activities.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use of a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client,
or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery, or
removal functions to or from the premises, in excess of those normally
associated with residential use.
NOISE — Any sound of such level and duration as to be or tend to be
injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably
interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the municipality
or in any portions thereof, but excludes all aspects of the employer-
A. Access to rooms is from directly outside the building.
B. Building height is only one or two stories.
C. The facility is generally served by a central office rather than a lobby.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:615
employee relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the
confines of a place of employment.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) — A person qualified in the
measurement of sound and empowered to investigate sound levels when
requested by the Borough.
OCTAVE BAND — A means of dividing the range of sound frequencies into
octaves in order to classify sound according to pitch.
OLDER ADULT DAILY LIVING SERVICES — Services provided or arranged
for part of a twenty-four-hour day to assist in meeting the needs, including,
but not limited to, personal care, social, nutritional, health, and education
needs, of a population of persons who are predominantly 60 years of age
or older or who are under 60 years of age but who have a dementia-related
disease, such as Alzheimer's disease, as a primary diagnosis. The term does
not include services provided for persons whose needs are such that they
can only be met in a long-term care facility on an inpatient basis, receiving
professionally supervised nursing care and related medical and other health
services. (See "adult day-care facility.")
OPEN SPACE — Public or private lands designated for the use and
enjoyment of residents of a development and/or the general public,
incorporating natural features such as woodlands, streams, or meadows,
and including state, county, or Borough parks, trails, and other recreational
facilities. Also includes "common open space" as defined below, and other
private lands which are available for the use of Borough residents (i.e.,
through access easements). (See "common open space.")
PARK — Any area which is predominantly open space, is used principally for
active or passive recreation, and is not used for a profit-making purpose.
PARKING FACILITIES — Outdoor areas or specially designed buildings or
garages used for the storage of vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — An open area or an area covered with a dust-free,
all-weather surface for the storage of one automobile, accessible via a
driveway.
PARTICULATE MATTER — Material other than water which is suspended in
or discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form, as a liquid or
solid.
PEDESTRIAN PICK UP WINDOW — A window designed to be used by a
pedestrian to obtain goods or receive services. Such a window may not
be used in conjunction with a motorized vehicle and differs from a drivethrough
window in that it is to be used only by pedestrians.
PENNSYLVANIA MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — The Municipalities
Planning Code, originally enacted as Act 247 of 1968,205 which establishes
the basic authority for the exercise of municipal land use controls in
Pennsylvania. All subsequent amendments are included. Abbreviated as
"MPC" or "Act 247."
205. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:616
PERMIT — A document issued by the proper authority authorizing the
applicant to undertake specified activities.
PERSONAL SERVICES — A business which provides a service oriented
to personal needs, and not primarily involving retail sales of goods or
professional advisory services. Includes barber, beauty salon, tailor,
dressmaker, shoe repair, photographer, travel agent, jewelry and watch
repair, or similar service uses. It does not include a massage parlor or tattoo
parlor.
PLAN — A graphic representation of a proposal for subdivision and/or land
development, including necessary written notes.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Collegeville Borough Planning
Commission.
PORCH — A roofed structure projecting from the front, side, or rear wall of
a building.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building which is considered the principal use
of the lot on which it is located.
PRINCIPAL USE — The single dominant use or single main use on a lot.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal or residual waste or any technology used to
convert part or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing
facilities include, but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting
facilities, and resource recovery facilities.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — A building in which services are performed by a
member of a profession, including an accountant, architect, author, dentist,
engineer, insurance agent, landscape architect, lawyer, notary, optometrist,
physician, planner, realtor, or similar occupations.
PROPERTY LINE — A recorded boundary of a lot. Any property line which
abuts a street or other public way shall be measured from the right-of-way.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
governing body, Planning Commission, or other municipal agency, intended
to inform and obtain public comment prior to taking action in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.206
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of
July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act"207 ("...any
prearranged gathering of an agency which is attended or participated in by
a quorum of the members of an agency, held for the purpose of deliberating
agency business or taking official action.").
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice of a public hearing published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality. Such notice shall state the time and
place of the hearing and particular nature of the matter to be considered at
206. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
207. Editor's Note: Said Sunshine Act was repealed 10-15-1998 by P.L. 729, No. 93; see now 65
Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:617
the hearing. The publication of a public notice shall be in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as last amended.208
PUBLIC UTILITIES FACILITY — A building or structure and its equipment,
used for the transmission and exchange of telephone, radio telephone, gas,
power, sewer, and water facilities; provided, however, that in a residential
district, these shall not include public business facilities, storage of
materials, trucks, or repair facilities, or housing of repair crews.
PUBLIC UTILITY — A company regulated by the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission. Cellular communications companies and other companies not
defined as a public utility by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
shall not be considered a public utility.
PUBLIC UTILITY TRANSMISSION TOWER — A structure owned and
operated by a public utility electric company regulated by the Pennsylvania
Public Utility Commission, designed and used to support overhead
electricity transmission lines.
PURE TONE — Any sound that can be judged as a single pitch or set of
single pitches by the NCO.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either the imaginary line, including its vertical
extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another, or
the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one in a
multidwelling unit building.
RECEIVE-ONLY EARTH STATION — An antenna and attendant processing
equipment for reception of electronic signals from satellites.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials separated from municipal waste
which are to be used as raw materials for the development of new usable
products. Recyclable materials can include the following items: newsprint,
high-grade office paper, glass, aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans, plastic,
corrugated paper and leaf wastes.
RECYCLING OPERATION — An establishment which is maintained or used
or operated for the purposes of temporarily storing and preparing scrap
and/or discard materials for consumption by other establishments whose
operations include producing products from recycled materials.
RELATIVE — A parent, child (including adopted), stepparent, stepchild,
grandparent, grandchild, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister,
stepbrother, stepsister, first cousin, aunt, uncle, niece, or nephew.
RESIDENTIAL INFILL DEVELOPMENT — Residential development that
occurs when an existing, developed lot is further subdivided for one or more
building lots.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, except those fitting the definition
of fast food restaurants, at which food is sold for consumption on the
premises to patrons seated within an enclosed building, or elsewhere on
the premises. However, a snack bar or refreshment stand at a public,
208. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:618
semipublic, or community swimming pool, playground, playfield, or park
operated by the agency or group of an approved vendor operating the
recreational facilities and for the convenience of the patrons of the facility
shall not be deemed to be a restaurant. (Also see "fast food restaurant.")
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTTING — Lotting which extends between two
streets of differing classifications with vehicular access provided from the
lesser street, in order to promote traffic flow and safety on the greater
street.
SALVAGE — Any discarded material or articles, including scrap metallic or
nonmetallic items, whole or parts of vehicles and equipment, paper, glass,
containers, and structures, which is separated for industrial processing or
reprocessing and further used or reused. (See "junk," "waste," "recyclable
materials.")
SANITARY LANDFILL — See "solid waste disposal facility."
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A centralized sanitary sewer system or a
comparable common or package sanitary sewer facility approved by the
appropriate governmental health agency.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A device incorporating a reflective surface
that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow
dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit
and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or
orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include, but not be limited
to, what are commonly referred to as "satellite earth stations," "TVROs"
(television reception only), and "microwave antennas."
SATELLITE USE — A commercial establishment in a shopping center or
planned commercial center, located in a freestanding building independent
of other buildings, and frequently near the road frontage of the center.
Satellite uses are generally characterized by the following:
SCRAP PROCESSOR — A firm engaged in the business of preparing scrap
(metal or rags and paper) for consumption by steel mills or paper companies
or other establishments whose purpose it is to use scrap in producing
products.
SEWAGE FACILITIES, CENTRAL — A sewage disposal system in compliance
with all state and local regulations, approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and applicable sewer authority,
and providing service to multiple customers. Includes the following
definitions:
A. A need for nearby parking.
B. Rapid customer turnover.
C. Vehicular service bays or drive-through services.
PUBLIC SEWER FACILITIES — The central sewage system operated by
the Collegeville/Trappe Municipal Authority.
A.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:619
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments, planned
and developed as an integrated architectural and functional unit, providing
convenient on-site parking and controlled, common vehicular and
pedestrian access.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct,
or attract attention to an object, service, event, or location by any means,
including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination or projected images. Sign types and sign-related terms are
further defined in Article XXIII, herein.
SIGNIFICANT GAP — As defined by the courts, a significant gap is where
the holes in cellular coverage are very limited in number or size (such as
the interiors of buildings in a sparsely populated rural area, or confined
to a limited number of houses or spots as the area covered by buildings
increases), so that the lack of cellular coverage likely will be de minimis so
that denying applications to construct towers necessary to fill these holes
will not amount to a prohibition of service.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a contiguous
land area as one or more lots by one owner, whether a person, partnership,
corporation, or other legal entity, irrespective of the fact that parts of the
land may have been acquired at different times or that the area may have
been divided into parts on any plan or plat.
SOIL SURVEY — The Montgomery County Soil Survey of 1967, prepared
by the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY — A land use, including buildings, land
equipment, and any other appurtenances used in the processing of solid
waste, resource recovery, cogeneration of energy, recycling, incineration,
and/or landfilling as a means of disposal of solid waste.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A form of permitted use, authorized by this
chapter, under the jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning
Hearing Board is empowered to grant permission for special exceptions
COMMON SEWAGE FACILITIES — A sewage disposal system
independent of the public sewer system, serving more than one
residence or business through a community treatment plant, land
application system, or similar satellite system.
B.
DUMP — A site used primarily for the disposal by abandonment,
dumping, burial, burning, or other means, and for whatever purpose of
garbage, trash, junk, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste material of any
kind.
A.
SANITARY LANDFILL — Any outdoor establishment or place of
business operated or maintained for the disposal of solid waste by the
method known as "landfilling," in accordance with any or all federal,
state, and local landfilling laws, statutes, rules, and regulations. The
term "landfill" shall have the same meaning as sanitary landfill.
B.
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:620
consistent with the public interest, in compliance with standards and
procedures established in this chapter.
SPECIALIZED RETAIL — Retail shops and stores selling gifts, novelties,
flowers, books, periodicals, jewelry, apparel, tobacco, toys, crafts, hobby
supplies, cameras and film, stationery, or antiques. Stores in excess of 7,500
square feet in a single structure are not included in this use. Adult uses are
excluded from this definition and are defined separately above.
STEEP SLOPE — Areas with a gradient of 15% or greater, as determined by
the soil survey or accurate contour mapping.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it and including
those basements used for the principal use.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct, and any other ways used or intended to be
used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private.
STREET LINE — A line identical with the front lot line and ultimate rightof-
way line.
STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY — Rights-of-way for street purposes are defined
as follows:
STRUCTURE — Any thing built, constructed, or erected which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something located on the ground.
STUDENT — Any tenant, as defined herein, or proposed tenant attending
or enrolled in a post secondary educational or vocational institution at any
time during the period beginning five months prior to the first day of his or
her lease and ending on the last day of such lease term or any extension
thereof; provided, however, that a tenant shall not be deemed a student if
the aggregate number of academic or vocational equivalent credit hours
enrolled in by such tenant during the aforesaid period is less than nine.
STUDENT HOME — A living arrangement for students, unrelated by blood,
marriage or legal adoption, attending or about to attend a college or
university or who are on a semester or summer break from studies at a
college or university, or any combination of such persons. Student homes
shall not include fraternities, sororities or group homes for the
handicapped.[Amended 3-4-2009 by Ord. No. 537]
LEGAL RIGHT-OF-WAY — The street right-of-way legally in the public
domain at the time a plan is submitted. All setbacks are measured from
the legal right-of-way line, unless specifically mentioned in an individual
district.
A.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The street right-of-way projected as
necessary for adequate handling of anticipated maximum traffic
volumes. The ultimate right-of-way is the legal right-of-way where it has
been offered for dedication and accepted by the Borough.
B.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:621
STUDENT RESIDENCE HALL — A structure containing a living
arrangement owned or leased by an educational institution and operated as
an integral part of that educational institution for the use of its students.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL CONSTRUCTION — Construction on an approved project is
recognized as having begun when foundation footings are poured or other
structural supports are installed and such footings or supports have passed
any required inspection.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damaged occurred.
SWIMMING POOL — Any structure that contains water over 24 inches (610
mm) in depth and which is used, or intended to be used, for swimming or
recreational bathing. This includes in-ground, aboveground, and on-ground
swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas.
TATTOO PARLOR/BODY-PIERCING STUDIO — An establishment whose
principal business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the
public, is the practice of one or more of the following:
TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL OCCUPANCY — The use of any premises or
structure for living and/or sleeping purposes for less than 100 consecutive
days in any calendar year.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A recreational vehicle requiring a separate power
source for pulling, which may include living, sleeping, eating, and sanitary
facilities, but which is designed for vacation travel and not for long-term or
permanent occupancy.
ULTIMATE RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The dividing line between a lot and the
outside limit of the ultimate right-of-way of a public street. Identical with
"front lot line" and "street line."
UTILITY FACILITIES — Aboveground structures or facilities (other than
buildings, unless such buildings are used for storage incidental to the
Placing of designs, letters, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or
under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances that result
in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles
or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin.
A.
Creation of an opening in the body of a person for the purpose of
inserting jewelry or other decoration.
B.
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:622
operation of such structures or facilities) owned by a governmental entity,
a nonprofit organization, corporation, or any entity defined as a public
utility for any purpose by the Pennsylvania Public Utilities Commission and
used in connection with the production, generation, transmission, delivery,
collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, or
communication signals. Excepted are utility transmission lines and
supporting structures.
VARIANCE — The granting of permission by the Zoning Hearing Board
to use or alter land or structures which requires a variation from the
strict application of a requirement of this chapter. Variances are granted
only if specific requirements are met, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 680-20.
VEGETATIVE COVER — The portion of land devoted to vegetative coverage,
including lawns, trees, shrubs, flowers, and gardens.
VEHICLE DISPLAY AREA — An open area, other than a street or parking
area, used for display, sale, or rental of new or used motor vehicles,
recreational vehicles, or boats in operable condition, and where no major
repairs are done.
VISUAL SCREEN — A barrier whose purpose is to obscure a view, generally
comprised of plant materials suitable for the purpose.
WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings primarily used for the
commercial storage, transfer, and distribution of products and materials.
WAREHOUSE, MINI — A building or group of buildings situated in a
controlled access compound which are divided into individual separate
access units which are rented or leased for the storage of tangible personal
property.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed.
This term does not include source-separated recyclable materials. Waste is
further classified as follows, in accordance with Act 101, the Solid Waste
Management Act:209
AGRICULTURAL WASTE — Poultry and livestock manure, or residual
materials in liquid or solid form generated in the production and
marketing of poultry, livestock, fur-bearing animals, and their products,
if the agricultural waste is not hazardous. The term includes the
residual materials generated in producing, harvesting, and marketing
of agronomic, horticultural, and silvicultural crops or commodities
grown on the premises of a farm operation.
A.
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION WASTE — Solid waste resulting from
the construction or demolition of buildings and other structures,
including wood, plaster, metals, asphaltic substances, bricks, block, and
unsegregated concrete. The term also includes dredging waste. The
term does not include clean fill separated from other waste.
B.
209. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:623
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — A system designed to transmit water from a
source to users, in compliance with the requirements of the appropriate
state agencies and the local authorities. Includes the following definitions:
CLEAN FILL — Uncontaminated, non-water-soluble, nondecomposable
inert solid material used to level an area or bring the area to grade.
Includes uncontaminated soil, rock, gravel, brick, block, and concrete.
C.
HAZARDOUS WASTE —
Municipal or agricultural waste which because of its quantity,
concentration, physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics
may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality
or an increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total
population.
(a)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
(b)
(1)
The term does not include point sources subject to permits under
§ 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act,210 as amended, or
source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the
United States Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.211
(2)
D.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste, or other material resulting from operation of residential,
municipal, commercial, or institutional establishments and from
community activities; and sludge not meeting the definitions of residual
or hazardous waste from a municipal, commercial, or institutional
water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant, or air
pollution control facility.
E.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Garbage, refuse, or other discarded material or
waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous materials
resulting from industrial, mining, and agricultural operations and
sludge from an industrial, mining, or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, wastewater treatment facility, or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous.
F.
SOLID WASTE — Waste, including municipal, residual, or hazardous
wastes.
G.
WATER FACILITIES, COMMON — A water distribution system serving
a single neighborhood or development.
A.
WATER FACILITIES, PUBLIC — A water distribution system serving all
or a portion of the Borough and operated by a certified public utility.
B.
210. Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
211. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.
§ 680-5 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-5
1:624
WATERCOURSE — A place intended or used for the directed surface flow
of water, including permanent and intermittent streams, brooks, creeks,
channels, ditches, swales, and rivers.
WETLANDS — Those areas that are inundated and saturated by surface
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; includes swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas. Development in wetlands is regulated
by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. Identification of wetlands should
be based upon the Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Wetlands,
an interagency publication of the Corps of Engineers, EPA, Fish and Wildlife
Service, and Natural Resources Conservation Service, dated January 1989.
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — Places of business primarily engaged in selling
merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or
professional business users, or to other wholesalers, or acting as agents
or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such
individuals or companies.
WOODLANDS — Areas, groves, or stands of mature or largely mature trees
(i.e., greater than six inches in caliper) covering an area greater than 1/
4 of an acre, or groves of mature trees (greater than 12 inches in caliper)
consisting of more than 10 individuals.
YARD — The area(s) of a lot which must remain free of buildings or other
structures, and may be used as lawn or planted area, parking or driveway
space, in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A yard is measured
at right angles from the right-of-way or lot line to the nearest building wall.
"Yard" is further defined as follows:
YARD LINE — A line which locates and delineates the minimum yard
setback requirements, measured from the front, rear, and side lot lines.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
FRONT YARD — A yard which extends across the full width of a lot, for
a depth equal to the minimum front yard setback distance required by
the specific regulations of this chapter, measured from the street legal
right-of-way line, unless stated otherwise.
A.
REAR YARD — A yard which extends across the full width of a lot, for a
depth equal to the minimum rear yard setback distance required by the
specific regulations of this chapter, measured from the rear lot line.
B.
SIDE YARD — A yard which extends along a side lot line from the
required front yard to the required rear yard, the minimum width of
which shall be the minimum specified by the regulations of this chapter,
measured from the side lot line. However, corner lots shall be regarded
as having two front yards for the frontage along a street. Therefore, the
setback for a side yard with street frontage shall be the same as the
front yard setback for the district in which the property is located.
C.
§ 680-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-5
1:625

ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 680-6. Zoning Officer.
For the administration of this chapter, a Zoning Officer, who shall not
hold any elective office in the municipality, shall be appointed by Borough
Council. The Zoning Officer shall meet qualifications established by the
Borough and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough
a working knowledge of municipal zoning. The Zoning Officer shall
administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms, and shall not
have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of use
which does not conform to this chapter. Zoning Officers may be authorized
to institute civil enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement when
acting within the scope of their employment.
§ 680-7. Duties and powers.
The Zoning Officer shall have the authority to:
A. Keep a report of all plans and applications for permits, and all permits
issued with notations as to special conditions attached thereto. All
records shall be open for public inspection.
B. Review applications for permits for erections or alterations of
structures or changes of use, determine whether such construction or
use is in accordance with the general requirements of this chapter, all
other applicable ordinances of the Borough, and with the laws and
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Zoning Officer
shall issue no permit unless it conforms with all applicable ordinances,
statutes, and regulations of Collegeville Borough.
C. Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or
noncompliance with the terms of this chapter. In carrying out such
surveys, the Zoning Officer or his or her representatives may enter
upon any land or building within the Borough within the limits of law
regarding trespass and illegal search.
D. Make written orders requiring compliance with the provisions of this
chapter to be served personally or by registered mail.
E. Institute civil enforcement proceedings for the enforcement of
provisions of this chapter, when acting within the scope of his or her
employment.
F. Maintain a map showing the current zoning classification of all land
within the Borough.
G. Maintain a map and register showing the registration, identity, location,
and type of all nonconforming uses within the Borough.
§ 680-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-7
1:627
§ 680-8. Appeals.
An appeal from the determination of the Zoning Officer shall be taken within
the limits and according to the procedures described in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.212
§ 680-9. Appeal and application procedure.
An application for special exception, or for a variance from the terms of this
chapter, or an appeal from a decision of the Zoning Officer may be filed with
the Borough Manager and shall state:
H. Participate in all proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board, present
facts and information to assist the Board in reaching decisions which
shall be compatible with this chapter.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the real estate to be affected by
the proposed special exception or variance.
C. A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by such
proposed change.
D. A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question, the improvements thereon, and the present use thereof.
E. A statement of the section of this chapter from which the variance is
required, or special exception may be allowed, and the reasons why it
should be granted.
F. A reasonably accurate description of the present improvements and the
additional improvements intended to be made under the application,
indicating the size of the lot, and size of improvements now erected and
those proposed to be erected thereon.
212. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 680-7 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-9
1:628
ARTICLE IV
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 680-10. Appointments; membership; terms of office.
§ 680-11. Alternate members.
The Borough Council may appoint by resolution no more than three
residents of the Borough to serve as alternate members of the Board. The
term of office of an alternate shall be determined by the Municipalities
Planning Code.214
A. The word "Board" when used in this article shall mean the Zoning
Hearing Board.
B. The membership of the Board shall, upon the determination of the
Borough Council, consist of either three or five residents of the Borough
appointed by resolution. The terms of office of a three-member board
shall be determined by the Municipalities Planning Code,213 as last
amended, and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member
shall expire each year. The terms of office of a five-member board shall
expire each year. If a three-member board is changed to a five-member
board, the members of the existing three-member board shall continue
in office until their term of office would expire under prior law. Borough
Council shall appoint two additional members to the Board with terms
scheduled to expire in accordance with the provisions of this section.
The Board shall promptly notify the governing body of any vacancies
which occur. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term. Members of the Board shall hold no
other office in the Borough.
C. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance, or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the
governing body which appointed the member, taken after the member
has received advanced notice pursuant to the Municipalities Planning
Code of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in
connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
A. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a
quorum. An alternate so designated shall be entitled to participate in all
proceedings and discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as
provided by law for Board members, including specifically the right to
cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have
all the powers and duties set forth in this article and as otherwise
provided by law.
213. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
214. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 680-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-11
1:629
§ 680-12. Organization of Board.
§ 680-13. Jurisdiction.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in accordance with the requirements of Article IX
of the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.215
§ 680-14. Appeal or application to Zoning Hearing Board.
Challenges and appeals from decisions made by the Borough Zoning Officer
may be filed with the Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer
or agency of the Borough, or any person aggrieved. Requests for variance
or special exception may be filed by any landowner or any tenant with
permission of the landowner. An appeal or application regarding a matter
within the jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board may be filed with the
B. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on the Board
in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the alternate
was initially appointed until the Board has made a final determination
of the matter or case.
C. Alternate members may hold no other office in the Borough.
A. The Board shall elect a chairperson from its own membership, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall not
be less than a majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board
may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any
hearing on its behalf and the parties may waive further action by the
Board as provided in § 680-17.
B. If, by reason of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to site on the Board as may be needed to provide
a quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on
the Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case for which the
alternate was initially appointed until the Board as made a final
determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate
pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
C. The Board may make, alter, or rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the municipality and laws of
the commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its
business, which records shall be the property of the municipality, and
shall submit a report of its activities to the governing body as requested
by the governing body.
215. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 680-11 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-14
1:630
Zoning Officer on forms provided by the Zoning Hearing Board, and shall
state:
§ 680-15. Board action on application or appeal.
A. The name and address of the applicant, and of the applicant's
representative(s) or agent(s) where applicable.
B. The name and address of the owner of record of the property that is the
subject of the application or appeal. Where the applicant is not the
owner of record of the subject property, a signed and notarized
statement from the owner of record, authorizing the applicant to
pursue the specific appeal or application.
C. A copy of the deed to the subject property.
D. A brief description and location of the subject property, along with a
survey and/or sketch of the property boundaries.
E. A statement of the present zoning classification of the subject property
with the improvements thereon, and the present use thereof.
F. A statement of the section of this chapter under which consideration by
the Board is requested, along with a summary of reasons or arguments
in support of request.
G. A reasonably accurate description of the improvements or changes
intended to be made under the application. In addition, there shall be
attached a plot plan of the property to be affected, indicating the
location and size of the lot, and the size and location of the existing and
proposed improvements or changes.
H. A list of all landowners within 500 feet of the applicant's land, to be
supplied by applicant, who shall obtain the list at his or her own cost
and expense from the Montgomery County Board of Assessment
Appeals, or from Collegeville Borough and other municipalities when
the adjacent land is outside the Borough.
I. A payment to the Borough in accordance with a fee schedule adopted
and amended from time to time by the Borough Council, in accordance
with the requirements of the Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.216
A. Immediately upon receipt of an application, the Zoning Officer shall
promptly forward the application to the Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor, in consultation with the Board's
chairperson, shall fix a reasonable time and place for a public hearing
on the application. Said hearing shall occur no more than 60 days after
the application is made to the Borough, unless the applicant has agreed
in writing to an extension of time.
216. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 680-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-15
1:631
§ 680-16. Notice of hearing.
The Board shall schedule a public hearing and shall give public notice, as
well as written notice as follows:
§ 680-17. Hearing procedures.
C. A true and correct copy of the application and all related information
shall be forwarded to each member of the Zoning Hearing Board, and to
the President of the Borough Council, the Borough Manager, and the
Borough Solicitor.
A. Written notice shall be given to:
(1) The owner of record, applicant, and applicant's representative.
(2) Adjacent landowners.
(3) Borough Council, Solicitor, Manager, and Zoning Officer.
(4) All parties in interest who have entered their appearance, and any
other person registered for that purpose.
B. Written notice shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of
land at least one week prior to the hearing. Written notices must be
removed no later than one week after the Board has made its final
decision, unless directed otherwise by the Board's Solicitor.
A. Zoning Hearing Board hearings shall be held at the call of the
chairperson and at such times as the Board may determine. The Board
shall make a good faith effort to schedule hearings at a time convenient
for as many residents as possible.
B. Hearings may be conducted by the Board, which may appoint any
member as a hearing officer. The decision or findings shall be made by
the Board; however, the applicant may, prior to a decision, waive a
decision or findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of
the hearing officer as final.
C. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person, including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
the power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances, in writing, on forms provided for that purpose.
D. The chairperson or acting chairperson or hearing officer may
administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of
witnesses and production of relevant documents and papers, including
witnesses and documents requested by the parties.
§ 680-15 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-17
1:632
§ 680-18. Decision of Zoning Hearing Board.
E. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
F. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
G. The Board or the hearing officer shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be shared
equally by the applicant and the Board. The cost of the original
transcript shall be paid by the Board if the transcript is ordered by the
Board or hearing officer, or shall be paid by the person appealing from
the decision of the Board if such appeal is made, and in either event the
cost of additional copies shall be paid by the person requesting such
copy or copies. In other cases, the party requesting the original
transcript shall bear the cost.
H. The Board or hearing officer shall not, except upon notice and
opportunity for all parties to be present, participate, and inspect and
contest materials, engage in the any of the following activities:
(1) Communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his or her
representative in connection with any issue involved.
(2) Take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or
other materials, except advice from the Solicitor.
(3) Inspect the subject site or its surroundings after commencement of
hearings with any party or his or her representative.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board or hearing officer shall render a written
decision or, when no decision is called for, make written findings on the
application within 45 days of the last hearing. When the application is
contested or denied, the decision shall be accompanied by findings of
fact and conclusions based upon findings. Conclusions based on any
provision of a Borough ordinance shall contain a reference to the
provision.
B. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer, and there has been no
stipulation that his or her decision or findings are final, the Board shall
make his or her report and recommendations available to the parties
within 45 days and the parties shall be entitled to make written
representations to the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings.
The Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the
report of the hearing officer.
C. Where the Board fails to render the decision within the required period,
or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days of application, the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
§ 680-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-18
1:633
§ 680-19. General standards for Board review.
In the consideration of an application, the Board shall:
applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to
an extension of time.
D. When a decision has been deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant because of the failure of the Board to hold a hearing or render
a decision as provided, the Board shall give public notice of said
deemed decision within 10 days from the last day it could have met to
render a decision. If the Board shall fail to provide such notice, the
applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the right
of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
E. A copy of the final decision or findings shall be delivered to the
applicant personally or mailed to him or her not later than the day
following its date. To all other persons who have filed their names and
addresses with the Board not later than the last day of the hearing, the
Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief notice of the decision or
findings and a statement of the place at which the full decision or
findings may be examined.
A. Consider the suitability of the property for the use desired. Assure itself
that the proposed change is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of this chapter and Comprehensive Plan.
B. Determine that the proposed change will not substantially injure or
detract from the use of neighboring property or from the character of
the neighborhood and that the use of the adjacent property is
adequately safeguarded.
C. Determine that the proposed change will serve the best interests of the
Borough, the convenience of the community (where applicable), and the
public welfare.
D. Consider the effect of the proposed change upon the logical, efficient,
and economical extension of public services and facilities such as public
water, sewers, police and fire protection, and public schools.
E. Consider the suitability of the proposed location of use with respect to
probable effects upon highway traffic, and assure adequate access
arrangements in order to protect major roads from undue congestion
and hazard.
F. Be guided in its study, review, and recommendation by sound standards
of subdivision and land development practice where applicable.
G. Impose such conditions and safeguards in addition to those required as
are necessary to assure that the intent of this chapter and the
Comprehensive Plan are complied with, which conditions may include
§ 680-18 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-19
1:634
§ 680-20. Specific standards for variances and special exceptions.
(but are not limited to) harmonious design of buildings, planting and
its maintenance as a sight or sound screen, the minimizing of noxious,
offensive or hazardous elements, and adequate standards of parking,
loading, and sanitation.
H. The Zoning Hearing Board shall be limited to consideration of
applications as they relate to ordinance provisions in effect at the time
of the application. The Borough Council shall retain the exclusive right
to enact and amend ordinances.
A. Variance. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. The Board may grant a variance provided that all of
the following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by the
provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in which
the property is located.
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That the unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation at issue.
B. Special exception. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide
requests for special exceptions in accordance with the standards and
criteria found in the particular section of this chapter that permits
application for said special exception, and with the general standards in
§ 680-19 of this article.
C. Burden of proof. For variances, the burden of proof shall be on the
applicant. For special exceptions, the applicant shall be entitled to the
§ 680-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-20
1:635
§ 680-21. Review of challenges and appeals.
special exception unless others can prove that it would adversely affect
the public health, safety, morals, or welfare.
A. Time limitations on appeals.
(1) All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be
filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the
determination is issued.
(2) Appeals designed to secure reversal or limit the approval of any
application for development, preliminary or final, shall be filed with
the Board no later than 30 days after the application is approved by
an appropriate Borough officer or agency, unless the person filing
alleges and proves that he or she had not notice, knowledge, or
reason to believe that such approval had been given. If such person
succeeded to his or her interest after such approval, he or she shall
be bound by the knowledge of his or her predecessor in interest.
B. Effect of filing. When an appeal is filed, further development or official
action pursuant to the appealed determination or approval shall be
stayed until issuance of a final decision or findings by the Board. If the
Zoning Officer or other Borough agency presents facts to the Board
indicating that such a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property, development or official action can only be stayed by
restraining order granted by the Board or by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
C. Substantive validity challenge. A landowner who desires to challenge,
on substantive grounds, the validity of a map or ordinance provision
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he
or she has an interest, may submit the challenge either to the Zoning
Hearing Board or, with a request for curative amendment, to the
Borough Council.
(1) The written application to the Zoning Hearing Board shall contain
the reasons for the challenge.
(2) Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of
the ordinance or map is in question, and shall specify the place and
time where a copy of the request and its accompanying materials
may be examined by the public.
(3) Based upon the testimony at the hearing(s), the Board shall
determine whether the challenged ordinance or map is defective,
as alleged. If the challenge is found to have merit, the decision of
the Board shall include recommended amendments to the
challenged ordinance which will cure the defects found.
§ 680-20 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-21
1:636
§ 680-22. Expiration.
Unless otherwise specified by the Board, a special exception or variance
shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain any and all permits within six
months of the date of authorization thereof.
§ 680-23. Appeal to court.
Any persons aggrieved by the decision of the Board may within 30 days
thereafter appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Montgomery County
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended.217
(4) In reaching its decision, the Board shall consider the plans and
explanatory material submitted by the landowner, and shall also
consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools, and other public service facilities.
(b) If the proposal is for residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the
proposal in providing housing units of a type actually available
to and affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully
excluded by the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map.
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed, by
the site's soils, slopes, woodland, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources, and other natural features.
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodland, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers, natural resources,
and other natural features, the degree to which these are
protected or destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to
development, and any adverse environmental impacts.
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(5) If the Board fails to act on the request within 45 days of the last
hearing, a denial of the request is deemed to have occurred.
217. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 680-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-23
1:637

ARTICLE V
Violations, Enforcement Remedies, Fines, and Charges
§ 680-24. Violations, causes of action.
In case any building, structure, landscaping, or land is, or is proposed to
be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained, or
used in violation of this chapter, the Borough Council or, with the approval
of the Borough Council, an officer of the Borough or any aggrieved owner or
tenant of real property who shows that his or her property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate legal action or proceeding to prevent,
restrain, correct, or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or
to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business, or use
constituting a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner
or tenant, notice of that action shall be served upon the Borough at least 30
days prior to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint
on the Borough Council. No such action may be maintained until such notice
has been given.
§ 680-25. Enforcement notice.
A. If it appears to the municipality that a violation of any zoning ordinance
enacted under this act or prior enabling laws has occurred, the
municipality shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an
enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. The enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the municipality intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
§ 680-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-25
1:639
§ 680-26. Violations and penalties; enforcement remedies.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions as described herein.
D. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board,
the municipality shall have the responsibility of presenting its evidence
first.
E. Any filing fees paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be returned to the appealing party by the
municipality if the Zoning Hearing Board, or any court in a subsequent
appeal, rules in the appealing party's favor.
A. Any person, partnership, or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus
all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Borough as a result thereof.
B. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied, or payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
Judge.
C. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure.
D. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the Magisterial District Judge, determining that there has been a
violation, further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership, or corporation violating this chapter to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial
District Judge and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
E. All judgments, costs, and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Borough.
F. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
G. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 680-25 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-27
1:640
§ 680-27. Charges.
Charges for applications, permits, certificates, etc., shall be as stated in
resolutions adopted by Borough Council, in accordance with applicable
laws.
§ 680-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-27
1:641

ARTICLE VI
Amendments
§ 680-28. Power of amendment.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Collegeville from time to time may
amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal this chapter, in whole or
in part, including the Zoning Map, by the procedures noted herein, or as
otherwise required by law.
§ 680-29. Public notice.
For any amendment proposed to this chapter, Borough Council shall
conduct a public hearing pursuant to public notice, as follows:
A. At a regular or special meeting, Borough Council shall fix the time and
place for the public hearing.
B. Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice shall
state the time and place of the hearing and particular nature of the
matter to be considered at the hearing. All required publication shall be
pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code (MCP), as last
amended.218 The notice shall include reference to the time and place of
the hearing as well as the place in the Borough where the amendment
may be examined.
C. Publication of text. Public notice shall include either the full text or a
brief summary of the proposed ordinance which lists the provisions in
reasonable detail and a reference to a place within the Borough where
copies of the proposed amendment may be examined. All proposed
amendments shall be published once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough, pursuant to the Municipalities Planning
Code (MPC), as last amended. If the full text is not published:
(1) A copy of the full text shall be supplied to the publishing newspaper
at the time of publication.
(2) An attested copy of the full text shall be filed in the Montgomery
County Law Library.
D. Perimeter posting. If the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map
change, notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted
along the perimeter of the affected tract by the Borough at least one
week prior to the public hearing, at points deemed by the Borough to be
sufficient to notify potentially interested citizens. Notices shall be taken
down one week after the final decision by the Board, unless directed
otherwise by the Board's Solicitor.
218. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 680-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-29
1:643
§ 680-30. Application for amendment by citizens.
Every application for amendment of this chapter shall first be presented to
the Zoning Officer, and shall contain the following:
§ 680-31. Petitions for amendment.
Whenever the owners of 50% or more of the frontage in any zoning district
shall present to the Borough Council a petition, duly signed and
acknowledged, requesting an amendment, supplement, change,
modification, or repeal of the regulations prescribed for, or of the Zoning
Map including such district, it shall be the duty of the Borough Council
to hold a public hearing thereon and cause notice thereof to be given in
the manner prescribed in § 680-16, herein. However, the Borough Council
shall not be required to consider a petition requesting an amendment,
supplement, change, modification, or repeal of any provision of this chapter
or the Zoning Map, or to hold a public hearing thereon, when the requested
change is the same or substantially the same as requested and upon which
E. Change to amendment. If, after any public hearing, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land not
previously affected, the Borough Council shall hold another public
hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to a vote on the
amendment.
F. Thirty days prior to the hearing on the proposed amendment, Borough
Council shall submit the proposed ordinance to the Montgomery
County Planning Commission for review and recommendation.
A. The applicant's name and address and his or her representative and the
interest of every person represented in the application.
B. A plan showing the extent of the area to be rezoned, streets bounding
and intersecting the area, the land use and zoning classification of
abutting districts, and photographs of the area to be rezoned and
abutting area.
C. A statement of the circumstances in the proposed district and the
abutting districts and any other factors upon which the applicant relies
as reasons for supporting the proposed rezoning.
D. The approximate time schedule for the beginning and completion of
development in the area.
E. A site plan to scale, indicating the locations of structures, uses, areas
for off-street parking and loading.
F. Information about the market area to be served by the proposed
development, if a commercial use, including population to be served,
effective demand for proposed business facilities, and any other
information necessary for Borough Council to evaluate the proposal.
§ 680-29 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-31
1:644
a public hearing has been held within the previous year. Such petition shall
set forth the following facts:
§ 680-32. Opportunity to be heard.
At the public hearing, full opportunity to be heard shall be given to any
citizen and all parties in interest.
§ 680-33. County copy.
Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment shall be
forwarded to the Montgomery County Planning Commission.
§ 680-34. Fees.
For the purpose of defraying expenses of advertising etc., applications
for amendments shall be accompanied by payment to the Borough in
accordance with its adopted fee schedule.
A. Signature and address of each petitioner, together with the amount of
front footage in any district or part thereof.
B. The petition, if pertaining to the Zoning Map, shall have attached
thereto a plot plan of the tract to be affected.
§ 680-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-34
1:645

ARTICLE VII
Nonconforming Structures, Uses, and Lots
§ 680-35. Nonconforming status.
All buildings, structures, uses of land, uses of buildings, lots, and signs
which do not comply with the applicable regulations of the zoning district in
which they are located shall be considered nonconforming provided that:
§ 680-36. Nonconforming classifications.
Nonconforming status shall be classified and defined as follows:
§ 680-37. Nonconforming regulations.
The following regulations shall govern all properties to which
nonconforming status is applied:
A. They existed on the date of the Collegeville Borough Zoning Ordinance
originally ordained and enacted in 1948.
B. They existed on the date of an amendment to the Official Zoning Map or
on the date of an amendment to or reenactment of the text of the
Collegeville Borough Zoning Ordinance, originally ordained and
enacted in 1948 and such amendment or reenactment caused the
noncompliance.
A. Nonconforming use. The existing use of land and/or buildings and/or
structures upon the land which does not conform to any of the
permitted uses of the district in which it is located.
B. Nonconforming building or structure. Any existing building or structure
that does not conform to the height, location, size, bulk, or other
dimensional requirements of the district in which it is located. This does
not include signs.
C. Nonconforming lot. Any existing lot which does not conform to the area
and/or width requirements for lots in the district in which it is located.
D. Nonconforming sign. Any sign, signboard, billboard, or advertising
device existing at the time of the passing of this chapter that does not
conform in use, location, height, or size with the regulations of this
chapter shall be considered a nonconforming sign and shall also be
governed by the requirements of § 680-184 of this chapter.
A. Nonconforming status shall continue and a property may continue to be
used as nonconforming until it complies with the requirements of this
chapter.
B. Change of use.
§ 680-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-37
1:647
(1) A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use. A
nonconforming use which has been changed to a conforming use
shall lose its nonconforming status.
(2) A nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming
use of the same general character provided that the applicant
obtains a special exception pursuant to § 680-20 of this chapter.
Where exterior structural alterations or other site modifications are
proposed, the following requirements shall apply in addition to the
requirements of § 680-20 of this chapter.
(a) Such use shall not increase the amount of traffic entering and
exiting the site.
(b) Such use shall not increase the impervious coverage by more
than 10% of the area of the impervious coverage existing on
the site.
C. Discontinuance. Whenever a nonconforming use in or on the land, or
within a building or structure or portion thereof, has been discontinued
for a continuous period of more than one year, such discontinuance
shall be deemed to be an abandonment of such nonconforming use and
any subsequent use thereof shall conform to the applicable provisions
of the zoning district in which such use is located, and the prior
nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed unless a variance is
granted by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with § 680-20 of
this chapter.
D. Extension or expansion. A nonconforming use, building or structure,
not including signs, may be extended or expanded in compliance with
the following requirements:
(1) The lot on which the extension or expansion is proposed shall be
limited to only that lot on which the use, building, or structure
existed at the time it became nonconforming. Expansion onto
adjoining lots is prohibited.
(2) The nonconforming use of a building may be expanded within the
building provided that the expansion is limited to 25% of the gross
floor area occupied by the nonconforming use at the time the use
became nonconforming.
(3) A building which houses a nonconforming use may be extended on
the same lot, provided that the extension shall be limited to 25% of
the gross floor area of the building as it existed at the time the use
became nonconforming.
(4) A nonconforming use may be extended to a new building on the
same lot, provided that the existing nonconforming use continues.
(5) A nonconforming building may be extended on the same lot
provided that the extension shall be limited to 25% of the gross
§ 680-37 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-37
1:648
floor area of the building existing at the time the use became
nonconforming.
E. Additional buildings and regulations. The following regulations apply to
buildings:
(1) When new ordinance provisions are adopted and affect planned
construction which has not been completed:
(a) A building under construction as of the date of adoption of the
new ordinance provisions, to the extent of completion of a
footing, may be competed as a nonconforming building,
provided that a valid building permit has been issued.
(b) A building approved for development as part of a subdivision or
land development which does not conform to the new
ordinance provisions must be built within five years from the
date of approval of the subdivision or land development plan.
(2) A nonconforming structure which is destroyed or partially
destroyed by fire, explosion, or by any other cause to the extent of
75% or more of the market value thereof immediately prior to such
damage or destruction shall not be repaired or restored to a
nonconforming status, but may be reconstructed and used only in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) A nonconforming structure which is destroyed or partially
destroyed by fire, explosion, or by any other cause to the extent of
75% or less of the market value thereof immediately prior to such
damage or destruction may be reconstructed and used as before,
provided that:
(a) The reconstructed building shall not exceed the dimensions of
the damaged or destroyed building, including height, width,
depth, and volume.
(b) Building construction shall be started within one year from the
date the building was damaged or destroyed, and shall be
carried out without interruption.
(c) The building will pose no hazards to safety by virtue of its
location.
(4) Legally condemned nonconforming buildings shall not be rebuilt or
used except in conformance with this chapter.
F. Contiguous undeveloped lots. Two or more contiguous lots held in
single ownership in subdivision approved prior to the effective date of
this chapter (where each lot individually does not meet the required
minimum area or width for the district in which the lots are located)
shall be joined to form one lot which meets the minimum lot area and
width required. If all such lots as joined do not meet the area and width
§ 680-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-37
1:649
§ 680-38. Administration.
Mapping and recording of nonconforming uses, structures, and lots. The
Zoning Officer may perform a survey of the Borough and record and map
all uses, structures, and lots nonconforming to the district requirements
set forth in this chapter. If the survey, record, or map are not done, or
are incomplete, the nonconforming status may be determined when
applications for building permits are filed with the Borough.
requirements, they shall be considered a single nonconforming lot in
accordance with § 680-36C above.
G. Nonconforming signs. If and when a nonconforming sign is replaced,
the new sign shall comply with the requirements of Article XXIII of this
chapter. Replacement shall not include simply revising the text or color
or the sign, but shall refer to structural replacement and/or relocation
of the sign.
H. Conforming uses in nonconforming buildings or lots. The conversion of
one conforming use to another conforming use on a lot or in a building
that is nonconforming shall be permitted.
§ 680-37 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-38
1:650
ARTICLE VIII
General Regulations
§ 680-39. Intent; applicability of regulations.
§ 680-40. Lots of record.
For a lot which is of public record in single and separate ownership at
the time of enactment of this chapter and which is not of sufficient size
or dimensions to permit the erection of a building thereon in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter (provided the Zoning Hearing Board
finds the necessary additional ground is not available because of the settled
condition of the neighborhood or because of inability of the owner to
acquire additional ground upon fair terms), the Zoning Hearing Board may
grant a variance for the use of such parcel of ground, in accordance with
the provisions of § 680-20 of this chapter.
§ 680-41. Subdivision plan of lots of record.
A lot which does not conform to the minimum and/or maximum regulations
of the district in which it is located and which is included in a recorded plan
of lots previously approved under the provisions of the Collegeville Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance220 shall not be used unless:
A. In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and statement of
community development objectives contained in Article I of this
chapter, the specific intent of this article is to establish clear standards
for activities that may be associated with a variety of zoning districts or
types of land use, and to cross reference provisions in the Collegeville
Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance219 that regulate
activities in one or more zoning districts.
B. Except where noted in this article, these provisions apply to all zoning
districts within the Borough. However, if a conflict occurs between the
standards of the general regulations and any other standards of this
chapter then the more restrictive standards shall apply. Subdivision
and/or land development proposals are further regulated by the
Collegeville Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
A. The minimum and/or maximum regulations of the district are met.
B. A variance is obtained from the Zoning Hearing Board, in compliance
§ 680-20 of this chapter.
219. Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
220. Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 680-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-42
1:651
§ 680-42. Reduction of lot area.
No lot which does not qualify for § 680-41 shall be so reduced that the area
of the lot, or the dimensions of the required open space shall be less than
herein prescribed.
§ 680-43. Corner lots.
A front yard setback shall be required from the legal right-of-way for each
lot line abutting a public or private right-of-way.
§ 680-44. Residential conversions (general regulations). [Amended
7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 519]
A dwelling may be converted into two or more apartments in the V-2, MSC,
and RO Districts pursuant to the following standards:
§ 680-45. Accessory uses.
The following accessory uses shall be permitted, subject to the additional
requirements herein:
A. An additional lot area of at least 500 square feet shall be required for
each additional dwelling unit for all the above districts except the MSC
District. For this district, the requirement does not apply.
B. Regardless of the existing dwelling unit size, the total number of
dwelling units in the structure after conversion shall not exceed three,
unless more units are permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
C. Two off-street parking places for each new dwelling unit shall be
provided on the property, meeting all the requirements of Article IX
herein. Parking areas shall not be located in the front yard.
D. No external alteration of the building shall be permitted except as may
be necessary for reasons of safety. All fire escapes and outside
stairways shall be located to the rear of the building.
E. Rooming houses. These are allowed in the MSC District as a special
exception, provided the following conditions and any others deemed
relevant by the Zoning Hearing Board are met:
(1) There shall be no more than six residents.
(2) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee
per shift and every two residents or each rental unit, whichever is
greater.
F. The residential density on a lot shall not exceed 12 dwelling units per
acre.
A. Permitted residential accessory uses and structures. The following uses
are permitted by right; however, approval as a conditional use by the
§ 680-42 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-45
1:652
Borough Council shall be required for uses that exceed the stated
capacities or sizes, or that would involve use or storage of items other
than those listed.
(1) Home occupations and no-impact home-based businesses, subject
to the provisions of § 680-46, herein.
(2) Private garage, either attached or detached, not to exceed a ninehundred-
fifty-square-foot maximum.
(3) Noncommercial greenhouse and carports, not to exceed a fivehundred-
square-foot maximum.
(4) Storage sheds for garden equipment, household goods, and/or
sporting goods owned and used by the residents of the dwelling,
with a total floor area of less than 250 square feet.
(5) Noncommercial swimming pool or other recreational facilities,
excluding facilities for use of motorized recreational vehicles
provided they are not closer than six feet from any property line.
(6) The keeping of farm animals, not in conjunction with agriculture, in
accordance with the following:
(a) Minimum lot size shall be three acres.
(b) Building setbacks shall be 50 feet from any property line.
(c) Notwithstanding § 680-51, Height limitations of fences and
walls, all farm animals must be kept in a fenced area. The
height of the fence shall be sufficient to provide for the safety
of the public.
(d) Such animals may be kept at the following rates:
On a Minimum
3-Acre Lot
For Each
Additional Acre
Horses, cows, or other
animals of a similar size
1 animal 1 additional
animal
Sheep, goats, or other
animals of a similar size
2 animals 2 additional
animals
Fowl or other animals of
a similar size
5 animals 5 additional
animals
(7) Satellite dish or other television or radio antenna, in accordance
with the provisions of § 680-60, herein.
B. Uses accessory to noncommercial recreational use. Customary
recreation, refreshment, and service uses and buildings in any
noncommercial recreational area.
§ 680-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-45
1:653
§ 680-46. No-impact home-based businesses and home occupations.
C. Other accessory uses. Accessory uses other than those listed may be
permitted in compliance with the requirements for principal uses in the
district in which they are located and to which they are accessory.
D. Accessory structure setback, including detached garages, storage
sheds, greenhouses and carports. All structures shall be five feet from
any side or rear property lines, unless a greater distance is specifically
stated. No structures are allowed in the front yard area, defined as the
area between the legal right-of-way and a building's front facade.
Corner properties are defined as having two facades.
E. Off-street parking of commercial vehicles in Residential District.
(1) Routine off-street parking of not more than two commercially
registered vehicles with not more than four wheels each, which are
used regularly or frequently for business purposes shall be
permitted. Routine parking of more than two such vehicles shall
constitute a business operation and shall not be permitted in a
residential district, unless in an enclosed building.
(2) Routine off-street parking of one commercially registered vehicle
with more than four wheels which is used regularly or frequently
for business purposes shall be permitted; more than one shall
constitute a business operation and shall not be permitted in a
residential district, unless in an enclosed building.
A. No-impact home-based businesses.
(1) General regulations. No-impact home-based businesses are
allowed in all residential dwelling units of the Borough as a use
permitted by right, except that such permission shall not supersede
any deed restriction, covenant, or agreement restricting the use of
land, nor any master deed, bylaw, or other document applicable to
a common interest ownership community.
(2) Specific regulations.
(a) The business activity shall be compatible with the residential
use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
(b) The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(c) There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no
stockpiling or inventory of a substantial nature.
(d) There shall be no outside appearance of a business use,
including, but not limited to, parking, signs, or light.
(e) The business activity may not use any equipment or process
which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or
§ 680-45 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-46
1:654
electrical or electronic interference, including interference
with radio or television reception which is detectable in the
neighborhood.
(f) The business activity may not generate any solid waste or
sewage discharge in volume to type which is not normally
associated with residential use in the neighborhood.
(g) The business activity shall be conducted only within the
dwelling and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable
floor area.
(h) The business my not involve any illegal activity.
B. Home occupations.
(1) General regulation. Home occupation shall be limited to the
accessory use of a residence for the conduct of an art or profession,
the offering of a service, the conduct of a business, or the
production of handicrafts. The use shall be secondary and
incidental to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes, and
shall not change the character of the residential use or adversely
affect the uses permitted in the residential district of which it is a
part.
(2) Specific regulations.
(a) A home occupation is permitted only in a single-family
detached dwelling.
(b) A resident of the dwelling must be a principal of the home
occupation.
(c) Home occupation must be conducted entirely within the
dwelling or accessory structures.
(d) No more than 500 square feet of building area may be used for
the home occupation.
(e) The home occupation shall not have any business-related
exterior storage or display of goods and/or merchandise.
(f) There shall be no sale of retail goods on the premises.
(g) Home occupations shall be limited to the employment on the
premises of not more than two paid or unpaid assistants or
employees at any one time.
(h) The accessory home occupation shall not generate more than
five vehicle trips per day in excess of that which is required for
primary use.
(i) There shall be no regular deliveries to or from a home
occupation from a vehicle with more than two axles.
§ 680-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-46
1:655
§ 680-47. Bed-and-breakfast accommodations.
Bed-and-breakfast homes and inns are permitted in the V-2 and MSC
Districts pursuant to the following regulations:
(j) No home occupation shall require trash pickup in excess of
that required normally in single-family residential areas.
(k) Clients are permitted by appointment between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. only.
(l) The home occupation shall in no way cause the residential
appearance or character of the premises to differ from the
surrounding residential area.
(m) Home occupations shall not use noxious, combustible,
explosive, or other types of materials that could endanger the
health and safety of the occupants and the surrounding
residents.
(n) Home occupations shall not produce noise, dust, vibration,
glare, smoke, odor, electrical interference, fire hazard, traffic,
or any other nuisance not typically experienced in the zoning
district where the property is located.
(o) Home occupations shall not include auto-related service, clinic,
hospitals, animal hospitals, restaurants, cafes, hotels, boarding
houses, or storage yards for construction or landscaping
materials, equipment, or vehicles as defined in § 680-45E of
this chapter, or similar uses.
(p) No use shall require internal or external construction features
or the use of electrical, mechanical, or other equipment that
would change the fire rating of the structure or in any way
significantly increase the fire danger to neighboring structures
or residences.
(q) Only one sign per residence shall be permitted, conforming to
the provisions of Article XXIII of this chapter.
(r) Adequate off-street parking shall be required for any home
occupation that has employees that are not residents of the
dwelling or has regular visits by clients, salesman, etc.; the
amount needed will be determined by the Borough's staff.
(s) Family day-care homes and group day-care facilities are not
classified as home occupations and are regulated by § 680-56
of this chapter.
A. Regulations for a bed-and-breakfast home.
(1) A bed-and-breakfast home is allowed only in a single-family
detached dwelling.
§ 680-46 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-47
1:656
(2) A bed-and-breakfast home must be run as a home occupation and
shall not have more than six guest rooms.
(3) No guest can stay for more than 14 days.
(4) One off-street parking space for each guest bedroom shall be
provided in a side or rear yard, in addition to any other required
parking. There shall be no parking allowed in the front yard.
(5) Owners shall comply with all federal, state, and local requirements
for the preparation, handling, and serving of food.
(6) Owner shall maintain a current guest register.
(7) Bed-and-breakfast accommodations may only serve alcoholic
beverages to guests.
(8) Any modifications, additions, alterations, fire escapes, etc., are
allowed only to the side and rear of the structure. The structure's
facade shall be maintained to appear as a single-family dwelling.
(9) Signs, pursuant to the sign ordinance requirements.
(10) Each bed-and-breakfast facility shall be equipped with smoke
detectors and fire extinguishers in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry and with the Borough fire code. Guests shall be provided
with information regarding the floor plan of the building and the
location of emergency exits.
(11) No cooking is allowed in guest rooms.
(12) All bed-and-breakfast homes must be licensed by the Borough, with
the license to be renewed each year.
(13) All bed-and-breakfast homes will be inspected yearly by the
Borough's Building Inspectors.
B. Regulations for a bed-and-breakfast inn.
(1) A bed-and-breakfast inn is not permitted as a home occupation.
(2) No more than 20 guest rooms are allowed.
(3) No guest can stay for more than 14 days.
(4) Owners shall comply with all federal, state, and local requirements
for the preparation, handling, and serving of food.
(5) Owner shall maintain a current guest register.
(6) Bed-and-breakfast accommodations may only serve alcoholic
beverages to guests.
§ 680-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-47
1:657
§ 680-48. Exemptions from requirements.
§ 680-49. Effect of private covenants.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to render inoperative any
enforceable restriction established by covenants running with the land,
and which restrictions are not prohibited by or are not contrary to the
regulations herein established.
§ 680-50. Access to public street.
(7) Each bed-and-breakfast facility shall be equipped with smoke
detectors and fire extinguishers in accordance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry and with the Borough fire code. Guests shall be provided
with information regarding the floor plan of the building and the
location of emergency exits.
(8) No cooking is allowed in guest rooms.
(9) All bed-and-breakfast inns must be licensed by the Borough, with
the license to be renewed each year.
A. Public utilities. This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed
building, or extension thereof, used or to be used by a public utility
corporation if, upon petition of the corporation, the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission shall, after a public hearing, decide that the present
or proposed situation of the building in question is reasonably
necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public. It shall be the
responsibility of the Pennsylvania Utility Commission to ensure that
both the corporation and the municipality in which the building or
proposed building is located have notice of the hearing and are granted
an opportunity to appear, present witnesses, cross-examine witnesses
presented by other parties and otherwise exercise the rights of a party
to the proceedings.
B. Wherever federal, state or county-owned property is included in one or
more zoning districts, it shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
only insofar as is permitted by the Constitution and laws of the United
States of America and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In the case
of a property used to provide Borough services, as defined in this
chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply. [Amended
6-1-2011 by Ord. No. 550]
A. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all lots shall abut a public or
private street. Preexisting landlocked parcels zoned residential may be
developed with one single-family detached house provided they contain
an access easement of at least 20 feet and provided that the nonaccess
portion of the lot otherwise complies with the lot size and dimensional
requirements of the district in which it is located.
§ 680-47 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-50
1:658
§ 680-51. Height limitations of fences and walls.
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all fences and freestanding walls
shall comply with the standards in this section.
B. Flag lots. These are permitted only by special exception granted by the
Zoning Hearing Board, pursuant to the standards contained in
§§ 680-19 and 680-20 and the following:
(1) Flag lots are only permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Districts.
(2) Single-family detached dwellings are the only housing type
permitted on a flag lot.
(3) A thirty-foot-wide access strip is required from a public street to
the flag lot.
(4) The flag lot must be 10% larger than the required lot size for the
zoning district in which it is located. The access strip shall not be
used for calculating lot size.
(5) The driveway within any access strip must be at least six feet from
any property line.
(6) The front and rear yard setbacks for the zoning district in which the
flag lot is located must be met. For side yards, regardless of the
zoning district, each side yard setback shall not be less than 40
feet.
(7) All property lines within the flag area shall be screened by a
softening buffer as defined in the Collegeville Borough Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.221 However the Board, at their
discretion, may require additional landscaping. They also may
require landscaping along the access strip.
(8) Access strips are not permitted to adjoin each other and shall be
separated by the minimum lot width for single-family detached
dwellings for the zoning district in which the flag lot is located.
(9) Multiple flag lots shall not be used to avoid the creation of a new
road.
(10) Any other conditions deemed necessary by the Board.
A. Specific requirements.
(1) Fences. Notwithstanding any specific fencing requirements
contained elsewhere in this chapter for buffers, screenings, or
public safety:
(a) Maximum height for fences on improved lots.
221. Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 680-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-51
1:659
§ 680-52. Projections into required yards.
No building and no part of a building shall be erected within or shall project
into any required yard in any district, except that:
[1] Yard area between the front wall of a principal structure
and the legal right-of-way of the street toward which the
wall is oriented: four feet. For corner lots, the side yard
facing the street shall have this height restriction
extending to the rear wall of the principal structure.
[2] For noncorner lots, fences in the yard area between the
front wall of a principal structure and the rear lot line: six
feet.
(b) Maximum height for fences on unimproved lots. It shall not
exceed six feet in all districts except the M&I, SC, and GC
Districts, where it shall not exceed 10 feet.
(2) Walls.
(a) In all districts, freestanding walls shall not exceed three feet in
the yard area between the front wall of a principal structure
and the street toward which this front wall of the structure is
oriented. For corner lots, this would also apply to the side yard
facing the street extending to the rear wall of the principal
structure.
(b) For noncorner lots, walls shall not exceed six feet in the yard
area between the front wall of a principal structure and the
rear lot line.
B. No fence or freestanding wall shall be permitted to obstruct sight
distance at a street or driveway intersection.
C. No opaque fence shall be permitted in the area between the front wall
of a principal structure and the legal right-of-way of the street, toward
which the wall is oriented. For corner lots, this would also apply to the
side yard facing the street extending to the rear wall of the principal
structure.
D. Fences and freestanding walls are not required to comply with front,
side, and rear yard building setbacks.
E. Fences and freestanding walls shall not be located within the legal
right-of-way or of any street or road except for a wall and/or sign which
contains "Welcome to Collegeville." [Amended 6-7-2017 by Ord. No.
583]
A. An unenclosed porch, not more than 14 feet in height, provided that in
no case shall it extend into such front or rear yard more than one-half of
the required depth of the yard.
§ 680-51 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-52
1:660
§ 680-53. Prohibited uses (general regulations). [Amended
7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 519]
§ 680-54. Performance standards.
Unless otherwise noted, the following performance standards apply to all
uses in all districts in the Borough:
B. A terrace, patio, deck, platform, or landing place, not covered by a roof,
canopy, or trellis, which does not extend above the level of the first floor
of the building, may be erected to extend into a required side or rear
yard a distance of not more than 12 feet provided that it shall not
extend into such yard more than 40% of the required depth or width of
the yard.
C. A carport may be erected over an existing driveway in a required side
yard, provided that such structure is:
(1) Not more than 12 feet in height and 20 feet in length.
(2) Entirely open on at least three sides, exclusive of the necessary
supporting columns and customary architectural features.
(3) At least five feet from the side or rear lot line.
D. A buttress, chimney, cornice, pier, or pilaster of a building may project
not more than 18 inches into a required yard.
E. Open, unenclosed fire escapes, steps, bay window, and balconies may
project no more than three feet into a required rear yard.
A. These uses are only permitted in the M&I Industrial District and are
regulated pursuant to § 680-167 of the M&I District.
B. The following uses are prohibited in all districts within Collegeville
Borough:
(1) Adult uses.
(2) Auto salvage.
(3) Junk or salvage yard.
(4) Mobile home park.
(5) Recycling operation.
(6) Solid waste disposal facility.
(7) Tattoo parlor/body piercing studio.
A. Air pollution controls. All uses shall comply with the standards of the
Air Pollution Control Act, 35 P.S. §§ 4001 through 4015, as amended,
and the following standards:
§ 680-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-54
1:661
(1) Smoke. Visible air contaminants shall not be emitted in such a
manner that the opacity of the emissions is equal to or greater than
10% for a period or periods aggregating more than three minutes
in any one hour, or equal to or greater than 30% at any time, and
shall comply with Pa. Code Title 25, Chapter 127.A(7), or its most
recent update.
(2) Particulate, vaporous, and gaseous emissions.
(a) No emission shall be made which can cause any damage to
health, to animals, or vegetation or other forms of property, or
which can cause any excessive soiling at any point.
(b) No emission of particulate matter shall exceed 0.0115 grams
per dry standard cubic foot, corrected to 7% oxygen.
Provisions must be made to reduce dew point cycling and
resulting damage to particulate control devices.
(c) For measurements of the amount of particles in gases resulting
from combustion, standards correction shall be applied to a
stack temperature of 500° F. and 50% excess air.
(3) Hazardous air emission. All emissions shall comply with National
Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants promulgated by
the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the
Federal Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. § 7412) as promulgated in 40 CFR
61, or its most recent update.
B. Noise.
(1) Sound measurement procedures:
(a) Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the
source under investigation is operating at normal, routine
conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including,
but not limited to, design, maximum, and fluctuating rates.
(b) Prior to taking noise measurements, the investigator shall
explore the vicinity of the source in question to identify any
other sound sources that could affect measurements to
establish the approximate location and character of the
principal sound source and to select suitable locations from
which to measure the sound from the source in question.
(c) When measuring continuous sound, or sound that is sustained
for more than one second at a time, the SLM shall be set for Aweighting,
slow meter response speed, and the range (if the
SLM is designed to read levels over different ranges of SPLs)
shall be set to that range in which the meter reads closest to
the maximum end of the scale. When the measured sound level
is variable or fluctuating over a range greater than three dBA
using the slow meter response speed, the fast meter response
§ 680-54 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-54
1:662
speed shall be used. In either case, both the minimum and
maximum reading shall be recorded to indicate the range of
monitored values.
(d) The SLM shall be placed at a minimum height of three feet
above the ground or from any reflective surface. When hand
held, the microphone shall be held at arm's length and pointed
at the source at the angle recommended by the SLM
manufacturer.
(e) If extraneous sound sources, such as aircraft flyovers or
barking dogs, that are unrelated to the measurements increase
the monitored sound levels, the measurements should be
postponed until these extraneous sounds have become of such
a level not to increase the monitored sound levels of interest.
(2) Sound measurement procedures. No person shall cause, suffer,
allow, or permit the operation of any sound source on a private
property or any public space or right-of-way in such a manner as to
create a sound level that exceeds the background sound level by at
least 10 dBC during daytime (7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.) hours and by
at least five dBC during nighttime (9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) hours
when measured at or within the property line of the receiving
property except as provided in Subsection B(1)(a).
(a) If the background sound level cannot be determined, the
absolute sound level limits set forth in Table 1 shall be used.
Residential
Commercial
or Industrial
Source Property
7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
9:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m. All Times
Residential 55 45 65
Commercial or
industrial
60 45 65
(b) If the sound source in question is a pure tone, the limits of
Table 1 shall be reduced by five dBA.
(c) Nonrepetitive impulsive sound source shall not exceed 80 dBC
at or within a residential real property line using the fast meter
response speed.
(d) In multidwelling unit buildings, if the background sound level
cannot be determined, the daytime limit is 46 dBA and the
nighttime limit is 35 dBA for sounds originating in another
dwelling within the same building.
(3) Exemptions.
§ 680-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-54
1:663
(a) Noise from emergency signaling devices.
(b) Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building provided
such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within five
minutes of its activation.
(c) Noise from domestic power tools, lawn mowers, and
agricultural equipment when operated between 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. on weekdays and between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on
weekends and legal holidays, provided they generate less than
85 dBA at or within any real property line of a residential
property.
(d) Sound from church bells and chimes when a part of a religious
observance or service.
(e) Noise from construction activity, provided all motorized
equipment used in such activity is equipped with functioning
mufflers, except as provided in Subsection B(3)(f).
(f) Noise from snow blowers, snow throwers, and snow plows
when operated with a muffler for the purpose of snow removal.
C. Odor control.
(1) No person shall cause, suffer, or permit the emission into the
outdoor atmosphere of any malodorous air contaminants from any
source in such a manner that the malodors are detectable outside
the property of the person where the source is being generated.
(2) The prohibition on odors shall not apply to odor emissions arising
from the premises of a farm operation.
(3) Any process which causes an odor emission shall be operated in a
manner such that escaping odors are eliminated. Backup odor
reduction equipment shall be maintained to support primary odor
reduction equipment.
D. Glare or heat control. Any operation producing intense glare or heat
shall be performed within an enclosed building or behind a solid fence
in such manner as to be completely imperceptible from any point
beyond the lot lines.
E. Vibration control. No vibration which is discernible to the human sense
of feeling shall be perceptible without instruments at any point beyond
the lot line.
F. Control of radioactivity or electrical disturbance. There shall be no
activities which emit dangerous or harmful radioactivity. There shall be
no electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation of any
equipment located beyond the property boundary of the creator of such
disturbance.
§ 680-54 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-54
1:664
§ 680-55. Procedure for consideration of conditional use
application.
An application for any conditional use as specified in the various articles of
this chapter shall be considered by the Borough Council according to the
following procedures:
G. Fire and explosive hazards. Flammable and explosive materials shall be
stored, used, and transported in accordance with the applicable state
and federal regulations regarding such materials and associated
storage vessels.
H. Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
(1) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, flammable or explosive
materials and raw materials shall be enclosed by a fence adequate
to prevent the access of children and other members of the general
public.
(2) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
or forces.
(3) All material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise be
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in
closed, sealed containers.
(4) No materials or wastes of any form may be stored in a floodplain
area.
(5) No use shall be conducted in such a way as to discharge any
treated or untreated sewage except as shall be approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection and/or the county Health
Department, as appropriate; nor shall industrial wastes be stored,
discharged, incinerated, or otherwise disposed of except in
conformance with the applicable state and federal regulations
regarding solid and hazardous wastes.
A. Application.
(1) The application shall be submitted in writing to the Borough during
regular Borough business hours, with a fee as required by the
Borough's fee schedule.
(2) The application shall include the request for approval of a
conditional use and sufficient information to document compliance
with the applicable standards of this chapter; a tentative sketch
plan of the proposed development shall be included.
(3) The Borough Planning Commission may submit one copy of the
application to the Montgomery County Planning Commission for its
advisory review, one copy to the Borough Council, and other copies
§ 680-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-55
1:665
§ 680-56. Day-care facilities.
Day-care facilities, as defined in this chapter, are permitted by right in
compliance with the requirements of this section.
to agencies and/or technical consultants whose review may be
relevant.
B. Public hearing.
(1) The Borough Council shall schedule a public hearing pursuant to
the Municipalities Planning Code.222
(2) The Borough Council shall consider the comments and
recommendations of the Borough and County Planning
Commissions, other advisors, and those present at the public
hearing prior to deciding to approve or deny the proposed use. In
allowing a conditional use, the Borough Council may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in the ordinance, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter.
(3) In deciding all applications for conditional uses, the Borough
Council shall be guided by the following standards and criteria:
(a) The proposed use shall be one permitted by conditional use
and one that will conform to the applicable regulations of the
district in which it is located.
(b) The proposed use shall be considered in light of the general
standards for Zoning Hearing Board decisions in § 680-19 of
this chapter.
(4) The Borough Council shall render a written decision on the
application pursuant to the Municipalities Planning Code.
(5) Where the Borough Council fails to render a decision or fails to
hold the required hearing within the time prescribed by the
Municipalities Planning Code, the decision shall be deemed to have
been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has
agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
A. Family day-care homes are allowed in any zoning district, provided that:
(1) They are only allowed in a single-family detached dwelling.
(2) They can demonstrate that they have a safe loading/unloading area
for children that is located off of a public or private street.
(3) They have a safe and secure outdoor play area.
B. Group day-care centers are allowed in any zoning district provided that:
222. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 680-55 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-56
1:666
§ 680-57. Lighting.
Lighting of property that causes a hazard or a nuisance to abutting roads
and/or properties is a violation of this chapter, and shall not be permitted.
(1) They are only allowed in a single-family detached dwelling.
(2) They can demonstrate that they have a safe loading/unloading area
for children that is located off of a public or private street.
(3) They have a safe and secure outdoor play area.
(4) They are located in a dwelling on a lot of at least one acre in size.
C. Day-care centers are permitted in the GC, C-O, and V-1 Districts.
D. Adult day-care homes are allowed in any zoning district, provided that:
(1) They are only allowed in a single-family detached dwelling on lots
of at least one acre in size.
E. Adult day-care centers are permitted in any zoning district, provided
that they are not located in a residential building.
A. When lighting appears to be a potential hazard or nuisance along public
roads, the Borough Zoning Officer shall determine the need to relocate,
diminish, reorient, shield, or remove the light fixtures in question, with
the advice of the Borough Engineer. The determination shall be made
mainly in terms of the effect of the lighting on traffic safety, such as
from glare or brightness interfering with a driver's ability to see safely.
B. When lighting appears to be a potential hazard or nuisance to an
abutting property, the owner or tenant of the affected property may
notify the Zoning Officer, who shall then determine the need to relocate,
diminish, reorient, shield, or remove the light fixtures in question, with
the advice of the Borough Engineer. The following shall be used as
criteria:
(1) No light shall shine directly into the windows of a building on
abutting property.
(2) No light shall shine directly from a light source onto the ground or
improvements of an abutting property, although incidental light
may be permitted to fall on abutting property.
(3) Where the abutting property is residentially zoned or used,
nonresidential uses shall direct light fixtures toward the
nonresidential development and shield the residential properties
from direct lighting or glare. An intensely lit nonresidential use
shall also be required to install a landscaped screen buffer along
any residential property line. The effectiveness and design of this
buffer shall be determined by the Borough.
§ 680-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-57
1:667
§ 680-58. Kennels.
Kennels are subject to the following provisions:
§ 680-59. Traffic impact study.
A traffic impact study may be required at the discretion of the Borough
Council for Zoning Map or text amendments, special exceptions, conditional
uses, variances, preliminary plans for subdivisions and/or land
developments, and/or any other pertinent proposal. The scope of this study
shall be determined by Council, based upon the recommendations of the
Borough Engineer or other Borough consultants.
§ 680-60. Satellite dishes, antennas, and towers.
The following regulations apply to all satellite dishes, antennas, antenna
support structures, and towers. Satellite dishes are hereinafter referred to
as "dishes."
(4) Light fixtures closer to a side or rear lot line than the side or rear
yard setback shall be no more than 20 feet high, and shall be so
constructed that all light shall be aimed perpendicular to the side
or rear lot line and in the direction of the nonresidential
development. [Amended 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 583]
(5) All light fixtures for nonresidential uses shall use the most current
lighting industry technology to ensure that these performance
standards are satisfied.
C. The person(s) responsible for the lighting violation shall be required to
correct the violation, in conformance with § 680-24 of this chapter.
A. A minimum lot size of five acres shall be provided.
B. No animal shelter or run shall be permitted within 100 feet of any
property line or 200 feet of any other dwelling on adjacent properties.
C. A screening buffer, as defined in the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance,223 shall be provided along all property boundaries with
residential uses to control noise and odor.
D. The total number of dogs per acre shall not exceed five per acre, not
including dogs under six months old.
A. Size.
(1) A dish or antenna up to six feet in diameter and six feet in height is
permitted by right in any zoning district.
(2) A dish or antenna more than six feet in diameter or six feet in
height is permitted by special exception in any zoning district,
223. Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 680-57 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-60
1:668
§ 680-61. Wireless communication facilities. [Amended 11-1-2017
by Ord. No. 584]
pursuant to the standards contained in §§ 680-19 and 680-20 and
any additional conditions required by the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Nuisance. All antenna and support structures shall be designed and
located so that surrounding areas will not be negatively affected by
support structure failure, falling ice or other debris, electromagnetic
fields, or radio frequency interference.
C. Public safety. Any ground-mounted dishes or antenna support
structures more than six feet in diameter or six feet in height shall be
enclosed by a fence or fitted with an anticlimbing device, as approved
by the manufacturer.
D. Antenna support structures shall not exceed 150 feet in height and
should be painted silver or have a galvanized finish retained in order to
reduce the visual impact. Support structures may be painted green up
to the height of nearby trees. Antenna support structures shall meet all
FAA regulations. No antenna support structure may be artificially lit
except when required by the FAA.
E. Advertising. No advertising shall be affixed to any dish, antenna,
antenna supporting structure, or tower.
A. Purposes. The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards
for the siting, design, permitting, designation, maintenance,
installation, construction and use of wireless supports and wireless
communication facilities in Collegeville Borough. While the Borough
recognizes the importance of wireless communications facilities in
providing high-quality communications service to its residents and
businesses, the Borough also recognizes that it has an obligation to
protect public safety and to minimize the adverse visual effects of such
facilities through the standards set forth in the following provisions.
B. Definitions. When used in this § 680-61, the following words, phrases
and abbreviations shall have the meaning given hereinbelow unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, rods, discs, panels, flat panels,
dishes, whips, or other similar devices used for the transmission or
reception of wireless signals. An antenna may include an
omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel), parabolic
antenna (disc) or any other wireless antenna. This definition shall not
include private-residence-mounted satellite dishes or television
antennas or amateur radio equipment, including, without limitation,
ham or citizen band radio antennas.
APPLICANT — Any person that submits an application, including,
without limitation, a building permit application, zoning permit
application or conditional use application, under this section related
§ 680-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-61
1:669
to the construction, designation, location, co-location, modification,
change or substantial change of a WCF or wireless support.
BASE STATION — A station at a specified site authorized to
communicate with mobile stations, generally consisting of transceivers,
antennae, coaxial cables, power supplies and other associated
electronics. Base stations also include any non-tower-based wireless
support.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Collegeville, also known and referred to
as Collegeville Borough and Collegeville.
CO-LOCATION — The installation of one or more wireless
communication facilities, including antennae, on a previously approved
and constructed wireless support. The term includes the placement,
replacement or modification of previously approved accessory
equipment.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS (DAS) — Network of spatially
separated antenna sites connected to a common source that provides
wireless service within a geographic area or structure.
EMERGENCY — A condition that (1) constitutes a clear and immediate
danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public, or (2) has caused
or is likely to cause facilities in the rights-of-way to be unusable and
result in loss of the services provided.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT OF A WIRELESS SUPPORT — The vertical distance measured
from the ground level, including any base pad, to the highest point on
a wireless support, but not including antennae mounted on the tower
and any other WCFs. If the wireless support is on a sloped grade, then
the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in
calculating the wireless support height.
MODIFICATION — The improvement, upgrade, expansion or
replacement of existing wireless communication facilities or accessory
equipment on an existing wireless support, including, but not limited
to, any co-location, replacement or removal of WCFs.
MONOPOLE — A wireless support or site which consists of a single pole
structure, designed and erected on the ground or on top of a structure,
to support communications antennae and connecting appurtenances. A
monopole is a freestanding structure which does not use the support of
guy-wires.
NON-TOWER-BASED WIRELESS SUPPORT — Any wireless support
not included within the definition of tower-based wireless support,
including, without limitation, water towers, utility poles, light poles and
existing buildings.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, company, association, joint
stock company, firm, partnership, limited liability company, corporation
§ 680-61 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-61
1:670
and any other legal entity; provided that person does not include, or
apply to, the Borough or to any department or agency of the Borough.
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any piece of equipment related to, incident
to, or necessary for, the operation of a wireless support or WCF. By way
of illustration, not limitation, "related equipment" includes generators
and ground cabinets.
RIGHT-OF-WAY or ROW — The surface of and space above and below
any real property in the Borough in which the Borough has a regulatory
interest, or interest as a trustee for the public, as such interests now
or hereafter exist, including, but not limited to, all streets, highways,
avenues, roads, alleys, sidewalks, tunnels, viaducts, bridges, skyways,
or any other public place, area or property under the control of the
Borough, and any unrestricted public or utility easements established,
dedicated, platted, improved or devoted for utility purposes, but
excluding lands other than streets that are owned by the Borough and
also excluding pedestrian trails, footpaths and equestrian trails under
the control of the Borough. The phrase "in the right(s)-of-way" means
in, on, over, along, above and/or under the right(s)-of-way. For the
purpose of this section, ROW shall include streets and roads owned by
the Borough, Montgomery County, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
and any other Pennsylvania state agencies.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
supports, WCFs, base stations, related equipment, antennae and other
facilities which render them more visually appealing or blend the
proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop in such
a manner as to render it minimally visible to the casual observer. Such
methods include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roofmounted
antennae or building-mounted antennae painted to match the
existing structure and facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs,
and light poles.
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — Any modification of a wireless support,
including the placement of any WCFs thereon, that results in the
following:
For all wireless supports:
Any increase in the number of equipment cabinets beyond the
industry standard for the technology involved, and in any case
an increase in the total number of existing and new equipment
cabinets to greater than four;
(a)
Any modification that requires the excavation or deployment
outside of the current site of the wireless support;
(b)
Any modification that defeats the existing concealment and
stealth technology efforts of the wireless support;
(c)
(1)
§ 680-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-61
1:671
TOWER-BASED WIRELESS SUPPORT — Any tower, monopole, or other
structure which has a primary purpose of supporting wireless
communication facilities thereto, which has received approval from the
Borough as required in this chapter, to be designated as a wireless
support. This definition shall include, but not be limited to, DAS hub
facilities, self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles.
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.), as amended.
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or
radio signals.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The set of
equipment and network components, including antennae, nodes,
control boxes, conduits, ducts, pedestals, electronics and other
equipment, used for the purpose of transmitting, receiving,
distributing, or providing wireless communications services. The term
does not include any wireless support.
WIRELESS SUPPORT — Any support structure that supports wireless
communications facilities, regardless of its primary purpose, including
but not limited to towers, monopoles, buildings, water towers, utility
Any modification that does not comply with the conditions
associated with the initial or subsequent approval of the
construction or modification of the wireless support.
(d)
For tower-based wireless supports outside of rights-of-way:
Any increase in the height of a tower-based wireless support
by more than 10% of its existing height, or by the height of
one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest
existing antenna by more than 20 feet, whichever is greater,
except that the mounting of the proposed wireless
communications facility may exceed the size limits set forth
herein if necessary to avoid interference with existing
antennae; or
(a)
Any increase in the horizontal width of a tower-based wireless
support by more than 20 feet, or by an amount equal to the
existing width of the tower-based wireless support, whichever
is greater.
(b)
(2)
For tower-based wireless supports in rights-of-way and all nontower-
based wireless supports:
Any increase in the height of a wireless support by more than
10% of its existing height, or by more than 10 feet, whichever
is greater, or
(a)
Any increase in the horizontal width of a wireless support by
more than six feet.
(b)
(3)
§ 680-61 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-61
1:672
poles and light poles that could support the placement or installation
of WCFs if approved by the Borough. This term does not include the
wireless communications facility attached thereto.
C. Applicability.
(1) New wireless communications facility structures. All new wireless
supports and WCFs in the Borough, not in existence on the
effective date of this section, shall be subject to these regulations,
except as provided in Subsection C(2) and (3), below.
(2) Preexisting approved wireless supports and WCFs. Except with
regard to additions of new WCFs or a substantial change, wireless
supports and WCFs in existence prior to the effective date of this
section, if previously approved by the Borough, shall not be
required to obtain conditional use approval under this section.
Wireless supports and WCFs not previously approved by the
Borough shall be fully subject to all of the requirements of this
section.
(3) Amateur radio station operators or receive-only antennas. This
section shall not govern any support structure, or the installation of
any antenna array, that is owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive-only and/or noncommercial antennas.
D. General requirements.
(1) Standard of care. All wireless supports and WCFs shall be
designed, constructed, installed, erected, operated, maintained,
repaired, modified and removed in strict compliance with all
current applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes,
including, but not limited to, the most recent editions of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Code, National
Electrical Safety Code, National Electrical Code, as well as the
accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices of the
National Association of Tower Erectors, as applicable. All wireless
supports and WCFs shall at all times be kept and maintained in
good condition, order and repair by qualified maintenance and
construction personnel, so that the same shall not endanger the life
of any person or any property in the Borough.
(2) Maintenance. All wireless supports and WCFs shall be fully
automated and unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only
for maintenance or emergency repair. Such maintenance shall be
performed to ensure the upkeep of the facility in order to promote
the safety and security of the Borough's residents and businesses.
All modifications and utilized materials shall be nothing less than
the best available technology for preventing failures and accidents.
All maintenance shall be ordered and repaired by qualified
maintenance and construction personnel.
§ 680-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-61
1:673
(3) Public safety communications. No wireless support or WCF shall
interfere with public safety communications or the reception of
broadband, television, radio or other communication services
enjoyed by occupants of nearby properties.
(4) Radio frequency emissions. No wireless support or WCF may, by
itself or in conjunction with other wireless supports and/or WCFs,
generate radio frequency emissions in excess of the standards and
regulations of the FCC, including, but not limited to, the FCC Office
of Engineering Technology Bulletin 65, entitled "Evaluating
Compliance with FCC Guidelines for Human Exposure to Radio
Frequency Electromagnetic Fields," as amended.
(5) Aviation safety. All wireless supports and WCFs shall comply with
all federal and state laws and regulations concerning aviation
safety.
(6) Related equipment. Ground-mounted related equipment greater
than three cubic feet, such as cabinets and accessory structures,
shall not be located within 50 feet of a lot in residential use or
zoned residential.
(7) Historic buildings or districts. No structure that could support the
placement or installation of WCFs may be designated as a wireless
support if it is:
(a) Listed on either the National or Pennsylvania Registers of
Historic Places, or eligible to be so listed.
(b) Included in the official historic structures and/or historic
districts list maintained by the Borough.
(c) Located within the boundaries of any certified historical
district in the Borough.
(8) Wind. Wireless supports and WCFs shall be designed to withstand
the effects of wind according to the standard designed by the
American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association,
and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/EIA-222-E
Code, as amended).
(9) Lighting. Wireless supports and WCFs shall not be artificially
lighted, except as required by law. If lighting is required, the
applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting,
demonstrating as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations.
(10) Noise. Wireless supports and WCFs shall be operated and
maintained so as not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise
standards under state law and the Borough Code, except in
emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator,
§ 680-61 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-61
1:674
where such noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis
only.
(11) Inspection. The Borough reserves the right to inspect any towerbased
wireless support to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this section and any other provisions found within the Borough
Code or state or federal law. The Borough and/or its agents shall
have the authority to enter the property upon which a wireless
support is located at any time, upon reasonable notice to the
operator, to ensure such compliance.
(12)FCC license. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
wireless support in the Borough shall submit a copy of its current
FCC license, including the name, address, and emergency
telephone number for the operator of the facility.
(13) Reimbursement for ROW use. Every wireless support located in the
ROW is subject to the Borough's right to fix annually a fair and
reasonable compensation to be paid for use and occupancy of the
ROW and all costs incurred by the Borough as a result of such
activities. Such compensation for ROW use shall be directly related
to the Borough's actual ROW management costs including, but not
limited to, the costs of the administration and performance of all
reviewing, inspecting, permitting, supervising and other ROW
management activities by the Borough. The annual ROW
management fee for wireless supports shall be determined by the
Borough and authorized by resolution of Borough Council.
(14) Zoning requirements. In addition to the requirements contained in
this article, a wireless support must also comply with the
requirements of the zoning district within which the wireless
support is located. Where conflict exists between the requirements
of the zoning district within which the wireless support is located
and this article, this article shall control.
E. Application, permit fees and retention of experts.
(1) Application. An applicant proposing the construction or
designation of any new wireless support or the modification or colocation
of a WCF on any existing wireless support shall complete
and submit an application to the Borough prior to beginning
construction, designation, co-location or modification which shall
include, at a minimum, the following:
(a) Name, address and point of contact for the applicant.
(b) Name, address and point of contact for the property owner
upon which the new wireless support or the modification or colocation
of a WCF on any existing wireless support is proposed
to be located.
§ 680-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-61
1:675
(c) All fees required by the Borough's fee schedule, including fees
required this section.
(d) A description, drawing and plan showing the proposed
installation, construction and/or changes to the wireless
supports, in detail, and the WCF to be attached thereto. All
plans and drawings for the installation, construction or
modification of a wireless support, or the replacement,
modification or co-location of a WCF on a wireless support and
related equipment shall be signed and sealed by a professional
structural engineer, licensed in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(e) A copy of all Zoning Hearing Board and conditional use
decisions pertaining to the property upon which the wireless
support is located.
(f) If located outside of a right-of-way, documentation evidencing
ownership of the parcel upon which the wireless support is
proposed, or an easement or other agreement with the owner
which provides the applicant with access thereto.
(2) Fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable fees
directly related to the Borough's actual costs in reviewing and
processing application(s) for the construction, designation or
modification of a wireless support, as well as related inspection,
monitoring and associated costs.
(3) Retention of experts. The Borough may hire any consultant(s) and/
or expert(s) necessary to assist the Borough in reviewing and
evaluating the application for approval of the construction of a new
wireless support and, once approved, in reviewing and evaluating
any potential violations of the terms and conditions of this section.
The applicant and/or owner of the new wireless support shall
reimburse the Borough for all costs of the Borough's consultant(s)
in providing expert evaluation and consultation in connection with
these activities.
F. Modification or co-location of WCFs.
(1) Additional application requirements. In addition to the information
set forth in Subsection E, applicant shall complete and submit a
building permit application, and request a certification from the
Borough that existing wireless support is in compliance with this
section and all other applicable ordinances of the Borough, subject
to the WBCA.
(2) Permit fees. The Borough may assess appropriate and reasonable
permit fees directly related to the Borough's actual costs in
reviewing and processing the application, as well as related
inspection, monitoring and associated costs, which permit fees
§ 680-61 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-61
1:676
shall not exceed $1,000, or other such other monetary limit, set
forth in the WBCA.
(3) Cost of experts. The Borough may hire any consultant(s) and/or
expert(s) necessary to assist the Borough in reviewing and
evaluating the application, the cost of which shall be reimbursed to
Borough by the applicant.
(4) Approval process. Within 30 calendar days of the date that an
application for modification or co-location of a WCF on an existing
wireless support is filed with the Borough, the Borough shall notify
the applicant in writing of any information that may be required to
complete such application, including the law, ordinance, or code
section authorizing such request. If, after additional information is
submitted, the Borough finds the additional information to be
insufficient, the Borough may send a second written request within
10 days of the subsequent submission. All applications for
modifications or co-locations of WCFs shall be acted upon within 60
days of the receipt of the initially submitted application and the
Borough shall advise the applicant in writing of its decision. If
additional information was requested by the Borough to complete
an application, the time required by the applicant to provide the
information shall not be counted toward the above-stated
guidelines.
(5) Substantial change. Any application proposing a modification, colocation
or any other change to a wireless support, WCF or related
equipment that is deemed to constitute a substantial change shall
be an application for a new wireless support and shall be reviewed
under the provisions of this § 680-61 for the same.
G. Location of wireless supports.
(1) Tower-based wireless supports outside a ROW. Tower-based
wireless supports are permitted by conditional use outside of
rights-of-way in the following zoning district: M+I, Manufacturing
and Industrial District, Institutional District and/or municipal
property in any district.
(2) Tower-based supports within a ROW. Tower-based wireless
supports are permitted by conditional use within the rights-of-way
in the following zoning district: any zoning district subject to all
applicable criteria within this § 680-61.
(3) Non-tower-based supports outside of a ROW. Non-tower-based
wireless supports are permitted by conditional use outside of
rights-of-way in the following zoning districts: any zoning district
subject to all applicable criteria within this § 680-61.
(4) Non-tower-based supports within a ROW. Non-tower-based
wireless supports are permitted by conditional use within the
§ 680-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-61
1:677
rights-of-way in the following zoning district: any zoning district
subject to all applicable criteria within this § 680-61.
H. Conditional use procedure.
(1) Application. The application shall be submitted, in writing, to the
Borough during regular business hours, with all fees required by
the Borough's fee ordinance and this section. The application shall
include a request for conditional use approval and sufficient
information to document compliance with the applicable standards,
conditions and criteria of this section and the underlying zoning
district in which the wireless support is to be located. In the event
of a conflict between the provisions of this section and the
underlying zoning district, this section shall control.
(2) Notice by applicant. Upon submission of an application for the
construction, installation or designation of a new wireless support,
the applicant shall mail notice to all owners of every property
within 500 feet of the proposed facility. The applicant shall provide
proof of mailing of the notification to the Borough.
(3) Application review. Within 30 days of receipt of the application, a
copy of the application will be provided to the Borough Planning
Commission, Montgomery County Planning Commission, the
Borough Engineer and any other agency or technical consultants
whose review may be relevant.
(4) Public notice. Public notice of the public hearing, stating the time,
place and the particular nature of the case to be considered, shall
be published in accordance with the requirements of the
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.
(5) Public hearing. The Borough Council shall schedule a public
hearing thereon within 60 days of receipt of the application unless
the applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time.
(6) Decision. A written decision shall be rendered by Borough Council
in accordance with the requirements of the Municipalities Planning
Code, as amended. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a decision shall
be made on the application within 45 days of the last hearing on the
matter, but in no case shall a decision be made later than 150 days
from the receipt of the initially submitted application unless an
extension of time is agreed to, in writing, by the applicant. Where
the Borough Council fails to render a decision within the period set
forth hereinabove, or fails to hold the required hearing within the
time required by the Municipalities Planning Code, as amended,
the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant, unless the applicant has agreed, in writing or on the
record of the hearing, to an extension of time.
(7) Tolling of decision date. If additional information is requested by
the Borough to complete an application, the time required by the
§ 680-61 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-61
1:678
applicant to provide the additional information shall not be counted
toward the above-stated deadlines.
(8) Permits required. Any applicant proposing the designation,
construction or installation of a new wireless support shall first
obtain a zoning permit and building permit from the Borough prior
to construction. Approval of any conditional use shall expire two
years after the date of approval by the Borough Council if, prior to
such expiration, the applicant fails to obtain a building permit or
use and occupancy permit, unless the Borough Council has agreed,
in writing or on the record, to an extension of time.
I. Conditional use standards and criteria.
(1) General standards and criteria. The Borough Council shall consider
comments and recommendations of the Borough and County
Planning Commissions, other advisors and those present at the
public hearing prior to deciding to approve or deny the proposed
use. In allowing a conditional use, the Council may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in the chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter. In deciding all applications for
conditional uses under this section, the Borough Council shall be
guided by the following standards and criteria:
(a) The proposed use is permitted by conditional use, and it will
conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it
is located.
(b) Points of vehicular access to the lot are provided at a distance
from intersections and other points of access and in number
sufficient to prevent undue traffic hazards and obstructions to
the movement of traffic.
(c) A determination that the proposed use will not have an
unwarranted impact on traffic in the area, either creating
significant additional congestion in an area of existing
congestion or posing a threat of significant additional
congestion where there is a high probability of future
congestion. In addition, Borough Council shall consider
whether the proposed use will create any traffic hazard
dangerous to the public safety.
(d) The proposed use will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property.
(e) The proposed use will not adversely affect the public health,
safety or general welfare.
(f) Visual or land use impact. Subject to the WBCA, the Borough
reserves the right to deny an application for the construction,
§ 680-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-61
1:679
placement or designation of any wireless support based upon
adverse visual and/or land use impact.
(2) Indemnification. Each person who owns or operates a wireless
support located in the Borough shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Borough, its elected and
appointed officials, employees, consultants, solicitors and agents,
at all times against any and all claims for personal injury, including
death, and property damage arising in whole or in part from,
caused by or connected with any act or omission of the person, its
officers, agents, employees or contractors arising out of, but not
limited to, the construction, installation, operation, maintenance or
removal of a wireless support which is located in the Borough and
owned or operated by the person, and any WCFs attached thereto.
Each person that owns or operates a wireless support shall defend
any actions or proceedings against the Borough in which it is
claimed that personal injury, including death, or property damage
was caused by the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or removal of a wireless supports and any WCFs
attached thereto. The obligation to indemnify, hold harmless and
defend shall include, but not be limited to, the obligation to pay
judgments, injuries, liabilities, damages, reasonable attorneys'
fees, reasonable expert fees, court costs and all other costs of
indemnification.
J. Additional standards and criteria for all tower-based wireless supports.
(1) Additional criteria. The standards and criteria set forth in this
Subsection J are in addition to the general standards and criteria
set forth in Subsection I.
(2) Gap in coverage. Subject to the WBCA, an applicant for the
construction, installation or designation of a tower-based wireless
support must demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless
coverage exists with respect to all wireless operators in the
applicable area and that the type of wireless support being
proposed is the least intrusive means by which to fill that gap in
wireless coverage. The existence or nonexistence of a gap in
wireless coverage shall be a factor in the Borough's decision on an
application for approval of the application for the construction,
installation or designation of tower-based wireless supports.
(3) Co-location not available. An application for a new tower-based
wireless support shall not be approved unless the Borough finds
that the wireless communications equipment planned for the
proposed tower-based wireless support cannot be accommodated
on an existing or approved wireless support, or on Borough
property. Any application for approval of a tower-based wireless
support shall include a comprehensive inventory of all existing
wireless supports and other suitable structures within a two-mile
radius from the point of the proposed tower-based wireless
§ 680-61 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-61
1:680
support, unless the applicant can show to the satisfaction of the
Borough that a different distance is more reasonable, and shall
demonstrate conclusively why an existing wireless support or other
suitable structure cannot be utilized.
(4) Design regulations. The wireless support shall employ the most
current stealth technology available in an effort to appropriately
blend into the surrounding environment and minimize aesthetic
impact. The application of the stealth technology chosen by the
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Borough. Any
proposed tower-based wireless support shall be designed
structurally, electrically, and in all respects to accommodate both
the applicant's antennae and comparable antennae for future
users.
(5) Additional antennae. As a condition of approval for all tower-based
wireless supports, the applicant shall provide the Borough with a
written commitment that it will allow other service providers to colocate
antennae on its tower-based wireless support where
technically and economically feasible. Subject to the WBCA, no
person shall cause any additional antennae to be installed without
first obtaining the written approval of the Borough.
(6) Signs. All tower-based wireless supports shall be accompanied by a
sign in a location readily visible to any person outside of the
equipment compound identifying the name and phone number of a
party to contact in the event of an emergency. The face of such sign
shall be no larger than six square feet and the top of such sign shall
be located at a height of no higher than 10 feet from the ground.
(7) Protective covering. All tower-based wireless supports shall be
galvanized and/or painted with a rust-preventive paint of an
appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings.
(8) Prohibited as a sole use on a lot. A tower-based wireless support
shall not be permitted to be the sole use on a lot which meets the
minimum lot area for the district.
(9) Financial security: tower-based wireless supports. Prior to issuance
of any permit for the designation, construction or placement of a
tower-based wireless support, the owner shall obtain and maintain
a bond or other form of financial security acceptable to the
Borough Solicitor, in the amount of $100,000 for each tower-based
wireless support to assure the faithful performance of the terms
and conditions of this Subsection J(9). The financial security shall
be provided by the owner at its own cost and expense, shall be
obtained from a surety licensed to do business in Pennsylvania and
shall be maintained throughout the existence of the wireless
support. The financial security required under this Subsection J(9)
shall provide that the Borough may recover from the principal and
surety any and all compensatory damages incurred by the Borough
§ 680-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-61
1:681
for violations of this section, after reasonable notice and
opportunity to cure.
(10) Insurance. Each person that owns or operates a tower-based
wireless support in the Borough shall provide the Borough with a
certificate of insurance evidencing general liability coverage in the
minimum amount of $2,000,000 per occurrence and property
damage coverage in the minimum amount of $2,000,000 per
occurrence covering the tower-based wireless support.
(11) Combined with another use. A tower-based wireless support may
be permitted on an improved property with an existing use, or an
unimproved property in combination with another use. The existing
use on the property shall be any permitted use in the applicable
district, and need not be affiliated with the WCF.
K. Standards and criteria for tower-based wireless supports located
outside of rights-of-way.
(1) Additional criteria. The standards and criteria set forth in this
Subsection K are in addition to the general standards and criteria
set forth in Subsections I and J.
(2) Minimum setbacks. The tower-based wireless support, the related
equipment and any accompanying utility building, cabinet or
shelter shall comply with the minimum setback requirements of the
underlying zoning district or the setback shall be equivalent to the
maximum height of the proposed tower-based wireless support,
whichever setback is greater.
(3) Height. Tower-based wireless supports outside the rights-of-way
shall be designed at no more than the minimum functional height.
All applicants must submit documentation to the Borough justifying
the total height of the structure. The maximum total height of any
tower-based wireless support located outside the rights-of-way
shall not exceed 125 feet, which height shall include all subsequent
additions or alterations. Related equipment, including cabinets,
shall not exceed eight feet in height. Any height extensions to an
existing tower-based wireless support shall require prior approval
of the Borough, subject to the WBCA. The Borough reserves the
right to deny such requests based upon aesthetic and land use
impact, or any other lawful considerations related to the character
of the Borough.
(4) Existing vegetation. The applicant shall ensure that the existing
vegetation, trees and shrubs located within proximity to the
wireless support shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
(5) Soil report. The applicant shall submit a soil report to the Borough
complying with the standards of the ANSI/EIA-222-E (Geotechnical
Investigations), as amended, to document and verify the design
§ 680-61 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-61
1:682
specifications of the foundation of the tower-based wireless
support, and anchors for guy wires, if used.
(6) Fence. An eight-foot-high security fence shall completely surround
any tower-based wireless support outside the right-of-way, as well
as guy wires and any building or shelter housing related
equipment.
(7) Screening plantings. A screen of evergreen trees planted at a
maximum of eight feet on center, and staggered in at least two
rows, shall be located along the perimeter of the security fence
surrounding a tower-based wireless support. The applicant shall
ensure that the existing vegetation, trees and shrubs located within
proximity to the tower-based wireless support shall be preserved to
the maximum extent possible. Fence gates shall remain accessible.
(8) Related equipment. Ground-mounted equipment associated to, or
connected with, a tower-based wireless support shall be
underground or screened from public view using stealth
technologies. All utility buildings and related equipment shall be
architecturally designed to blend into the environment in which
they are situated and shall meet the minimum setback
requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(9) Access road. An access road, turnaround space and parking shall
be provided to ensure adequate emergency and service access to
tower-based wireless support. Maximum use of existing roads,
whether public or private, shall be made to the extent practicable.
Road construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance
and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow
natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and
minimize soil erosion. Where applicable, the owner of the wireless
support shall present documentation to the Borough that the
property owner has granted an easement for the proposed facility.
(10) Parking. There shall be two off-street parking spaces for the first
carrier and one additional parking space for each additional carrier
up to a maximum of four parking spaces per tower-based wireless
support.
L. Standards and criteria for tower-based wireless supports in rights-ofway.
(1) Additional criteria. The standards and criteria set forth in this
Subsection L are in addition to the general standards and criteria
set forth in Subsections I and J.
(2) Height. Tower-based wireless supports in the ROW shall not exceed
35 feet in height subject to the WBCA; all height extensions to an
existing tower-based wireless support shall require prior approval
of the Borough, and shall not constitute a substantial change. All
increases in the height are cumulative and additional increases
§ 680-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-61
1:683
shall not be further permitted. The Borough reserves the right to
deny such requests based upon aesthetic and land use impact,
or any other lawful considerations related to the character of the
Borough.
(3) Related equipment. Related equipment connected to or associated
with tower-based wireless supports located in the right-of-way shall
be installed underground if located in the right-of-way or within an
easement area located on a privately owned adjacent lot so as not
to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to
pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public
use of the ROW as determined by the Borough. In addition:
(a) Related equipment shall be screened, to the fullest extent
possible, through the use of stealth technology, including
decorative features, to the satisfaction of the Borough. Such
screening shall maintain clear sight distance for motorists.
(b) Any underground vaults related to tower-based wireless
supports shall be reviewed and approved by the Borough.
(c) Any related equipment attached to the tower-based wireless
support shall be attached at a minimum vertical height of no
less than 12 feet from the ground.
(4) Time, place and manner. The Borough shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all tower-based wireless supports in the ROW based on
public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW, and
related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and
manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of
the Borough and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
M. General criteria and standards for all non-tower-based wireless
supports.
(1) Additional criteria. The standards and criteria set forth in this
Subsection M are in addition to the general standards and criteria
set forth in Subsection I.
(2) Financial security: non-tower-based wireless support. Prior to
issuance of any permit for the designation, construction or
placement of a non-tower-based wireless support, the owner shall,
at owner's expense, obtain and maintain a bond or other form of
financial security in an amount acceptable to Borough Council to
assure the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of this
section. The financial security shall be provided by the owner at its
own cost and expense, shall be obtained from a surety licensed to
do business in Pennsylvania and shall be maintained throughout
the existence of the wireless support. The financial security
required under this Subsection M(2) shall provide that the Borough
§ 680-61 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-61
1:684
may recover from the principal and surety any and all
compensatory damages incurred by the Borough for violations of
this section, after reasonable notice and opportunity to cure.
(3) Insurance: non-tower-based wireless support. Each person that
owns or operates a non-tower-based wireless support shall provide
the Borough with a certificate of insurance evidencing general
liability coverage in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 per
occurrence and property damage coverage in the minimum amount
of $1,000,000 per occurrence covering the non-tower-based
wireless support. This provision may be waived by Borough if
insurance requirements in lease agreement are satisfactory to
Borough.
N. Additional criteria and standards of non-tower-based wireless supports
located outside of ROWs.
(1) Additional criteria. The standards and criteria set forth in this
Subsection N are in addition to the general standards and criteria
set forth in Subsections I and M.
(2) Existing structure required. Non-tower-based wireless supports
shall only be located on existing structures, such as existing
buildings.
(3) Height of wireless support. The total height of any wireless support
shall not exceed the attachment structure by more than 10 feet.
(4) Height and diameter of antennae. Antennae and accessory
equipment that are mounted to a building or similar structure may
not exceed a height of 10 feet above the roof or parapet, whichever
is higher, unless the applicant first obtains a special exception.
Antennae, and their respective accompanying support structures,
shall be no greater in diameter than any cross-sectional dimension
that is reasonably necessary for their proper functioning.
(5) Justification of height required. The applicants for a non-towerbased
wireless support located outside the right-of-way must
submit documentation to the Borough justifying the total height of
the non-tower-based wireless support, subject to the WBCA. Such
documentation shall be analyzed in the context of such justification
on an individual case-by-case basis.
(6) Stealth technology. Non-tower-based wireless supports are
encouraged to employ stealth technology and be treated to visibly
match the supporting structure in order to minimize aesthetic
impact. The application of the stealth technology chosen by the
applicant shall be subject to the approval of the Borough. Borough
citizens utilizing satellite dishes and antennae for the purpose of
maintaining television, phone, and/or internet connections at their
respective residences for personal use shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Subsection N(6).
§ 680-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-61
1:685
(7) Removal, replacement, modification. The removal and replacement
of non-tower-based wireless supports and/or accessory equipment
for the purpose of upgrading or repairing the wireless support is
permitted, so long as such repair or upgrade does not increase the
overall size of the wireless support or the numbers of antennae,
subject to the WBCA.
(8) Related equipment. Ground-mounted related equipment connected
to or associated with a non-tower-based wireless support outside
the right-of-way shall be installed underground, if feasible. Groundmounted
related equipment that cannot be installed underground
shall be screened from public view using stealth technology,
landscaping and other decorative features to the satisfaction of the
Borough. If the applicant proposes to locate the related equipment
in a separate building, the building shall comply with the minimum
setback and other dimensional requirements for the underlying
zoning district.
(9) Fencing and screening. An eight-foot-high security fence and
landscaping satisfying the requirements of this section shall
surround any separate communications equipment building. The
landscaping shall consist of a screen of evergreen trees planted
eight feet on center, and staggered in two rows, located along the
perimeter of the security fence.
(10) Vehicular access. Vehicular access to the communications
equipment building shall not interfere with the parking or vehicular
circulations on the site for the principal use.
O. Standards and criteria for non-tower-based wireless supports in the
rights-of-way.
(1) Additional criteria. The standards and criteria set forth in this
Subsection O are in addition to the general standards and criteria
set forth in Subsections I and M.
(2) Location. The only structures in the right-of-way that shall be
designated by the Borough as non-tower-based wireless supports
shall be existing poles, such as existing utility poles or light poles.
(3) Design criteria. The installation of WCFs on non-tower-based
wireless supports located above the surface grade in the public
ROW including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and joint
utility poles, shall consist of equipment components having a size
that does not constitute a substantial change and that are
compatible in scale and proportion to the wireless supports upon
which they are mounted, subject to the WBCA. All equipment shall
be the smallest and least visibly intrusive equipment feasible.
Antennae and all related equipment shall be designed to match the
supporting structure. WCFs and accompanying equipment shall be
painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually compatible with the
non-tower-based wireless support upon which they are mounted.
§ 680-61 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-61
1:686
(4) Related equipment. Related equipment connected to or associated
with non-tower-based wireless supports and WCFs located in the
right-of-way shall be installed underground if located in the rightof-
way or within an easement area located on a privately owned
adjacent lot so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety
hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the
Borough.
(5) Screening and stealth technology. Related equipment shall be
screened, to the fullest extent possible, through the use of stealth
technology, including decorative features, to the satisfaction of the
Borough. Such screening shall maintain clear sight distance for
motorists.
(6) Underground vaults. Any underground vaults related to non-towerbased
wireless supports and WCFs shall be reviewed and approved
by the Borough.
(7) Minimum height of related equipment. Any related equipment
attached to the non-tower-based wireless support shall have a
minimum vertical height of no less than 12 feet.
(8) Time, place and manner. The Borough shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all non-tower-based wireless supports in the ROW based
on public safety, traffic management, physical burden on the ROW,
and related considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and
manner requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of
the Borough and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(9) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 60 days following written
notice from the Borough, or such longer period as the Borough
determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the
case of an emergency, an owner of a non-tower-based wireless
support in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
wireless support when the Borough, consistent with its police
powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration is reasonably necessary under the following
circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Borough or other public improvement in the right-of-way.
(b) The operations of the Borough or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way.
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement.
§ 680-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-61
1:687
(d) An emergency as determined by the Borough.
P. Relocation and removal of wireless supports.
(1) Discontinued, unused or abandoned tower-based wireless
supports. In the event that the use of a tower-based wireless
support is planned to be discontinued, the owner shall provide
written notice to the Borough of its intent to discontinue use and
the date when the use shall be discontinued. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Borough may deem a tower-based wireless support
to be abandoned or unused after reasonable investigation. Unused
or abandoned tower-based wireless supports or portions thereof
shall be removed as follows:
(a) All unused or abandoned tower-based wireless supports and
related equipment shall be removed by the owner within six
months of the cessation of operations at the site unless a time
extension is approved by the Borough.
(b) If the wireless support, related equipment and/or accessory
facility is not removed within six months of the cessation of
operations at a site, or within any longer period approved by
the Borough, the wireless support, related equipment and/or
accessory facility may be removed by the Borough and the cost
of removal assessed against the owner of the wireless support,
related equipment and/or accessory facility.
(c) Any unused portions of tower-based wireless supports,
including antennae, shall be removed within six months of the
time of cessation of operations. The Borough must approve all
replacements of portions of a tower-based wireless support
previously removed, subject to the WBCA.
(2) Removal of discontinued, unused or abandoned non-tower-based
wireless support. In the event that use of a non-tower-based
wireless support is discontinued, the owner shall provide written
notice to the Borough of its intent to discontinue use and the date
when the use shall be discontinued. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the Borough may deem non-tower-based wireless supports to be
abandoned or unused after reasonable investigation. Unused or
abandoned non-tower-based wireless supports or portions thereof
shall be removed as follows:
(a) All abandoned or unused non-tower-based wireless supports
and related equipment shall be removed within two months of
the cessation of operations at the site unless a time extension is
approved by the Borough.
(b) If the non-tower-based wireless support or related equipment
is not removed within two months of the cessation of
operations at a site, or within any longer period approved by
the Borough, the non-tower-based wireless support, related
§ 680-61 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-61
1:688
equipment and/or associated facilities and equipment may be
removed by the Borough and the cost of removal assessed
against the owner of the non-tower-based wireless support,
related equipment and/or associated facilities.
(3) Relocation or removal of wireless supports in ROWs. Within 60
days following written notice from the Borough, or such longer
period as the Borough determines is reasonably necessary or such
shorter period in the case of an emergency, an owner of a wireless
support in the ROW shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
wireless support when the Borough, consistent with its police
powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall
determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Borough or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Borough or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Borough.
(4) Cost of removal. If the removal of the wireless support is performed
by the Borough in accordance with other provisions of the Borough
Code of Ordinances, the Borough shall have the right to recover
any and all reimbursement of the expenses of removal from/against
the bond. The owner shall file a copy of the bond with the Borough
prior to the issuance of the building permit. The Borough's
remedies shall be cumulative, and in the event that the Borough
exercises its rights to recovery against the bond, the Borough shall
retain its right to recover any and all outstanding costs as
permitted by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code and
applicable law, such as an action in equity.
Q. Violations applicable to all wireless supports and facilities.
(1) Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
subject, upon finding by a magisterial district judge, to a penalty
not exceeding $1,000, for each and every offense, together with
attorneys' fees and costs. A separate and distinct violation shall be
deemed to be committed each day on which a violation occurs or
continues to occur. In addition to an action to enforce any penalty
imposed by this section and any other remedy at law or in equity,
the Borough may apply to a court for an injunction or other
appropriate relief at law or in equity to enforce compliance with or
restrain violation of any provision of this section.
§ 680-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-61
1:689
§ 680-62. Group home for handicapped.
Pursuant to the definition in Article II and the following, group homes are
permitted by right in all zoning districts.
(2) Determination of violation. In the event a determination is made
that a person has violated any provision of this section, such person
shall be provided written notice of the determination and the
reasons therefor. Except in the case of an emergency, the person
shall have 30 days to cure the violation. If the nature of the
violation is such that it cannot be fully cured within such time
period, the Borough may, in its reasonable judgment, extend the
time period to cure, provided the person has commenced to cure
and is diligently pursuing its efforts to cure. If the violation has not
been cured within the time allowed, the Borough may take any and
all actions authorized by this section and/or federal and/or
Pennsylvania law and regulations.
R. Miscellaneous.
(1) Nonconforming uses. Nonconforming tower-based wireless
supports which are damaged or destroyed after enactment of this
section due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored at
their former location, but must otherwise comply with the terms
and conditions of this section.
(2) Police powers. The Borough, by granting any permit or taking any
other action pursuant to this section, does not waive, reduce,
lessen or impair the lawful police powers vested in the Borough
under applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
A. The facility shall be certified by the appropriate state agency. The
license or certification shall be obtained prior to issuance of an
occupancy permit by the Borough. A copy of an annual report with
evidence of continuing certification shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer in January of each year.
B. Twenty-four-hour supervision shall be provided by staff qualified by the
sponsoring governmental agency.
C. No kitchen facilities shall be located in any bedroom.
D. The number of residents occupying the group home, excluding staff,
shall not exceed four persons.
E. Any medical or counseling service provided shall be done only for
residents of the group home.
F. The use of the dwelling shall comply with all other Borough ordinances,
including Borough and property maintenance.
G. The group home must maintain the appearance of a single-family home.
§ 680-61 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-62
1:690
§ 680-63. Modification of front yard requirements.
Where an unimproved lot of record is situated on the same road frontage
between two abutting improved lots or between one unimproved lot and one
improved lot, the front yard requirement for the district shall be modified so
that the front yard shall be an average of the existing abutting front yards
on improved lots and the required front yard.
§ 680-64. Setback from road legal right-of-way.
In all districts, the minimum building setback from the legal right-of-way of
all public roads shall be equal to the minimum front yard setback for the
district.
§ 680-65. Obstruction to vision at intersections.
On any corner lot, no physical improvement, tree(s), or planting area shall
be erected or altered within the vicinity of the intersection that would cause
obstruction to driver vision from the abutting intersection. All development
and use of land shall comply with the Collegeville Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.224
§ 680-66. Condominium development.
Development proposed under the condominium form of ownership shall be
required to satisfy the dimensional requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located, for the types of dwelling units proposed. For dwelling
units that are otherwise regulated by minimum lot areas, lot widths, and
yards, plans shall show equivalent lotted areas, lot widths, and yard areas as
dashed lines to show that the proposed development would comply with the
dimensional standards required for those dwelling units under a fee simple
lotted plan.
§ 680-67. Height of structures.
For any permitted structure not otherwise regulated herein, additional
height above the limit specified in the individual zoning districts may be
permitted as a conditional use when approved by the Borough Council,
provided that the setback from any property line is at least equal to the
height of the structure and the structure will not regularly be entered by
people. This provision is intended to regulate miscellaneous structures,
including chimneys, steeples, clock towers, water towers, and windmills.
H. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each staff member
per shift.
224. Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 680-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-68
1:691
§ 680-68. Solid waste disposal facilities.
Outside rubbish storage areas for all commercial, industrial, institutional
and multifamily uses shall be fully enclosed and concealed from view.
Opaque fencing and/or landscaping may be used. These areas shall also
not be permitted within any parking space or aisle, but shall be located to
provide easy access for pickup.
§ 680-69. Principal structure or building.
In any zoning district, no more than one principal structure or building is
permitted on an individual lot.
§ 680-70. Zoning permits. [Added 12-1-2004 by Ord. No. 506]
Zoning permits shall be required for all fences less than six feet,
construction of all carports, greenhouses, sheds, detached private garages,
and other accessory structures less than 1,000 square feet which are not
otherwise required to obtain a building permit under the Borough's Building
Code Ordinance.225 Zoning permits shall also be required for any change
in use of land, buildings or structures and any change of nonresidential
building tenant or occupant.
§ 680-71. Student homes. [Added 3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
A. All student homes must register in conformity with Chapter X226 of the
Collegeville Borough Code.
B. Legislative intent of separation requirements. Certain uses in the
various zoning districts, while compatible with other lawful uses, can be
detrimental to the quiet use and enjoyment by others of their property if
concentrated in the same neighborhood. Borough Council has
determined that undue concentration can be avoided by mandating a
minimum distance of separation between these uses in residential
districts. Thus, the essential nature of the various districts can be
maintained while providing a broad level of inclusion for the variety of
uses that enrich our community.
C. No permitted use allowed conditioned upon compliance with this
subsection shall be located on a lot, any portion of which is closer to
another lot lawfully used for a permitted use allowed conditioned upon
compliance with this subsection than a distance determined by
multiplying by 15 times the required street frontage for a single-family
detached or, if permitted as a use, a single-family semidetached
dwelling in the district in which the use is located. This section shall be
construed to prevent an existing lawful use from being rendered
unlawful by the application hereof.
225. Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Uniform Construction Codes.
226. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 680-68 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-71
1:692
§ 680-71.1. Hookah bar/lounge. [Added 4-4-2018 by Ord. No. 586]
Pursuant to the definition in Article II and the following, hookah bars/
lounges are permitted in the M&I, Manufacturing and Industrial District by
right:
D. A special exception authorizing a student home shall expire without
further action by the Borough unless the use is registered.
A. Hookah bars/lounges shall cease operations between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 11:00 a.m.
B. No alcoholic beverages served or consumed on premises.
C. Planted filtering buffer, fence or sound barrier when located within 300
feet of a residential property. The filtering buffer shall be consistent
with § 600-53B(5) and figure 600-4.17.
D. Services must be performed under sanitary conditions and in
compliance with all federal, state and local regulations, rules and laws,
if any, regulating such services.
E. No one under the age of 18 is permitted on premises.
§ 680-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-71.1
1:693

ARTICLE IX
Off-Street Parking
§ 680-72. Declaration of legislative intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 680-73. Required off-street parking facilities. [Amended 3-7-2007
by Ord. No. 526; 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 583]
Any building or structure erected, altered, or used, and any lot used or
occupied for any of the following purposes shall be provided with the
minimum number of off-street parking spaces set forth below, together with
adequate driveways and street access in compliance with the requirements
of the Collegeville Borough Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.227 The required spaces below are in addition to any state or
federal handicapped space requirements or part thereof.
Use Requirement
Dwellings
Single-family detached, two-family,
multifamily
2 spaces per dwelling unit
Single-family attached (townhouse) 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Places of assembly (theater, church,
stadium, auditorium, etc.)
1 space per 3 seats
Freestanding retail stores 1 space per 200 square feet of
gross sales floor
Shopping centers 1 space per 200 square feet of
gross leasable floor area
A. Set reasonable standards and provide reasonable controls to assure
sufficient parking capacity for the uses or potential uses of land in the
Borough.
B. Provide flexibility in the implementation of these standards by
permitting construction of a reduced number of parking spaces under
appropriate conditions.
C. Prevent hazards to public safety caused by the intrusion of parking
upon public rights-of-way and provide suitable facilities for off-street
parking.
D. Provide design standards that will minimized the impact of parking lots
on adjoining property owners.
227. Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 680-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-73
1:695
Use Requirement
Offices 1 space per 275 square feet of
gross usable office space, halls,
bathrooms, stairway, elevators,
utility rooms, and floor area
Industry (excluding those specifically
listed below)
1 space per employee for the
largest shift
Laboratory 1 space per 450 square feet of
gross floor area
Warehouse or storage 1 space per 1,500 square feet of
gross floor area
Services
Doctor, dentist, or similar type,
including outpatient clinics
7 spaces per practitioner, plus 1
space per additional employee
Barber, beautician, tailor, or similar
type
2 spaces per 250 square feet of
gross floor area plus 1 space per
any other employee
Tourist home, rooming house, bed-andbreakfast
2 spaces, plus 1 space per rental
unit
Self-service laundromat 1 space per 3 washers and/or
dryers
Place of indoor amusements (not sports
or exercise)
1 space per 100 square feet of
gross floor area
The following uses require 1 space per
employee and/or volunteer on the
largest shift or during peak periods,
plus the number of spaces listed below:
Library, museum, or similar place 1 space per 500 square feet of
floor area
Hospital, inpatient clinic,
sanitarium, nursing home
1 space per 1 bed
Hotel, motel, or similar use 1 space per rental unit, plus 1
space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area in common or
public use (lobby, bar, meeting
rooms, etc.)
Restaurants
Drive-in or fast food 1 space per 100 square feet of
gross floor area, minimum 25
spaces
All others 1 space per 100 square feet of
gross floor area
§ 680-73 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-73
1:696
Use Requirement
Motor vehicle repairs (body or
mechanical)
3 spaces per service bay
Vehicle sales 1 space per 500 square feet of
indoor sales area, plus 1 space
per 5,000 square feet of outdoor
sales area
Indoor sports facility
Bowling alley 5 spaces per lane
Racquet sports 2 spaces per court
Health spa 1 space per 250 square feet of
gross floor area
Studio for dance, art, music, or
photography
1 space per 5 students and 1
space per 300 square feet of
gross floor area
Post office or wholesale business 1 space per 500 square feet of
gross floor area
Bank, financial institution
Without drive-in service 6 spaces per teller window
With drive-in service 6 spaces per indoor teller
window
Plus 3 spaces per automated teller
Day-care or preschool facilities Additional capacity determined
on a case-by-case basis
Retirement complex. The following
minimum parking standards shall apply
to any age restricted development in the
Borough:
Independent dwelling units (singlefamily
or multifamily dwellings)
1 space for each independent
dwelling unit to be used
primarily by the residents of the
units and 1 additional space for
every 5 independent units to be
used primarily by visitors
Skilled care facilities and personal
care congregate facilities
1 space for every 2 beds in
skilled care facilities and
personal care congregate
facilities
Staff parking 1 space for each staff doctor
Employee parking 1 space for each employee
working on the largest shift
§ 680-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-73
1:697
Use Requirement
Schools
Elementary or intermediate 2 spaces per classroom
High school 8 spaces per classroom
Any use not specifically listed in this
chapter shall provide parking spaces in
compliance with the parking generation
manual of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) as last
amended
Student homes
Three parking spaces for each
student home located in a singlefamily
detached or twin dwelling
One parking space for each resident
of a student home located in an
apartment as defined herein
Convenience store 1 space per 150 gross square
feet of store floor area
§ 680-74. Parking held in reserve.
If the number of spaces required by § 680-73 is substantially larger than the
number of spaces anticipated by the applicant, then the applicant may hold
some of the parking in reserve in order to avoid unnecessary paving while
ensuring adequate area for potential parking demands.
A. Suitable area must be available on the site for 100% of the parking
required by § 680-73 above.
B. The number of spaces which must be paved initially may be reduced by
up to 50% by the Borough Council, upon the recommendation of the
Borough Planning Commission. All stormwater engineering shall be
designed based on total parking requirements, including the reserve.
C. Suitable area must be reserved for the balance of the total number of
spaces required by § 680-73; these spaces shall be constructed by the
applicant if and when determined necessary by Council, upon the
recommendation of the Borough Zoning Officer. The Council may
require the installation of these parking spaces when there is evidence
of a continued overflow of parking.
D. A financial guaranty shall be provided by the applicant to cover the cost
of installation of the parking spaces held in reserve, for a period of 18
months following the installation of the initially constructed parking
spaces. The type and dollar value of the guaranty must be approved by
§ 680-73 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-74
1:698
§ 680-75. Additional requirements.
§ 680-76. Shared parking.
Borough Council upon recommendation of the Borough Solicitor and
Engineer.
E. To qualify for use of the reserve parking concept, the applicant shall
provide evidence supporting reduced parking needs to the Borough
Planning Commission and Engineer for their review and
recommendations.
A. All parking lots must meet the requirements of the Borough Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance.228
B. Parking lots shall not be used for the sale, repair, or dismantling of any
vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies.
C. All commercial, industrial, and institutional uses shall provide adequate
off-street loading/unloading space.
D. All schools or churches may designate an area of level lawn or field for
overflow parking for special events.
A. The parking spaces required under § 680-73 above may be reduced
when two or more establishments share the same parking area,
whether on the same lot or abutting lots, according to the following
formula:
(1) Determine the required amount of parking for each proposed land
use as if it were a separate use.
(2) For each determined amount, plug into appropriate general
category in the following formula. Either plug in zeros for the not
relevant categories or delete them from the formula.
Formulas:
Formula (1) weekday 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.:
[(required office or industrial spaces) x 1] + [(required retail
or public comm. fac. spaces) x .6]
[(required hotel or motel spaces) x .75] + [(required
restaurant spaces) x .5]
[(required entertainment or recreation spaces) x .4] = a
Formula (2) weekday 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight:
[(required office or industrial spaces) x .1] + [(required retail
or public comm. fac. spaces) x .9]
[(required hotel or motel spaces) x 1] + [(required restaurant
spaces) x 1]
228. Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 680-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-76
1:699
§ 680-77. Off-street loading.
In addition to required off-street parking, off-street loading spaces shall be
required for all commercial and industrial uses requiring regular delivery
or shipping of goods, merchandise, or equipment by semitrailer truck. Offstreet
loading areas shall comply with the following:
§ 680-78. Off-street parking.
The nonresidential parking spaces required herein may be located
elsewhere than on the same lot when authorized as a special exception by
Formulas:
[(required entertainment or recreation spaces) x 1] = b
Formula (3) weekend 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.:
[(required office or industrial spaces) x .1] + [(required retail
or public comm. fac. spaces) x 1]
[(required hotel or motel space) x .75] + [(required
restaurant spaces) x 1]
[(required entertainment or recreation spaces) x .8] = c
Formula (4) weekend 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight:
[(required office of industrial spaces) x .05] + [(required
retail or public comm. fac. spaces) x .7]
[(required hotel or motel space) x 1] + [(required restaurant
spaces) x 1]
[(required entertainment or recreation spaces) x 1] = d
(3) The formula with the highest value [either (1), (2), (3), or (4)] is the
shared parking requirement.
B. When shared parking is used, sufficient area shall be set aside for the
remainder of the required spaces, according to the requirements of
§ 680-74 above.
C. Residential uses are not allowed to be part of these calculations.
D. All parties using the shared parking arrangement shall enter into a
contractual agreement regarding rights and obligations.
A. Required loading areas shall not be used for storage of vehicles or
materials or as off-street parking.
B. The location and size of loading areas shall be adequate for the safe
parking of trucks and maneuvering space shall be provided so that
ingress and egress can occur on the lot without backing out onto a
public street.
C. Two or more establishments may use common loading area if it meets
the requirements of Subsection B, above.
§ 680-76 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-78
1:700
the Zoning Hearing Board, pursuant to §§ 680-19 and 680-20 and to the
following conditions:
A. That the owners of two or more establishments shall submit with their
application for special exception, a site plan showing joint use and
location of a common off-street parking area.
B. That some portion of the common off-street parking area lies within 400
feet of an entrance, regularly used by patrons, into the buildings served
thereby.
C. That the Zoning Hearing Board may, in its discretion, reduce the
amount of required parking space upon determination that greater
efficiency is effected by joint use of a common parking area, but in no
case shall the number of off-street parking spaces be reduced by more
than 20% of the required number of spaces.
§ 680-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-78
1:701

ARTICLE X
Zoning Districts
§ 680-79. Districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough is hereby divided into 13
districts, which shall be designated as follows:
R-1 Low Density Residential
R-2 Medium Density Residential
R-3 High Density Residential
R-4 High Density and Multifamily Residential
V-1 Village One
V-2 Village Two
R-O Residential-Office
MSC Main Street Commercial
GC General Commercial
SC Shopping Center
M&I Manufacturing and Industrial
C-O Planned Commercial-Office
INST Institutional
§ 680-80. Overlay Districts.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following districts are applied over
the mapped districts listed in § 680-79, herein. These districts serve the
intent and purposes identified in the individual overlay districts, which
relate primarily to the prevention of hazards and degradation of the natural
environment, as well as protection of environmental amenities.
FP Floodplain Conservation District
SS Steep Slope Conservation District
§ 680-81. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of said districts shall be shown upon the map attached to
and made part of this chapter,229 which shall be designated the Collegeville
Borough Zoning Map. The said map and all notations, references, and other
things shown thereon shall be made part of this chapter as if the matters,
references, and things shown by said map were all fully described herein.
229. Editor's Note: Said Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 680-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-82
1:703
§ 680-82. Boundaries of districts.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts, as shown on the Zoning Map, the following shall apply:
A. The district boundaries are center line of road unless otherwise shown.
B. Where the district boundaries are not shown to be roads, the
boundaries shall be construed to be property lines or dimensions from
streets or roads.
§ 680-82 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-82
1:704
ARTICLE XI
R-1 Low Density Residential District
§ 680-83. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and the statement of
community development objectives contained in Article I, the specific intent
of this district is to:
§ 680-84. Permitted uses. [Amended 3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
In the R-1 District, a building may be erected or used or occupied and a lot
may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 680-85. Area regulations.
A. Promote the maintenance, stability, and continued viability of the
Borough's low density residential neighborhoods.
B. Provide for appropriate infill and new development, along with
appropriate redevelopment.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Public park, playground, and other outdoor recreational areas not
operated commercially for profit and owned by a governmental or
nonprofit agency.
C. Family day-care home in compliance with § 680-56 of this chapter.
D. Accessory uses, in compliance with § 680-45 of this chapter.
E. Student homes are permitted when authorized as a special exception
subject to the following provisions and the provisions of § 680-71:
(1) Shall be located in an existing SFD or twin.
(2) Shall have no more than three residents per student home.
(3) Shall have a floor area of at least 1,500 square feet, exclusive of
basements, garages, and accessory buildings.
A. Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet.
C. Maximum building coverage: 20% of lot area.
D. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 35% of lot area.
E. Yards. Front, side, and rear yards shall be provided on each lot as
follows:
(1) Front yard. One yard not less than 60 feet in depth, measured from
the ultimate right-of-way to the building line.
§ 680-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-85
1:705
§ 680-86. Height regulations.
No principal building shall exceed 35 feet in height. Accessory uses may not
exceed a maximum of 15 feet.
§ 680-87. Parking and signs.
All parking spaces and all signs erected in the R-1 Residential District
shall be in accordance with Article IX, Off-Street Parking, and Article XXIII,
Signs, of this chapter.
(2) Side yards. For every dwelling, two yards not less than 30 feet in
aggregate width and neither less than 12 feet; except that in the
case of a corner lot, the yard abutting a street shall be equal to the
minimum required front yard.
(3) Rear yard. One yard not less than 40 feet in depth.
§ 680-85 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-87
1:706
ARTICLE XII
R-2 Medium Density Residential District
§ 680-88. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and the statement of
community objectives contained in Article I and the specific intent of this
district is to:
§ 680-89. Permitted uses. [Amended 3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
In the R-2 District, a building may be erected or used or occupied and a lot
may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 680-90. Area regulations.
A. Provide reasonable standards and regulations.
B. To promote the maintenance, stability, and continued viability of the
Borough's medium density single-family and two-family residential
neighborhoods.
C. To provide for infill and new development, along with appropriate
redevelopment.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Single-family semidetached dwelling (twin), provided that the dwelling
with which it has a party wall in common is erected at the same time.
C. Public park, playground, and other outdoor recreational areas not
operated commercially for profit and owned by a governmental or
nonprofit agency.
D. Family day care home in compliance with § 680-56 of this chapter.
E. Accessory uses, in compliance with § 680-45 of this chapter.
F. Student homes are permitted when authorized as a special exception
subject to the following provisions and the provisions of § 680-71:
(1) Shall be located in an existing SFD or twin.
(2) Shall have no more than three residents per student home.
(3) Shall have a floor area of at least 1,500 square feet, exclusive of
basements, garages, and accessory buildings.
A. Lot area. Minimum lot areas shall be regulated by the following:
§ 680-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-90
1:707
§ 680-91. Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 35 feet in height. Accessory uses may not exceed
a maximum of 15 feet.
§ 680-92. Parking and signs.
All parking spaces and all signs erected in the R-2 Residential District
shall be in accordance with Article IX, Off-Street Parking, and Article XXIII,
Signs, of this chapter.
Type of Building Lot Area
Single-family semidetached
dwelling
9,000 square feet (per dwelling
unit)
Single-family detached dwelling 12,000 square feet
B. Lot width. Each lot shall have a width at the building line of not less
than 50 feet for an individual unit in a semidetached dwelling and 75 for
detached dwellings and other permitted structures.
C. Building area. For a single-family detached dwelling, a maximum of
30% of the lot area may be occupied by buildings. For a single-family
semidetached dwelling, a maximum of 40% of the lot may be occupied
by buildings.
D. Maximum impervious surface coverage. For a single-family detached
dwelling, no more than 45% of the lot area, and for a single-family
semidetached dwelling, no more than 55% of the lot are shall be
covered by impervious surfaces.
E. Yards. Front, side, and rear yards shall be provided on each lot as
follows:
(1) Front yard. One yard not less than 40 feet in depth, measured from
the legal right-of-way to the building line.
(2) Side yards.
(a) In the case of a detached dwelling, two yards not less than 23
feet in aggregate width, and neither less than 10 feet, except
that, in the case of a corner lot, the yard abutting a street shall
be equal to the minimum required front yard.
(b) In the case of a semidetached dwelling, there shall be one side
yard, the width of which shall be not less than 10 feet, except
that, in the case of a corner lot, the yard abutting a street shall
be equal to the minimum required front yard.
(3) Rear yard. One yard not less than 40 feet in depth.
§ 680-90 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-92
1:708
ARTICLE XIII
R-3 High Density Residential District
§ 680-93. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and the statement of
community development objectives contained in Article I, the specific intent
of this district is to:
§ 680-94. Permitted uses. [Amended 7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 519;
3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
In the R-3 District, a building may be erected, altered or used and a lot may
be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. Promote the maintenance, stability, and continued viability of the
Borough's low density residential neighborhoods.
B. Provide for appropriate infill and new development, along with
appropriate redevelopment.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Single-family semidetached dwelling (twin), provided that the dwelling
with which it has a party wall in common is erected at the same time.
C. Two-family detached dwelling (duplex).
D. Single-family attached dwelling, provided that row dwellings shall be
constructed in series of not more than six dwelling units and that all
units of the series shall be constructed at the same time.
E. Mobile home park, pursuant to § 14-1306230 of this article.
F. Public park, playground and other outdoor recreational areas not
operated commercially for profit and owned by a governmental or
nonprofit agency.
G. Attached duplex.
H. Family day-care home in compliance with § 680-56 of this chapter.
I. Accessory uses, in compliance with § 680-45 of this chapter.
J. Student homes are permitted when authorized as a special exception
subject to the following provisions and the provisions of § 680-71:
(1) Shall be located in an existing SFD or twin.
(2) Shall have no more than three residents per student home.
(3) Shall have a floor area of at least 1,500 square feet, exclusive of
basements, garages, and accessory buildings.
230. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 680-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-95
1:709
§ 680-95. Area regulations. [Amended 7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 519]
The following dimensional regulations shall apply:
See Dimensional Regulations included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 680-96. Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 35 feet in height.
§ 680-97. Standards for townhouses and attached duplex dwellings.
[Amended 7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 519]
These standards apply to all such developments unless listed.
A. Building setbacks.
(1) For other than fee simple ownership; property line other than a
street property line or street right-of-way: 30 feet.
(2) For all types of ownership.
(a) From primary arterial road: 60 feet.
(b) From collector road: 50 feet.
(c) From residential road: 25 feet.
(d) From private road: 25 feet.231
(3) Adjoining building front. No more than two adjoining building
facades to have same setback; minimum difference between two
facades shall be four feet.
B. Building length: 150 feet, but in no event greater than six dwelling units
per building.
C. Spacing between buildings.
(1) Front to front: 60 feet.
(2) Side to side (without windows): 20 feet.
(3) Side to side (with windows): 30 feet.
(4) Side to front/back: 40 feet.
(5) Back to back: 60 feet.
D. Open space: 40% of the site area, half of which must be usable passive
or active recreation areas, exclusive of front or side yards and
stormwater basins. Preservation of existing natural amenities is
231. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A(2)(e), regarding the twenty-foot setback requirement
from parking areas other than a driveway or garage, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 7-3-2013 by Ord. No. 559.
§ 680-95 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-97
1:710
§ 680-98. Parking and signs.
All parking spaces and all sign erected in the R-3 Residential District shall
be in accordance with Article IX, Off-Street Parking, and Article XXIII,
Signs, of this chapter.
encouraged. Open space should be interconnected. Maintenance shall
be secured and funded by the lot owners individually or through a
homeowners' association.
E. Buffer yard.
(1) There shall be a landscaped buffer yard established between the
perimeter of the tract to be developed and the dwellings. The
minimum width of this buffer yard shall be 25 feet. The purpose of
the buffer yard is to adequately buffer the development from
adjoining properties. The landscaping in this buffer yard shall be
continuous and uninterrupted except for streets, driveways, or
sidewalks.
(2) Existing healthy trees, shrubs, or woodlands may be substituted for
part of all of the required buffer yard at the discretion of the
Borough Council upon the recommendation of the Planning
Commission. The minimum quantities and/or visual effect of the
existing vegetation shall be equal to or exceed the required buffer
or screen.
F. Parking areas. Parking areas shall be set back at least 30 feet from all
perimeter boundaries.
G. Maximum residential density: 12 dwelling units per acre.
§ 680-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-98
1:711

ARTICLE XIV
R-4 High Density and Multifamily Residential District
§ 680-99. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and the statement of
community development objectives contained in Article I, the specific intent
of this district is to:
§ 680-100. Permitted uses. [Amended 3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
A building may be erected, altered, or used and a lot may be used or
occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 680-101. Single-family detached dwelling developments.
All single-family detached dwellings shall comply with the following
requirements:
A. Encourage an appropriate mix of dwelling types and densities in
Collegeville Borough.
B. Promote a variety of income levels, age groups, and housing
opportunities within the Borough.
C. Establish standards of performance and promote the desirable benefits
which garden apartments may have upon the community.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
B. Garden apartment house or complex.
C. Public park, playground, and other outdoor recreational areas not
operated commercially for profit and owned by a governmental or
nonprofit agency.
D. Family day-care home in compliance with § 680-56 of this chapter.
E. Accessory uses, in compliance with § 680-45 of this chapter.
F. Student homes, subject to the provisions of § 680-104.
A. Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width at building line: 60 feet.
C. Minimum building coverage: 35%.
D. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 45%.
E. Yards. Front, side, and rear yards shall be provided on each lot as
follows:
(1) Front yard. One yard not less than 30 feet in depth, measured from
the ultimate right-of-way to the building line.
§ 680-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-101
1:713
§ 680-102. Garden apartment developments.
All garden apartments shall comply with the following requirements:
(2) Side yard. For every dwelling, two yards not less than 20 feet in
aggregate width and neither less than eight feet; except that in the
case of a corner lot, the yard abutting a street shall be equal to the
minimum required front yard.
(3) Rear yard. One yard not less than 25 feet in depth.
A. Dimensional regulations.
(1) Maximum density: eight units per acre.
(2) Minimum tract size: each multifamily development shall have a
minimum gross area of 10 acres.
(3) Minimum setback from any property line: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum distance between any two principal buildings: 50 feet.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 30% of lot area.
(6) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 50% of lot area.
(7) Zoning district boundary setback. A minimum setback of 75 feet is
required between any principal multifamily building in this district
and any Borough boundary or boundary of a residential zoning
district. This setback may be part of a required yard area, and shall
include landscaping and/or berming. The adequacy of this buffer
shall be decided by Borough Council based upon the
recommendations of the Borough Planning Commission or other
Borough agencies chosen by Council.
(8) Maximum height: 35 feet for a principal building, 15 feet for any
accessory buildings.
(9) Parking area setback. A minimum thirty-foot setback shall be
required between any parking area of six or more spaces and any
side or rear lot line or tract boundary. This parking area setback
may be part of a zoning district boundary. If the parking area is
shared by two or more lots, the setback shall not be required from
the common lot line(s).
(10) Maximum building length: 200 feet.
B. Additional regulations.
(1) Parking shall not interfere with driveways, accessways, sidewalks,
or pedestrian walkways.
(2) The use of natural building materials, such as brick, stone, stucco,
or wood is strongly encouraged.
§ 680-101 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-102
1:714
(3) All refuse facilities shall be screened from the view of all public
streets and neighboring properties.
(4) Any outdoor lighting proposed for common areas or parking lots
shall not throw glare onto adjacent properties or cause a traffic
hazard.
(5) All access drives or roads shall be set back 20 feet from any
property line.
(6) All developments shall be served by public sewer and water
systems.
C. Open space regulations. A minimum of 20% of the site area of the
multifamily development shall be permanent open space. No more than
1/3 of the open space may be part of the required tract boundary
setback. The permanent open space shall comply with the following
standards:
(1) Ownership. The open space shall be conveyed in accordance with
one or more of the following methods, as approved by the Borough
Council:
(a) Dedication in fee simple to Collegeville Borough.
(b) Conveyance of title (including beneficial ownership) to an
association, condominium, conservancy, corporation, funded
community trust, individual, or other legal entity for
maintenance purposes.
(c) Fee simple ownership with conveyance of restrictive
covenants, conservation easements, or other suitable legal
device to Collegeville Borough, an association, condominium,
conservancy, corporation, funded community trust, individual,
or other legal entity for maintenance purposes. The terms of
such instrument of conveyance shall include provisions to the
Borough for guaranteeing the continued use of such land for
open space and recreation.
(2) Design. The open space shall not include stormwater basins, shall
have adequate pedestrian and vehicular access, and shall be
designed in one or more of the following ways, as approved by the
Borough Council:
(a) Buffer area, to buffer the impact of new development from
existing, adjacent development.
(b) Preservation of natural features, such as woodlands, stream
valleys, wetlands, or steep slopes.
(c) Central green or parkway, which shall be located in a central
position in the neighborhood, surrounded by streets and/or
§ 680-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-102
1:715
§ 680-103. Parking and signs.
All parking and all signs erected in the R-4 Residential District shall be in
accordance with Article IX, Off-Street Parking, and Article XXIII, Signs, of
this chapter.
§ 680-104. Student homes. [Added 3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
building lots on at least three sides, and designed and
landscaped as a space for common neighborhood use.
(d) Recreation area provided to meet the anticipated needs of the
residents of the development. Recreation areas should be of a
size, shape, and relief that is conducive to active and passive
recreation.
A. Student homes are permitted when authorized as a special exception
subject to the following provisions and the provisions of § 680-71:
(1) Shall be located in an existing SFD or twin.
(2) Shall have no more than three residents per student home.
(3) Shall have a floor area of at least 1,500 square feet, exclusive of
basements, garages, and accessory buildings.
B. Student homes are permitted in multifamily buildings and must register
their use as a student home in conformity with § 680-71A of this
chapter.
§ 680-102 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-104
1:716
ARTICLE XV
V-1 Village District
§ 680-105. Declaration of legislative intent.
§ 680-106. Use regulations.
A. The V-1 Village District is intended and designed to provide certain
areas of the Borough for the development of professional and low
intensity business offices in areas where residential dwellings currently
predominate. This district is intended to include older, established
types of development designed mainly for residential purposes, but
where changing conditions have made limited offices suitable and not
incompatible with the basic residential character of the district.
B. This district is intended to encourage the preservation of the existing
historic houses where road widenings are not needed, and adequate
rights-of-way where they are needed, and the residential appearance of
the areas. It is also intended to encourage the sharing of parking and
vehicular circulation and the limiting of vehicular access onto Route 29.
The V-1 District is also intended to protect the adjoining residential
neighborhoods from any impacts of the types of land uses permitted
herein.
A. The following uses are permitted:
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Twin dwellings.
(3) Duplex dwellings.
(4) Multifamily conversions, pursuant to § 680-44 of this chapter.
(5) Office for the professional practice of medicine, law, engineering,
accounting, architecture, real estate, insurance, financial
consultation, and similar activities.
(6) Places of worship.
(7) Child day-care centers.
(8) Studios of art, dance, music, or photography.
(9) Municipal or governmental offices.
(10) Uses of similar intensity and scale.
(11) Accessory uses, in compliance with § 680-45 of this chapter.
B. Any of the permitted uses which require new construction of a building
or more than four new parking stalls shall be permitted as a conditional
use when authorized by the Borough Council subject to compliance
§ 680-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-106
1:717
§ 680-107. Conditional use standards.
§ 680-108. Excluded uses.
The following uses are excluded: retail sales, drive-in restaurants, fast food
restaurants, barber/beauty shops, other personal services uses (such as dry
cleaning, tailors, etc.).
§ 680-109. Site development standards. [Amended 7-12-2006 by
Ord. No. 519]
with the provisions of this article and to the standards set forth in
§ 680-55 of this chapter.
A. Access shall be shared with abutting properties similarly zoned for
nonresidential use. This shall be accomplished by offering an
irrevocable offer of cross-easement to abutting similarly zoned
properties. Access to any major highways (such as Route 29) shall be
closed upon the opening of shared access with an abutting property.
B. Parking shall not be located in the front of the principal building.
C. Any new building shall be similar to the scale, massing, and general
design of the existing buildings.
A. Minimum lot size: 7,500 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
C. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yard. The minimum distance shall be 15 feet or the average
of the existing front yards on either side of the property for a
distance of 100 feet, whichever is less. The maximum distance shall
be 30 feet.
(2) Side yard. Minimum 10 feet if abutting a nonresidential zoning
district; 20 feet if abutting a residential district.
(3) Rear yard. Twenty-five feet if abutting a nonresidential district; 30
feet if abutting a residential district.
D. Height: maximum 35 feet.
E. Impervious coverage: maximum 50% of lot.
F. Maximum building footprint of commercial buildings.
(1) For a single use: 15,000 square feet.
(2) For all uses on site: 30,000 square feet.
§ 680-106 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-110
1:718
§ 680-110. Bonus provisions.
Bonuses will be permitted as follows:
§ 680-111. Landscaping.
A. If a building built prior to 1900 is used and the front and side facades
and front porch (if any) are preserved, the maximum impervious
coverage shall be 60%.
B. If parking and internal vehicular circulation is to be shared with
abutting nonresidentially zoned properties, the maximum impervious
coverage shall be 75% and parking lot landscaping may be considered
landscaping for the purposes of § 680-111. This sharing shall be
accomplished by the applicant providing Council with proof that an
irrevocable offer of cross-easement to abutting properties has been
made, and it is shown on the plans. The easement shall provide for a
driveway with vehicular access with sufficient width and turning radius
for two-way traffic.
C. If a property or properties abut a nonresidentially zoned property and
an irrevocable offer of dedication is made for an ultimate right-of-way
width of 50 feet from the center line of the street, the maximum
impervious coverage shall be 75%.
D. If Subsections A and B are both met, the maximum impervious coverage
shall be 85% and parking lot landscaping may be considered
landscaping for the purposes of § 680-111.
E. If Subsections C and D are both met, the maximum impervious
coverage shall be 85% and parking lot landscaping may be considered
landscaping for the purposes of § 680-111.
A. A minimum of 15% of lot shall be landscaped open space, excluding
parking lot landscaping, except as permitted in § 680-110.
B. Where abutting a residentially zoned parcel, there shall be a twentyfoot
landscaped buffer required along the property line. This may
include side, front, and rear yards setbacks. The adequacy of this buffer
shall be decided by Borough Council based upon the recommendations
of the Borough Planning Commission or other Borough agencies chosen
by Council.
C. Parking in side or rear yards shall be screened from the street by a low
hedge, fence, or wall.
D. Parking in side or rear yards shall be separated from adjacent
properties by a ten-foot buffer strip. The buffer shall be designed
pursuant to the Collegeville Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.232
232. Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 680-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-112
1:719
§ 680-112. Lighting.
§ 680-113. Design standards.
§ 680-114. Parking and signs.
All parking and all signs erected in the V-1 Village District shall be in
accordance with Article IX, Off-Street Parking, and Article XXIII, Signs, of
this chapter.
A. All exterior lighting shall not unreasonably or unnecessarily disturb
adjacent property owners or interfere with traffic by either location or
glare.
B. No lighting fixture shall exceed a twenty-foot mounting height, unless it
is in the setback area, then the requirements of § 680-57 apply.
C. Lighting facilities, poles, etc., shall not be permitted within any parking
space or aisle.
D. Lighting fixtures shall be of the character consistent with the
architecture of the structure and surrounding properties.
A. Pedestrian pathways abutting properties and between the rear of a
property and the street frontage are encouraged and shall not be
considered as part of the impervious coverage.
B. All wall surfaces shall be finished in a manner consistent with the front
facades of the building.
C. New buildings should be designed to be compatible with other
buildings in this district in terms of scale, massing, and building
materials.
D. Any lot with more than one building shall be designed as a compact,
unified development with common parking and signage and
internalized circulation.
§ 680-112 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-114
1:720
ARTICLE XVI
V-2 Village District
§ 680-115. Declaration of legislative intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 680-116. Use regulations.
On any lot in the V-2 District, the following use, and no other, is permitted:
§ 680-117. Conditional uses.
On any lot in the V-2 District, any of the following uses, and no other, may
be permitted by Borough Council as a conditional use, according to the
requirements of § 680-55 of this chapter and § 680-121 of this article:
A. Permit, by right, single-family detached dwellings.
B. Allow, by conditional use, limited commercial and office uses that are
low traffic generators.
C. Provide special rights and benefits for buildings that are designated
historic.
D. Provide incentives in the form of development bonuses that encourage
shared parking facilities, limited curb cuts, and proper floodplain
management.
E. Preserve the Perkiomen Creek corridor through a riparian setback.
A. Single-family detached dwelling.
A. Office for the professional practice of medicine, law, engineering,
accounting, architecture, real estate, insurance, financial consultation,
and similar activities.
B. Studios for art, dance, music, or photography.
C. Antique, consignment, or secondhand thrift shop.
D. Repair shop for professional, scientific, musical, or electronic
instruments and the limited sale of these instruments provided that any
sales are a secondary feature of the shop and are limited only to the
items being repaired.
E. The following uses, provided that they are on a lot of at least 34,000
square feet:
(1) Bed-and-breakfast home.
(2) Restaurant, cafe, or similar establishment serving food or
beverage.
§ 680-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-118
1:721
§ 680-118. Prohibited uses.
§ 680-119. Designated historical buildings. [Amended 7-12-2006 by
Ord. No. 519]
In the V-2 District, any building that has been designated historic by either
the Borough, state, or federal government, is permitted use bonuses as an
incentive to preserve the structure. If the property owner restores and/or
preserves the front and side facades and roofline, any of the conditional
uses listed in § 680-117 and the uses listed below are permitted by right.
Such uses may be separated or combined throughout the building. If the
building is not preserved, the owner is still allowed the permitted or
conditional uses of this chapter provided the necessary requirements are
satisfied.
§ 680-120. Development standards. [Amended 7-12-2006 by Ord.
No. 519; 3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
The following standards shall apply to all uses, except where otherwise
specified in the V-2 District:
A. Drive-in uses.
B. Drive-through window.
C. Fast food restaurants.
A. Hotel.
B. Tavern.
C. Apartments, provided they have no greater density than 12 dwelling
units per acre.
D. Bed-and-breakfast inn, pursuant to § 680-45 of this chapter.
E. Banquet or reception hall.
A. Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 40 feet, to be measured at the building setback.
C. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yard. The minimum distance shall be 15 feet, to be measured
from the ultimate right-of-way line.
(2) Side yard. The minimum distance shall be 15 feet from each yard.
(3) Rear yard. The minimum distance shall be 40 feet.
D. Maximum height requirements: 35 feet.
E. Accessory structures.
§ 680-118 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-120
1:722
§ 680-121. Bonus provisions. [Amended 3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
The following shall apply to all lots, where applicable, in the V-2 District:
§ 680-122. Conditional use standards.
The following shall apply to all conditional uses in the V-2 District:
(1) Property line setback: 10 feet.
(2) Maximum height: 15 feet.
F. Impervious surface coverage. A minimum of 80% of the lot shall be
landscaped open space. However, lots that are not eligible for the bonus
provision § 680-121 because of their location and can demonstrate
through an engineering survey that no impervious surface coverage is
within a floodplain are only required to provide 60% landscaped open
space on a lot.
G. Stream corridor setback: 35 feet from the edge of any stream corridor.
This setback shall apply to all buildings, parking areas, and access
drives. The area shall remain in a natural state. The stream corridor is
defined as the area containing the waterway, its bank, and contiguous
sloping land.
H. Maximum building footprint of commercial buildings:
(1) For a single use: 15,000 square feet.
(2) For all uses on site: 30,000 square feet.
A. If a property owner reforests the stream corridor setback area with
native floodplain trees and shrubs, then the landscape coverage
requirement in § 680-120F shall be reduced to 70% of the lot area. To
qualify for this reduction, a landscape plan must be submitted to the
Borough for review by the Planning Commission and the Shade Tree
Commission. The plan shall demonstrate that the trees, at maturity, will
create a canopy over the stream corridor setback area and that shrubs
are interspersed between the trees. The applicant should consult with a
landscape architect or horticulturist for a list of approved native
floodplain trees and shrubs.
B. If a property shares one common access drive with one or more
properties and the other access drives are permanently closed, then the
landscape coverage requirement in § 680-120F shall be reduced to 55%
of the lot area.
C. If both Subsections A and B are followed, then the landscape coverage
requirement in § 680-120F shall be reduced to 40% of the lot area.
A. If a new structure is being built for any conditional use, it shall be
designed to be compatible with the pre-1940 buildings in the district.
Traditional building materials and design motifs such as peaked roofs,
§ 680-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-122
1:723
§ 680-123. Buffering and lighting.
The following shall apply to all uses in the V-2 District:
§ 680-124. Parking areas and signs.
The following shall apply to all uses in the V-2 District:
sash windows, and varied facades with bays and porches are
recommended.
B. Parking shall be to the rear of the building, or in the side yard behind
the line of the building's front facade or the minimum front yard
setback line, whichever is greater.
C. Any conditional use applicant shall grant an irrevocable cross-access
easement and an interconnection drive, where feasible, to all adjacent
properties.
A. All parking lots shall be screened by a landscaped buffer from all
adjacent properties or streets. The buffer shall be at least 10 feet wide.
The adequacy of this buffer shall be determined by Borough Council
based upon the recommendations of the Borough Planning Commission
or other Borough agencies chosen by Council.
B. Opaque fences and walls are not permitted in the floodplain area.
C. All exterior lighting shall not unreasonably or unnecessarily disturb
adjacent property owners or interfere with traffic by either location or
glare. Lighting on fixtures shall not exceed 20 feet, unless it is in the
setback area, then the height criteria of § 680-57 of this chapter must
be met.
A. All parking and all signs erected in the V-2 Village Commercial District
shall be in accordance with Article IX, Off-Street Parking, and Article
XXIII, Signs, of this chapter.
§ 680-122 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-124
1:724
ARTICLE XVII
R-O Residential-Office District
§ 680-125. Declaration of legislative intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 680-126. Permitted uses. [Amended 3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
The following are permitted by right in the R-O District:
§ 680-127. Conditional use.
The following may be permitted by a conditional use in the R-O District by
Borough Council in accordance with § 680-55 of this chapter and § 680-129
of this article.
A. Permit, by right, single-family detached and semidetached dwellings.
B. Allow by conditional use, limited nonresidential conversions that are
low traffic generators and compatible with the existing residential
character of the area.
C. Maintain the existing residential streetscape of this section of Main
Street through regulations that allow these conversions only when front
facades and porches are preserved and only if building additions and
parking areas are not constructed between the public street and the
front facade of the principal structure.
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Single-family semidetached dwellings, provided that the dwelling with
which it has a party wall in common is erected at the same time.
C. Accessory uses, in compliance with § 680-45 of this chapter.
D. Student homes, subject to the provisions of § 680-132.
A. Business or professional office.
B. Studio for photography, music, dance, or art studio.
C. Multifamily conversions, in compliance with § 680-44 of this chapter.
However, an existing structure exceeding 5,000 square feet which is
located on a lot of at least 15,000 square feet, is permitted by
conditional use to have more dwelling units, provided the parking
standards in Article IX and all applicable building codes relating to size
of a dwelling unit are met.
D. Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls, provided that
they are on lots of at least 20,000 square feet.
§ 680-125 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-128
1:725
§ 680-128. Area regulations.
Each permitted use or conditional use in the R-O District shall comply with
the following area regulations:
§ 680-129. Conditional use standards. [Amended 7-12-2006 by Ord.
No. 519]
The following standards shall apply to all conditional uses in the R-O
District:
A. Lot area and width.
(1) A lot area of not less than 6,000 square feet and a lot width of not
less than 40 feet for a detached dwelling.
(2) A lot area of not less than 4,000 square feet and a lot width of not
less than 30 feet for each side of a semidetached dwelling.
B. Yards.
(1) Front yard. One yard not less than 25 feet in depth, to be measured
from the legal right-of-way line, except where a building line has
been established, then the building line of the majority of the
buildings on that side of the block shall be used.
(2) Side yards.
(a) For every detached dwelling, two side yards not less than 20
feet in aggregate width and neither less than eight feet.
(b) For every semidetached dwelling, one side yard not less than
eight feet.
(3) Rear yard. One yard not less than 15 feet in depth.
C. Building area: not more than 40% of each lot.
D. Impervious coverage: not more than 55% of each lot.
E. Building height: the maximum building height shall be 35 feet.
A. All conditional uses must have their primary facade oriented toward
Main Street.
B. The conditional use must preserve, utilize, and maintain an existing
building in a manner that is consistent with the historic character of
this section of Main Street. If an existing building is demolished, then
no conditional use will be permitted.
C. The conditional use must preserve and maintain the front facade and, if
existing, the front porch. Any building addition shall be located to the
rear and shall be compatible with the existing building in size, scale,
and materials. Stairways, fire escapes, and other structural alternations
shall be located to the rear or side of the building.
§ 680-128 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-129
1:726
§ 680-130. Additional use dimensional standards.
The following standard shall apply to all conditional uses in the R-O District:
§ 680-131. Parking lot requirements.
In addition to the requirements found in Article IX, Off-Street Parking, the
following requirements shall apply to all uses in the R-O District:
§ 680-132. Student homes. [Added 3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
D. The conditional use must preserve the existing front yard as a
landscaped open space. The only impervious coverage in the front yard
will be sidewalks or pedestrian access paths or driveways. The
landscaping shall be the type traditionally found in the Main Street area
(shade trees, foundation plantings, grass, etc.).
E. All refuse facilities must be screened from the view of public streets and
neighboring properties.
F. Maximum building footprint of commercial buildings:
(1) For a single use: 5,000 square feet.
(2) For all uses on site: 15,000 square feet.
A. The maximum impervious coverage of a lot is 55%. However, if two or
more adjacent property owners use common parking facilities and a
shared access drive pursuant to Article IX of this chapter, then the
impervious coverage for each lot may be increased to 80%.
A. There shall be no parking permitted between the front wall of a
principal structure and the curb of the street toward which that wall is
oriented.
A. Student homes are permitted when authorized as a special exception
subject to the following provisions and the provisions of § 680-71:
(1) Shall be located in an existing SFD or twin.
(2) Shall have no more than three residents per student home.
(3) Shall have a floor area of at least 1,500 square feet, exclusive of
basements, garages, and accessory building.
B. An apartment may be used as a student home, subject to the following
provisions:
(1) Shall be located above a nonresidential use.
(2) Shall be located on a parcel with frontage on an arterial road.
(3) Shall have a floor area of at least 400 square feet for each resident.
§ 680-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-132
1:727
(4) Shall have no more than three residents per student home.
(5) In mixed-use structures, no more than two apartments may be used
for student homes.
(6) Shall register their use as a student home in conformity with
§ 680-71 of this chapter.
§ 680-132 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-132
1:728
ARTICLE XVIII
MSC Main Street Commercial District
§ 680-133. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and the statement
of community objectives contained in Article I, the specific intent of this
district is to:
§ 680-134. Permitted uses. [Amended 3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
The following uses are permitted by right on any lot in the MSC District:
A. Preserve the traditional late 19th and early 20th century character of
Main Street.
B. To allow for new buildings or additions that reflect the existing
architecture of the street.
C. To allow for a mix of use at a scale and intensity found along a smalltown
Pennsylvania Main Street.
D. Prohibit uses that are more appropriate in the Borough's other
commercial districts.
A. Retail store for sale of dry goods, variety merchandise, books and
stationary, clothing, food, beverages, flowers and plants, furnishings or
other household supplies, antiques, consignment or secondhand thrift
shop, and/or similar goods.
B. Retail stores for sales and repair of jewelry, clocks, optical goods,
cameras, household items, electronic equipment, scientific and
professional instruments, and/or similar goods.
C. Restaurants, retail bakery, confectionery or ice cream shop, other
places serving food and beverages (excluding drive-through windows).
D. Personal service shop, including but not limited to barber shops,
hairdresser, shoe repair, tailor, dry cleaner (dropoff service only), and/
or similar uses.
E. Business or professional office.
F. Studio for photography, dance, art, etc.
G. Art gallery.
H. Bed-and-breakfast home or inn, pursuant to § 680-47 of this chapter.
I. Apartments, provided that they are above a nonresidential use.
J. Residential conversion, pursuant to § 680-44 of this chapter.
K. Accessory uses.
§ 680-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-134
1:729
§ 680-135. Special exceptions. [Amended 3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
The following uses are permitted by special exception, pursuant to § 680-20
of this chapter:
§ 680-136. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are not permitted in the MSC District:
L. Pedestrian pickup windows.
M. Outdoor dining, food service or merchandise sales, provided it does not
block the legal right-of-way of any sidewalk.
N. Single-family detached dwelling or semidetached dwelling (twin)
pursuant to the appropriate regulations of § 680-95 of this chapter.
O. An apartment may be used as a student home subject to the following
provisions:
(1) Shall be located above a nonresidential use.
(2) Shall be located in a parcel with frontage on an arterial road.
(3) Shall have a floor area of at least 400 square feet for each resident.
(4) Shall have no more than three residents per student home.
(5) In mixed-use structures, no more than two apartments may be used
for student homes.
(6) Must register their use as a student home in conformity with
§ 680-71 of this chapter.
A. Rooming house, pursuant to § 680-44.
B. Student homes are permitted when authorized as a special exception
subject to the following provisions and the provisions of § 680-71:
(1) Shall be located in an existing SFD or twin.
(2) Shall have no more than three residents per student home.
(3) Shall have a floor area of at least 1,500 square feet, exclusive of
basements, garages, and accessory buildings.
A. Fast food restaurants.
B. Drive-through window.
C. Gas station, auto repair, or body shop or gasoline sales of any kind.
D. Drive-in use.
E. Car wash.
§ 680-134 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-137
1:730
§ 680-137. Dimensional regulations. [Amended 7-12-2006 by Ord.
No. 519]
The following regulations shall apply to all buildings in the MSC District.
§ 680-138. Conditional uses.
Any new construction of a building, which is considered a land development
by Act 247 and is not a de minimis land development, as defined by the
Borough's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,233 shall be only
permitted as a conditional use when authorized by Borough Council subject
to § 680-55 of this chapter and the standards set forth in § 680-139 of this
article, unless the construction meets the requirements of § 680-140 of this
article.
§ 680-139. Conditional use standards.
The following shall apply to all conditional uses:
A. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yard: for existing buildings, the setback in place when this
chapter was adopted shall be used. Additions shall only be
permitted to the rear or side of an existing building. For any new
structure, the setback of the nearest adjacent building fronting
Main Street shall be used. If a conflict arises over which is the
nearest adjacent building, then the setback of the building closest
to Main Street shall be used.
(2) Side yard: 10 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 25 feet.
B. Coverage requirements.
(1) Maximum building coverage: 70%.
(2) Impervious coverage: 85%.
C. Height.
(1) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
D. Maximum building footprint of commercial buildings:
(1) For a single use: 10,000 square feet.
(2) For all uses on site: 15,000 square feet.
A. Any new structure shall be designed to be compatible with the pre-1950
buildings found along Main Street. Building materials traditionally
found along Main Street shall be used and design motifs such as
233. Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 680-137 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-139
1:731
§ 680-140. Building replacement provisions.
When a principal building is destroyed owing to a fire, natural disaster, or
other acts of God or is razed because of a structural instability not caused
by neglect or lack of maintenance, the owner is allowed by right to replace
the building, provided the following standards are satisfied:
§ 680-141. Parking lot and loading areas.
The following shall apply to all uses with parking lot and loading areas:
pitched roofs, sash windows, and varied facades with bays and porches
are required.
B. All conditional uses must have their primary facade oriented toward
Main Street.
C. Borough Council may require design changes or modifications to
address safety issues upon the advice of the Borough Engineer.
A. The new structure must be built within the existing building footprint
for the front and side yards. Rear extensions are permitted provided
they conform to the dimensional standards in § 680-137 for rear yards,
and where applicable, side yards.
B. Any facade that faces a public street must be constructed of building
materials typically found along Main Street. It shall also be similar to
the scale, bulk and massing, fenestration, and overall character of the
demolished structure. An exact replica is not required but rather design
details commonly found along the Main Street corridor shall be used.
C. Borough Council may require design changes or modifications to
ensure the building's design is harmonious with the existing buildings
along Main Street.
A. Parking shall be to the rear of the principal building or in the side yard,
behind the building's front setback line.
B. Access drives to Main Street are only permitted when the applicant can
demonstrate that no other alternative is possible.
C. When an applicant believes that their parking needs are less than those
required by § 680-73 of this chapter, they may petition Borough Council
to reduce the requirements up to 50%. When considering this petition,
Council may consult with the Borough Planning Commission, Engineer,
and staff.
D. Any use or property that is within 250 feet of a publicly owned parking
lot is exempted from the parking requirements of § 680-73 of this
chapter.
§ 680-139 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-141
1:732
ARTICLE XIX
GC General Commercial District
§ 680-142. Declaration of legislative intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 680-143. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered, or used and a lot may be used or
occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. Provide for development of a wide range of commercial uses in the
Borough.
B. Take advantage of access and visibility from the major roadway.
C. Provide regulations for continued commercial use opportunities in
areas of existing commercial development.
D. Establish standards for the orderly and well-planned development and
expansion of commercial facilities.
E. Relate specific types of uses to appropriate minimum lot sizes to ensure
adequate land area relative to use classifications and intensities.
F. Provide regulations that minimize conflicts between commercial
facilities and adjacent residential properties.
G. Assure suitable design to protect the character and property values of
adjacent neighborhoods.
H. Provide regulations that minimize congestion, hazardous traffic
conditions and potential noise, glare and pollution, resulting from
commercial development.
I. To provide incentives to encourage shared access points, public
meeting areas, and having buildings built to the edge of the public
right-of-way.
A. Retail store for sale of dry goods, variety merchandise, books and
stationery, clothing, food, beverages, flowers and plants, drugs
(excluding drive-through windows), furnishings or other household
supplies, and/or similar goods.
B. Retail stores for sales and repair of jewelry, clocks, optical goods,
cameras, home appliances, electronic equipment, scientific and
professional instruments and/or similar goods.
C. Personal service shop, including but not limited to barber shops,
hairdresser, shoe repair, tailor, dry cleaner (dropoff service only), selfservice
laundry, and/or similar uses.
§ 680-142 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-143
1:733
§ 680-144. Conditional uses.
The following may be permitted as a Class One conditional use in the GC
District by Borough Council in accordance with § 680-55 of this chapter and
§ 680-146 of this article.
§ 680-145. Dimensional regulations. [Amended 7-12-2006 by Ord.
No. 519]
D. Restaurants, retail bakery, confectionery or ice cream shop other places
serving food and beverages (excluding drive-through windows and
drive-in restaurants).
E. Business or professional office.
F. Bank, savings and loan association, financial institution (provided no
drive-through window is provided).
G. Indoor athletic facility.
H. Dance, exercise, music or art studio/gallery.
I. Funeral home.
J. Any use similar to those listed above.
A. Automatic or self-service car wash.
B. Garden supply, nursery.
C. Building materials and home equipment supplies.
D. Wholesale sales in conjunction with retail sales.
E. Indoor theater, bowling alley, pool hall, arcade, or other place of indoor
amusement or recreation.
F. Any permitted or conditional use that is proposing a drive-through
window either as a land development under Act 247 or as an addition to
an existing building.
G. Fast food restaurant.
H. Automobile sales and service, gasoline sales, parts and supply center
with automobile service as an ancillary use.
I. Any use similar to those listed above.
A. Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
C. Yard setbacks.
(1) Front: 15 feet from the legal right-of-way.
§ 680-143 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-145
1:734
§ 680-146. Conditional use standards.
The following standards shall apply, where applicable, to all conditional
uses:
(2) Side: 10 feet.
(3) Rear: 15 feet.
D. Maximum building coverage: 45%; however, coverage may be
increased provided the regulations of § 680-147 below are met.
E. Maximum impervious coverage: 60%; however, coverage may be
increased provided the regulations of § 680-147 below are met.
F. Maximum structure height: 35 feet.
G. Maximum building footprint of commercial buildings.
(1) For a single use: 20,000 square feet.
(2) For all uses on site: 50,000 square feet.
A. All car washes and automobile service, parts, and supply centers shall
meet the following:
(1) No repairs to vehicle shall be performed outside.
(2) Parking spaces shall be designated for vehicles being serviced.
(3) No unregistered or unlicensed vehicles shall be permitted on the
premises.
(4) Any bays for services or wash areas shall not be located on a street
frontage.
(5) No gasoline sales.
(6) No trucks over one-ton payload shall be repaired or serviced.
B. Drive-through windows shall meet the following:
(1) A minimum of six automobile waiting spaces are to be provided for
all drive-through bank windows, including each bank teller, remote
teller window, or drive-in automatic teller machine.
(2) A minimum of eight automobile waiting spaces are to be provided
for all drive-through restaurant windows, including the space at the
pickup window.
(3) These spaces shall not interfere with other parking spaces or the
internal circulation of the site.
C. Borough Council reserves the right to place any reasonable restriction
upon any conditional use. In considering any conditional use request,
§ 680-145 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-146
1:735
§ 680-147. Bonus provision.
§ 680-148. Parking.
§ 680-149. Additional regulations.
they may consider the potential effect the use could have on any
adjacent use or residential neighborhood.
D. Design standards. All conditional uses in the GC District shall meet the
following:
(1) All principal buildings shall avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted
walls or roof planes. Building wall offsets, such as projections,
recesses, and demarcated changes in floor levels shall be used.
Roof planes shall be broken up through dormers, gables, cupolas,
or other architectural features.
(2) All walls of the principal buildings that face public streets shall
contain windows.
(3) All principal buildings shall be constructed with traditional
materials such as brick, wood, or stucco. If synthetic materials are
used, they must be of a quality so that they appear to be
constructed with traditional materials.
(4) Flat roofs are prohibited unless hidden by a decorative parapet and
cornice. All parapets and cornices must contain architectural
features to avoid a long, monotonous, uninterrupted appearance.
(5) The scale and massing of all principal buildings shall relate to
neighboring properties.
A. If an applicant provides an irrevocable cross access easement to an
adjacent nonresidential property for the purpose of a connected
internal vehicular access, the maximum building coverage shall be 50%
and impervious coverage shall be 75%.
B. If, in addition to Subsection A, above, the applicant constructs the
principal structure to the front setback line, building coverage is raised
to 65% and impervious to 85%.
C. If, in addition to Subsection A, above, the applicant provides a public
space, the building coverage is raised to 65% and impervious to 85%.
Such a space shall be landscaped and/or hardscaped, pursuant to
§ 680-150 below.
A. All parking lots shall be 10 feet from any legal right-of-way.
B. All parking lots shall be 15 feet from any other property line.
C. Access drives shall be at least five feet from any adjacent properties.
§ 680-146 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-149
1:736
§ 680-150. Public space requirements.
To qualify as a public space as permitted in § 680-147, above, the area must
contain 350 square feet, be located along a public street's frontage, and
contain at least two of the following:
A. Outdoor display and storage. All uses except for parking and loading
areas shall be completely enclosed within a building. No merchandise,
goods, articles, or equipment shall be stored, displayed or offered for
sale outside the building except seasonal articles. Any outdoor display
areas shall be considered to be sales floor area for the purposes of
computing building coverage and for computing parking requirements.
B. Refuse areas. The design of buildings in the GC General Commercial
Retail District shall either include a provision for the storage of refuse
outside the building(s) or within an outdoor area enclosed by either
walls or opaque fencing. Any refuse area outside the building shall be
designed to be architecturally compatible with the building(s) and shall
not interfere with nor be visible from circulation within the parking lot,
such walls or fencing shall be designed to shield the refuse areas from
direct view of any adjacent property and must be at least six feet high.
No trash storage area shall be located within 10 feet of an adjacent
nonresidential property line nor within 20 feet of a road right-of-way or
residential property line.
C. Off-street loading. Adequate off-street loading and unloading space with
property access from a street, highway or common service driveway
shall be provided for all commercial properties. All areas for loading
and unloading of delivery trucks and other vehicles and for the
servicing of establishments or shops by refuse collection, fueled and
other service vehicles shall have adequate and unobstructed access
from a street or service driveway and shall be so arranged that they
may be used without blocking or otherwise interfering with the use of
automobile accessways, parking facilities, or pedestrian ways. They
shall also be so arranged that they may be used without backing out
onto a street. Service areas shall be screened from view from any
abutting roadway, customer parking area or residential property line.
All off-street loading areas shall be at least 20 feet from any residential
zoning district.
D. Landscaping buffers. Landscape buffers at least 15 feet in depth shall
be provided when a commercial property abuts a residential district.
The adequacy of this buffer shall be determined by Borough Council,
upon the recommendations of the Borough Planning Commission or
other Borough agency chosen by Council.
E. Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed for fixtures that
do not exceed 20 feet, unless it is in the setback area, then the height
standards of § 680-57 of this chapter apply.
A. Benches.
§ 680-149 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-150
1:737
B. Kiosk for public notices.
C. Fountain.
D. Public art, provided it is weatherproofed, low maintenance, and vandalresistant.
E. Clock tower.
F. Period streetlights.
G. Any other similar features, provided it is acceptable to Borough
Council.
§ 680-150 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-150
1:738
ARTICLE XX
SC Shopping Center District
§ 680-151. Declaration of legislative intent.
The purpose of the Shopping Center District is as follows:
§ 680-152. Use regulations.
A. To provide sufficient space and appropriate locations to meet current
and anticipated regional needs for large site commercial development,
appropriate to the community.
B. Encourage commercial development that will benefit the community
and the region, economically and aesthetically, by permitted investment
in a planned facility that will provide for coexistence of commercial
establishments in order to insure efficient integration and consolidation
of access to existing and planned roadways and utilities.
C. Provide Borough Council with a manner in which to review proposals
and to permit the development of those facilities which, in addition to
demonstrating a contribution to the community in the region,
incorporate design innovations in building and landscaping that would
mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent residential and institutional
districts.
D. Utilize the benefits that would accrue with the development of a unified
tract, designed to integrate various commercial establishments.
A. A tract of land proposed for the shopping center district shall be in a
single entity or ownership responsible for the operation of the
individual lot/pad/footprint and evidence shall be presented of a written
agreement between the parties and owners involved that said
development and management will be in accordance with a single plan
with common authority and common responsibility in owner-occupancy,
rental, cooperative, or condominium ownership.
B. A building or buildings may be erected, altered or used, and a lot may
be used or occupied on individual lots/pads/footprints for any of the
following purposes and no other:
(1) Retail uses.
(a) Retail store for sale of dry goods, variety merchandise,
clothing, food, beverages, flowers and plants, drugs,
furnishings or other household supplies, and/or similar goods.
(b) Retail stores for the sale or repair of jewelry, clocks, optical
goods, cameras, home appliances, electronic equipment,
scientific and professional instruments, and/or similar goods.
§ 680-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-152
1:739
(c) Personal service shop, including but limited to barber shop,
hairdresser, shoe repair, tailor, dry cleaner, self-service
laundry, and/or similar uses.
(d) Bank or other financial institution.
(e) Telephone or public utility offices.
(f) Restaurant, bar or tavern.
(g) Municipal, governmental, or community facilities.
(h) Dance, exercise, music or art studio.
(i) Day-care center.
(j) Indoor theater.
(k) Garden supply, nursery.
(l) Building materials and home equipment supplies.
(m) Wholesale sales in conjunction with retail sales.
(n) Automobile service, parts, and supply center with automobile
service as an ancillary use, provided that:
[1] No repairs to vehicles shall be performed outside.
[2] Parking spaces shall be designated for vehicles being
serviced.
[3] No unregistered or unlicensed vehicles shall be permitted
on the premises.
[4] Any bays for service areas shall not be located on street
frontage.
[5] No gasoline sales.
[6] No trucks over one-ton payload.
[7] Parking in rear or side shall have designated spaces.
[8] A buffer shall be provided which shall mitigate the visual
impact of the bay door.
[9] Three-car maximum per bay.
[10] Three-bay maximum.
(2) Office uses. Professional, business, or administrative office.
(3) Satellite uses. As defined as structures of less than 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area.
(a) Satellite use standards.
§ 680-152 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-152
1:740
§ 680-153. Height regulations.
The maximum height of any building or other structure erected or used in
this district shall be 40 feet.
§ 680-154. Area and yard requirements. [Amended 7-12-2006 by
Ord. No. 519]
[1] Up to 50% of building coverage used for freestanding
satellite used.
[2] A satellite use must meet the following requirements:
[a] Location at least 200 feet from any building(s).
[b] Only one commercial use is permitted in a satellite
building.
[c] Gross floor area of the use may not exceed 10,000
square feet.
[3] Access to satellite uses shall be from interior drives only,
with no independent access to exterior streets.
[4] Satellite uses shall be integrated into the overall design
and layout of the development, in accordance with the
standards of this article.
A. Area. A tract area of not less than 10 acres.
B. Building setback. All buildings, other than office buildings, shall be set
back a minimum of 75 feet from the legal right-of-way line of any street.
Office buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the legal
right-of-way.
(1) Satellite use setback: 50 feet.
(2) Rear yard setback: 35 feet.
(3) Side yard setback: 40 feet.
(4) From boundary of residential district of greater than three
contiguous acres: 80 feet.
(5) From boundary of other districts: 40 feet.
(6) From main entrance of the development where it intersects the
street: 50 feet.
C. Parking, internal road, and service area setbacks: from a residential
zoning district, 20 feet. These setbacks shall be reduced to 10 feet on
the common boundary where cross-easements are provided if the
property owners provide Council with proof that irrevocable crosseasements
are offered to adjoining property owners and shown on the
§ 680-152 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-154
1:741
plan, providing for an access road and/or driveway of sufficient width
for two-way traffic and adequate turn lanes, designed and constructed
to Borough specifications, leading from one development to the other,
with easements providing access off both properties to public highways.
D. Building area. Maximum building coverage: 20% of net lot area.
E. Open space area. Minimum open space area: 30% of net lot area.
F. Buffer area and fences.
(1) Buffer. A buffer area at least 10 feet in depth shall be provided
along any or all property lines with the exception of street frontage.
Where any uses permitted in this district abut a residential district,
the buffer or berm shall be a minimum of 20 feet in depth. This
twenty-foot buffer may be reduced to 10 feet if the property owners
provide Council with proof that irrevocable cross-easements are
offered to adjoining property owners and shown on the plan,
providing for an access road and/or driveway of sufficient width for
two-way traffic and adequate turn lanes constructed to Borough
specifications, leading from one development to the other with
easements providing access off both properties to public highways.
(2) Fence. A fence six feet in height shall be provided within the buffer
area along the boundary of a residential district of greater than
three contiguous acres. Such fence shall conform with existing
fence regulations, and shall be maintained at the sole cost and
expense of the property owner. The fence shall be placed at a
minimum distance of two feet from the property line.
G. Lighting facilities. All exterior lighting shall be designed for fixtures
that do not exceed 20 feet, unless they are in the setback area, then
they must meet the height requirements of § 680-57 of this chapter.
H. Parking. All uses shall provide the required amount of parking as
mandated in Article IX of this chapter.
I. Access, layout, and circulation controls.
(1) At least 10% of all parking areas shall consist of landscaped areas;
the landscaping along the perimeter of the parking area shall be
included in the said 10%.
(2) Parking spaces shall be broken by landscaped islands at least equal
in size to one parking space, planted with a shade or flowering tree
and low shrubs and/or ground cover. No more than 22 parking
spaces may be located in an uninterrupted row. Any greater
number of parking spaces shall be broken up by landscaped
islands.
(3) Any development shall be permitted no more than one access point
to the street per street frontage, unless otherwise required by
regulatory agencies for emergency use.
§ 680-154 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-154
1:742
(4) Entrance driveways shall not direct traffic to the storefront
driveway, but to an outer driveway from which vehicles can filter
down parking aisles toward stores, with the least interference with
pedestrian traffic.
(5) Pedestrian circulation shall be considered in the development's
design. Walkways shall be planned for linkages to an existing or
future pedestrian network of trails or sidewalks.
(6) Where public transportation facilities are or will be available, a
pickup area shall be designated with shelter and benches.
J. Design standards.
(1) Any development shall be designed according to a unified
architectural scheme, to include building facades, street furniture,
signs, and lighting standards.
(2) Abutting walls of individual buildings shall share a common party
wall or be separated by a distance of no less than the height of the
taller building.
(3) The use of traditional building materials such as local stone and
wood is encouraged.
K. Maximum building footprint of commercial buildings.
(1) For a single use: 50,000 square feet.
(2) For all uses on site: 100,000 square feet.
§ 680-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-154
1:743

ARTICLE XXI
C-O Planned Commercial-Office District
§ 680-155. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent contained in Article
I, the intent of the Planned Commercial-Office District is to encourage
development that will benefit the community and surrounding area by
permitting limited commercial and office development as an integrated
whole on a large tract rather than a small lot-by-lot basis. The district
also provides incentives for property owners who design buildings that
are oriented toward the street, and, in particular, the intersection of First
Avenue and Main Street. Such buildings shall evoke, through design
features and details, the Victorian and/or early 20th century appearance of
the Main Street Commercial area.
§ 680-156. Permitted uses. [Amended 7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 519]
A. Business or professional office.
B. Banks, savings and loan association, financial institution (excluding
drive-through windows).
C. Municipal office, telephone central office, public utility office.
D. Retail establishment for the sale of dry goods, variety and general
merchandise, clothing, food, drugs (excluding drive-through windows),
flowers, furnishings or other household supplies, sale and repair of
jewelry, watches, clocks, optical goods, or musical, professional, or
scientific instruments.
E. Personal service shop, including tailor, barber, beauty salon, shoe
repair, dressmaking, or similar shop.
F. Restaurants, retail bakery, confectionery or ice cream shop or other
places serving food and beverages (excluding drive-in and fast food
restaurants and drive-through or pick-up windows).
G. Dance, music or art studio.
H. Day-care center.
I. Repair and maintenance of office equipment, computer, and electronic
products.
J. Indoor athletic facility.
K. Apartments, provided:
(1) There are no more than six apartments in one building.
(2) All apartments are located above a nonresidential use.
§ 680-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-156
1:745
§ 680-157. Conditional use.
The following may be permitted as a conditional use in the C-O District by
Borough Council in accordance with § 680-55 of this chapter and § 680-158
of this article:
§ 680-158. Conditional use standards.
The following, where applicable, shall apply to all conditional uses in the CO
District:
(3) Apartment entrances and outdoor living areas are screened and
buffered from nonresidential loading and service areas.
(4) Maximum residential density: 12 dwelling units per acre.
L. Dependent care facility, such as a nursing home or an assisted living
facility.
M. Multifamily independent elderly housing.
N. Hotel.
O. Convenience store. [Added 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 583]
A. Banks, savings and loan associations, or financial institutions using a
drive-through window.
B. Drugstores using a drive-through window.
A. Drive-through window standards.
(1) Banks, savings and loan, or financial institutions shall provide the
following:
(a) A minimum of a six-car stacking lane must be provided for each
window, including the space at the window.
(b) These spaces shall not interfere with other parking spaces or
the internal circulation of the site.
(c) These windows shall not be attached to a facade that abuts a
street, road or right-of-way and features shall be incorporated
into their design to screen them from any street, road or rightof-
way.
(2) Drugstore.
(a) A minimum of a three-car stacking lane must be provided for
each window, including the space at the window.
(b) These spaces shall not interfere with other parking spaces or
the internal circulation of the site.
§ 680-156 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-158
1:746
§ 680-159. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the C-O District:
§ 680-160. Dimensional standards. [Amended 7-12-2006, by Ord.
No. 519]
Dimensional standards for standard tract development:
(c) These windows shall not be attached to a facade that abuts a
street, road or right-of-way and features shall be incorporated
into their design to screen them from any street, road or rightof-
way.
B. Additional conditional use requirements.
(1) All conditional uses shall be designed in accordance with the
development incentives contained in § 680-161A of this article. If
these are met, then an applicant will be permitted to utilize the
regulations contained in § 680-161B of this article.
A. Any use using a drive-through window which is not listed in § 680-158
of this chapter.
B. Fast food restaurant.234
A. Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.235 [Amended 6-7-2017 by Ord.
No. 583]
B. Maximum building coverage: 20%.
C. Maximum impervious surface: 45%; provided, however, for lots having
at least 150 feet of frontage on a principal arterial street, the maximum
impervious coverage may be increased to 75%. [Amended 6-7-2017
by Ord. No. 583]
D. Maximum height of building: 35 feet.
E. Maximum height of structures or accessory towers that are not
regularly occupied by people: 65 feet.
F. Minimum building setback from street ultimate right-of-way: five feet.
[Amended 1-5-2011 by Ord. No. 545]
G. Minimum building setback from property lines: 20 feet.
H. Minimum spacing between buildings: 1/2 height of taller building or 15
feet, whichever is greater.
234. Editor's Note: Original § 14-2106, Master plan approval, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 583.
235. Editor's Note: Original Subsection A, Minimum tract size, which immediately preceded
this subsection, was repealed 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 583.
§ 680-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-160
1:747
§ 680-161. Development incentives.
Buildings in the C-O District which are oriented toward all public streets
and evoke Victorian and/or early (pre-1940) 20th century commercial
building styles are allowed increased development density and reduced
setbacks.
I. Where the property abuts a residential zoning district, all buildings
shall be set back at least 30 feet from the zoning district line. Also, a
fifteen-foot buffer along the zoning district line is required. This buffer
may be included in the side, front, or rear yard setback and shall be
designed pursuant to the requirements of the landscape buffer
regulations of the Collegeville Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.236
J. Any lots in existence at the time they were zoned C-O Planned
Commercial-Office which do not meet the three acre minimum tract
size shall be permitted to be developed as a conforming lot, provided all
other requirements of the C-O District are met; however, existing tracts
under two acres do not have to submit a master plan.
K. Maximum building footprint of commercial buildings.
(1) For a single use: 50,000 square feet.
(2) For all uses on site: 100,000 square feet.
A. In order to qualify for those density and setback modifications, the
following should be met:
(1) All facades on any public street, road, or right-of-way must contain
windows. In particular, all windows shall not be faux windows and
their design and/or fenestration shall be compatible and consistent
with the architecture of the building. In particular, at least 35% of
the total facade shall be devoted to windows.
(2) Any building with a pitched, hip, mansard, or similar roof shall have
the roof line interrupted with such architectural features as gables,
dormers, steeples, chimneys, windows, copulas, etc.
(3) Any building with a flat roof shall have that roof completely
screened from view by a decorative parapet and cornice. Such a
parapet shall be periodically interrupted by stepped gables,
corbeling, crenelation, battlements, or other decorative features.
(4) Any HVAC or other roof-mounted functional elements shall be
screened from view with decorative features that are
architecturally compatible with the building as a whole.
(5) It is not the intent that any building be a recreation of an historic
style but rather a postmodern design that incorporates historic
236. Editor's Note: See Ch. 600, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 680-160 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-161
1:748
§ 680-162. Parking requirements.
§ 680-163. Landscaping and screening.
detailing and other design features common to commercial
building styles between 1850 and 1940 such as, but not limited
to, the Italianate, Romanesque, Colonial Revival, Neoclassical, and
Period Revival styles. Street facades shall be interrupted with such
elements as staggered setbacks, bay windows, and/or various types
of wall facings. Traditional building material such as brick, stone
veneer, metal, stucco, and wood must be used. Synthetic materials
may be used only if they are designed in a manner that resembles
traditional materials.
B. Borough Council shall determine if the applicant has met the intent of
these requirements. The bonuses are as follows:
(1) Maximum building coverage is replaced by a floor area ratio of .5,
which is calculated from the acreage of the original tract prior to
any subdivision.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage is increased to 75%, which is
calculated from the acreage of each proposed lot.
(3) Building setbacks from all property lines is decreased to 15 feet.
(4) Maximum building height is increased to 50 feet, provided that this
building has at least part of its footprint in a floodplain.
A. All off-street parking facilities shall be located to the rear of the building
and shall conform to the provisions of Article IX of this chapter.
[Amended 1-5-2011 by Ord. No. 545]
B. Any parking located underneath a structure and visible from any public
street, shall be screened with architectural screening designed to be
compatible with the building as a whole.
A. Landscaping shall be provided where possible around buildings and
within common use areas. Use of native plant materials and naturalistic
design is encouraged.
B. All loading, service areas, and outside parking shall be screened from
the view of adjacent streets or residences by a landscaped screen
buffer. Where vegetation is not feasible, architectural barriers, such as
decorative masonry walls may be used, preferably in conjunction with
landscape material. The adequacy of this buffer shall be determined by
Borough Council, upon the recommendations of the Borough Planning
Commission or other Borough agency chosen by Council.
C. Any existing natural screening, such as vegetation and topography,
shall be retained wherever possible. When such natural screening is
present, the applicant may use it in place of the required screen.
§ 680-161 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-164
1:749
§ 680-164. Signs.
All signs shall meet the requirements of § 680-180 of this chapter.
§ 680-165. Lighting.
A. No lighting fixture shall exceed a twenty-foot mounting height;
however, if the fixture is located in the setback area, then the
requirements of § 680-57 shall be met regarding height limitations.
B. Illumination of parking areas and walkway areas shall provide a
minimum level of illumination of 1/2 horizontal footcandle on the
ground surface.
C. Lighting fixtures shall be of the character consistent with the
architecture of the structure and surrounding properties.
D. All exterior lighting shall not permit glare onto adjacent properties or
public rights-of-way.
§ 680-164 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-165
1:750
ARTICLE XXII
M&I Manufacturing and Industrial District
§ 680-166. Declaration of legislative intent.
It is the specific intent of this article to:
§ 680-167. Permitted uses. [Amended 7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 519]
In the M&I District a building may be erected, used, or occupied and a lot
may be used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
A. Permit, by right, industrial uses appropriate for an established
Borough.
B. To regulate the operation of such uses to minimize traffic congestion,
noise, glare, air, and water pollution.
C. To ensure that such uses will not create fire and safety hazards.
D. To allow the conversion of older industrial buildings to alternate uses to
ensure their economic viability and preservation.
A. Automotive repair and service, including a body shop, provided that all
work is done within an enclosed structure.
B. Business or professional office.
C. Contractor's office and storage.
D. Scientific or industrial research, engineering, training, testing,
experimental laboratory, or similar establishment.
E. Printing, publishing, lithography, or similar processes.
F. Warehouse.
G. Wholesale sales of industrial products and equipment.
H. Gymnasiums, health or tennis clubs, or similar facility.
I. Manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, processing and packaging of
natural and man-made materials, chemicals, synthetics and other
organic or inorganic products, except those uses specifically prohibited
in § 14-2203237 below.
J. Mini storage facilities, provided that they are on lots of at least three
acres.
K. Car washes, provided that they only take access from a road classified
as a principal arterial and provide a stacking distance for at least eight
cars.
237. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 680-166 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-167
1:751
§ 680-168. Area regulations. [Amended 7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 519]
L. The following uses are permitted only in an existing industrial building
in the M&I District:
(1) Art gallery.
(2) Retail sales of dry goods, variety merchandise, books, antiques,
consignment or secondhand thrift shop and/or similar goods.
(3) Studio for photography, music, or dance.
(4) Apartments, provided they have no greater density than 12
dwelling units per acre.
M. Accessory use on the same lot and customarily incidental to any of the
above-permitted uses, including, but not limited to:
(1) Storage within an enclosed building or fenced area, meeting the
requirements of § 680-171, herein.
(2) Repair shop or maintenance facilities normally required for the
conduct of industrial operations.
(3) Cafeteria, recreation facility or other service facility located within
a permitted use and operated solely for the occupants of the
building.
N. Hookah bar/lounge. [Added 4-4-2018 by Ord. No. 586]
A. Lot area: 20,000 square feet, unless specified elsewhere in this article.
B. Lot width: 100 feet.
C. Building coverage: 40% of the lot area.
D. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 75% of the lot area.
E. Yards:
(1) Front yard. One yard not less than 30 feet in depth, measured from
the ultimate right-of-way.
(2) Side yard. There shall be two side yards, neither of which shall be
less than 20 feet wide.
(3) Rear yard. One yard not less than 40 feet in depth.
F. Maximum building footprint of commercial buildings:
(1) For a single use: 50,000 square feet.
(2) For all uses on site: 100,000 square feet.
§ 680-167 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-169
1:752
§ 680-169. Parking and off-street loading.
All parking spaces or lots and all off-street loading in the M&I District shall
be in accordance with Article IX, Off-Street Parking, of this chapter. Both
shall be set back at least 10 feet from any property line or legal right-of-way.
§ 680-170. Signs.
All signs erected in the M&I District shall be in accordance with Article
XXIII, Signs, of this chapter.
§ 680-171. Additional development regulations.
A. Access. A planned system of efficient ingress, egress, and internal
circulation of traffic shall be required. Loading and unloading areas
shall be provided to the rear of the proposed use and arranged so that
they may be used without blocking or interfering with the use of
driveways, parking areas, or streets.
B. Lighting. All lighting fixtures shall not exceed 20 feet, however when
they are located in a setback area, the height standards of § 680-57 of
this chapter must be met.
C. Service. Areas for refuse collection and recycling shall be provided. A
plan for disposal of solid waste materials shall be required. All solid
waste material shall be stored in covered containers, no closer than 15
feet from any property line. Refuse collection areas shall be shielded
from the direct view of any adjacent property or public street by a wall
or a fence, which is at least six feet in height.
D. Buffer landscaping. A landscape buffer shall be provided whenever an
M&I property abuts a residential district. The adequacy of this buffer
shall be determined by Borough Council, upon the recommendation of
the Borough Planning Commission or any other Borough agency chosen
by Council.
E. Fire and explosive hazards. Flammable and explosive materials shall be
stored, used, and transported in accordance with the applicable state
and federal regulations regarding such materials and associated
storage vessels.
F. Outdoor storage.
(1) All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, flammable or explosive
materials, and raw materials shall be enclosed by a fence adequate
to prevent the access of children and other members of the general
public pursuant to § 680-51 of this chapter.
(2) No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes
or forces.
§ 680-169 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-171
1:753
§ 680-172. Height regulations. [Added 7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 519]
The height of any building or structure shall not exceed 35 feet; however,
buildings or structures, excluding signs, are allowed to exceed this
requirement by 25 feet (to 60 feet), provided that for every one foot over 35
feet, they are set back an additional two feet from any property line.
(3) All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which
constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise be
attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored outdoors only in
closed, sealed containers.
(4) No materials or wastes of any form may be stored in a floodplain
area unless the storage facility has been floodproofed pursuant to
Article XXV of this chapter and to the satisfaction of the Borough
Engineer.
G. Waste disposal. Industrial wastes shall not be stored, discharged,
incinerated, or otherwise disposed of except in conformance with the
applicable state and federal regulations regarding solid and hazardous
wastes.
H. Fire detection and suppression devices. Fire detection and suppression
devices shall be installed when required by Borough Council upon the
recommendations of the Borough Fire Chief.
I. Health and safety hazards. All uses in the M&I District shall comply
with all local, state, and federal regulations regarding health and safety
hazards, including the reporting of potential hazards.
J. Public utilities. All uses shall be capable of being served by public sewer
and water facilities. All sewer or water facilities shall be subject to all
local, state, and federal regulations and are subject to approval by
Borough Council upon the recommendations of the Borough Engineer.
K. All the applicable performance standards of this chapter shall be
followed.
§ 680-171 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-172
1:754
ARTICLE XXIII
Signs
[Amended 7-12-2006 by Ord. No. 520]
§ 680-173. Declaration of legislative intent.
It is recognized that signs perform an important function in identifying
properties, businesses, services, residences, events, and other matters of
interest to the public. It is hereby found and declared, however, that control
of signs is necessary to promote the health, safety, and general welfare by:
§ 680-174. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE DISPLAY SCREEN — A sign, or any portion of a
sign with a fixed or changing display/message that may be changed through
electronic means. This definition includes television screens, plasma
screens, digital screens, flat screens, video boards, LED displays, fiber-optic
displays, holographic displays, or other technologies of a similar nature.
Such signs shall include the following modes of operation:[Added
6-6-2007 by Ord. No. 531]
A. Lessening hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
B. Preserving property values.
C. Preventing unsightly and detrimental development which has a
blighting influence upon residential, business, and industrial areas.
D. Preventing signs from reaching such excessive size that they obscure
one another to the detriment of all concerned.
E. Securing certain fundamentals of design for the Borough.
STATIC — Signs which shall include no animation or effects simulating
animation.
A.
FADE — Signs where static messages are changed by means of varying
light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to
the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually
increases intensity to the point of legibility.
B.
DISSOLVE — Signs where static messages are changed by means of
varying light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually
appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneous to the gradual
appearance and legibility of the subsequent message.
C.
TRAVEL — Signs where the message is changed by the apparent
horizontal movement of letters or graphic elements of the message.
D.
§ 680-173 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-174
1:755
SIGN — A structure, building wall, or other outdoor surface, or any device
used for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing
the subject thereof to the attention of the public, or to display, identify,
and publicize the name and product or services of any person, exclusive of
supporting members that bear no message.
SIGN AREA —
SIGN HEIGHT — The distance from the highest portion of the sign to the
mean grade at the base of the sign.
SIGN TYPES —
SCROLLING — Signs where the message is changed by the apparent
vertical movement of the letters or graphic elements of the message.
E.
The area of a sign shall mean the area of all lettering, wording, and
accompanying designs, logos, and symbols, together with the
background on which they are displayed (whether such background
is open or enclosed), but excluding any supporting framework and
bracing which are solely incidental to the display itself provided the
same do not contain any lettering, wording, or symbols.
A.
Where the sign consists of individual letters, designs or symbols
attached to a building, awning, wall, or window, the area shall be that
of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters, designs,
and symbols.
B.
Where a sign consists of a double face, only one side shall be considered
in the calculation of area.
C.
ADVERTISING SIGN — An off-premises sign which advertises or
otherwise directs attention to a commodity, business, industry, home
occupation, or other similar activity which is sold, offered, or conducted
elsewhere than on the lot upon which the sign is located.
A.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign with action or motion, flashing, or color
changes requiring electrical energy, but not including window
displayed computer monitors or wind-actuated elements such as flags,
banners, or novelty items.
B.
AWNING SIGN — A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against
the surface of an awning.
C.
BUSINESS SIGN — An on-premises sign which advertises or otherwise
directs attention to a business, commodity, service, industry, or other
activity which is sold, offered, or conducted, other than incidentally, on
the premises upon which the sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
D.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign on which the names and location of the
occupants or the use of a building is given, including office building and
church directories.
E.
§ 680-174 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-174
1:756
FREESTANDING SIGN — A self-supporting sign resting on or
supported by means of poles or standards, either on the ground or on
the roof of a building.
F.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign whose copy is limited to the name
of a building, institution, or person and/or to the activity or occupation
being identified.
G.
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A directional sign of a public service nature
which contains no advertising.
H.
MARQUEE SIGN — Any sign attached to or supported by a marquee
structure.
I.
OBSCENE SIGN — Any sign or symbol which displays or contains
obscene matter. The matter shall be considered obscene if:
The average person, applying contemporary community standards
would find the sign or symbol, taken as a whole, appeals to prurient
interest;
(1)
The sign or symbol depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct specifically defined by applicable state law; and/or
(2)
The sign or symbol, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
(3)
J.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign structure advertising an establishment,
merchandise, service, or entertainment, which is sold, produced,
manufactured, or furnished at a place other than on the property on
which said sign is located; a sign which advertises or otherwise directs
attention to an activity not on the same lot where the sign is located,
e.g., billboards, outdoor advertising, subdivision directional sign, and
real estate sign.
K.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which advertises or otherwise directs
attention to an activity on the same lot where the sign is located.
L.
PAINTED WALL SIGN — Any sign which is applied with paint or similar
substances on the face of a wall.
M.
PARALLEL WALL SIGN — A sign mounted parallel to a wall or other
vertical building surface, but does not extend beyond the edge of any
wall, roofline, or other surface to which it is mounted, and does not
project more than 10 inches from the surface to which it is mounted.
N.
PERSONAL EXPRESSION SIGN — A sign which displays an individual's
political, religious or personal belief, provided such sign is not
considered obscene or offensive to an individual race, gender, or
religious beliefs.
O.
PROJECTING WALL SIGN — Any sign mounted to a wall or other
vertical surface other than a parallel sign, but does not project more
P.
§ 680-174 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-174
1:757
than seven feet from the surface to which it is mounted, nor project
above the wall, roofline, or surface to which it is mounted, nor in any
way interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
Q. REVOLVING SIGN — Any sign which revolves 180° or more.
ROOF SIGN — A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a
building, and which is wholly or partly supported by that building.
R.
SNIPE SIGN — A permanent or temporary sign or poster affixed to a
tree, fence, utility pole, or upon rocks or natural features.
S.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which advertises community or civic
projects, construction projects, real estate for sale or lease, or other
special events on a temporary basis. The following types of signs shall
be considered temporary signs:
BANNER SIGN — A temporary sign intended to be hung either
with or without frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations
or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind.
National flags, flags of political subdivisions, and symbolic or
decorative flags of any institution, residential use or business shall
not be considered banners for the purpose of this chapter.
(1)
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — Any sign giving the name or names
of principal contractors, subcontractors, architects, and lending
institutions responsible for construction on the site where the sign
is placed.
(2)
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — An on-premises sign on a building or lot
which announces the nature, purpose, or name of the prospective
building/enterprise.
(3)
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign used in connection with a
local, county, state, or national election or referendum.
(4)
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the
ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be
transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be
transported by means of wheels, signs converted to A- or T-frames,
menu and sandwich board signs, balloons used as signs, umbrellas
used for advertising, and signs attached to or painted on vehicles
parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle
is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
Portable signs shall not be illuminated unless a conditional use is
granted by the Borough.
(5)
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign which advertises the sale,
lease, or rent of the property on which the sign is placed. Open
house signs for property which is for sale shall be considered real
estate signs.
(6)
T.
§ 680-174 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-174
1:758
§ 680-175. Applicability.
Any sign erected after the effective date of this chapter shall conform to the
following regulations.
§ 680-176. Administration.
SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS — On-premises window signs, banners,
or commemorative flags which advertise a grand opening or other
special event.
(7)
STREET BANNER SIGN — Any banner sign which is stretched
across and hung over a public right-of-way.
(8)
SUBDIVISION SIGN — An on-premises or off-premises directional
sign advertising to the public the name of the subdivision project
and the nature of the product offered.
(9)
WINDOW SIGN — Any temporary sign affixed to or visible through
a window or within 12 inches of the surface of the window facing
the outside which is to be used for advertising purposes and
intended to be viewed from the outside.
(10)
TRAILER SIGN — Any sign which is erected upon a structure having
wheels or rollers facilitating movement from one location to another.
U.
VEHICULAR SIGN — Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such
a manner that the carrying of the sign is no longer incidental to the
vehicle's purpose but becomes a primary purpose in itself an example
is an empty tractor trailer with advertising painted on its side, left for
an extended period of time in front of the business premises that is
advertised on the trailer.
V.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign affixed to or visible through a window or
within 12 inches of the surface of the window facing the outside which
is to be used for advertising purposes.
W.
A. Sign permits. Unless listed in Subsection B, below, it shall be unlawful
to erect, construct, or significantly alter any sign which requires a sign
permit without first filing with Collegeville Borough an application, in
writing, in order to obtain a formal permit.
B. Exempt signs. The following signs are allowed in any district and do not
require a permit from Collegeville Borough. Signs not requiring sign
permits and are permitted in any zoning district:
(1) Government signs (i.e., traffic signs, parking signs, etc.).
(2) Legal notices.
(3) Public monument, plaque, historic identification sign erected by a
government agency.
§ 680-174 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-176
1:759
§ 680-177. General sign regulations for all districts.
In all districts, the following sign regulations shall apply:
(4) Government flag, insignia, or decorative banners.
(5) Public service and information signs advertising availability of
public restrooms, telephones, or similar public conveniences, not
exceeding three square feet in area.
(6) Address signs not exceeding two square feet.
(7) Name plates and identification signs, provided that characters do
not exceed three inches in height and an area not exceeding two
square feet.
(8) Vending machine signs where a product name is an integral
component of the vending machine.
(9) Incidental signs, provided that the aggregate area of incidental
signs on a property does not exceed four square feet; incidental
sign area in excess of four square feet shall be included in the
calculation of a property's permitted sign area.
(10) Home security signs not exceeding one square foot.
(11) Real estate signs.
(12) Yard sale signs, provided that they are not erected earlier than
seven days before the date of the event and shall be removed within
two days after the event.
(13) Personal expression signs, provided that they either are
freestanding, wall or window signs. Such signs may not exceed six
square feet and, in the case of freestanding signs, six feet in height.
They also cannot be illuminated or placed within the legal right-ofway
or clear sight triangle of a road.
(14) Political signs provided that they are not erected earlier than 30
days before the of the election and shall be removed within seven
days after the election date.
C. Sign permit review. The Zoning Officer shall either approve or deny the
application or refer the application back to the applicant in any instance
where insufficient information has been submitted.
D. Fees. All applications for permits for the erection, construction, or
alteration of signs shall, at the time of making application, be paid to
the Borough in accordance with the respective fee schedule adopted by
the Borough Council from time to time.
A. Prohibited signs. The following types of signs or illumination of signs
shall be prohibited in the Borough:
§ 680-176 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-177
1:760
(1) Animated signs.
(2) Flashing, moving, or reflective signs.
(3) Illuminated temporary signs.
(4) Revolving signs.
(5) Roof signs.
(6) Vehicular signs.
(7) Obscene signs.
(8) Snipe signs.
(9) Electronic message display screen. [Added 6-6-2007 by Ord. No.
531]
B. Permitted signs. The following types of signs are permitted throughout
the Borough and shall obtain a sign permit in accordance with
§ 680-176A:
(1) Trespassing signs and signs indicating private ownership of
roadways or other property on the same premises therewith,
provided that the total area of any one side of such sign shall not
exceed four square feet.
(2) Real estate signs as follows:
(a) For advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which
the sign is erected, provided that the total area on any one side
of such signs on any one street frontage of any property in
single or separate ownership shall not exceed four square feet.
(b) For temporary advertising, on the premises, the sale or
development of homes within a subdivision, provided that the
area of any one side of any such sign shall not exceed 35
square feet, and provided that not more than two such signs
shall be erected within any such subdivision.
(3) Directional subdivision signs (off-premises), provided that the area
of any one side of any such sign shall not exceed six square feet,
and provided that such signs shall be spaced at intervals of not less
than 500 feet of street frontage. A maximum of three off-premises
directional signs shall be permitted for one development.
Permission must be obtained in advance from the property owner
where the sign is to be placed. Signs shall not be erected more than
60 days prior to the beginning of the actual construction of the
project, and shall be removed within 10 days after the date of the
sale or rental of the final unit in such development.
(4) Temporary signs of contractors, mechanics, painters and artisans
erected and maintained on the premises where the work is being
§ 680-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-177
1:761
performed during the period in which such work is being
performed, provided that the area of any one side of any such
sign shall not exceed six square feet, and provided that not more
than one such sign shall be erected on any property in single and
separate ownership, and provided that such sign shall be removed
upon completion of the work.
(5) Construction sign, provided that the area of any one side of the sign
not exceed 35 square feet and that the height is no more than eight
feet 15 feet. One such sign per street frontage is permitted. Signs
shall not be erected more than 60 days prior to the beginning of the
actual construction of the project and shall be removed 10 days
after the date of the sale or rental of the final unit in the
development.
(6) For sale of agricultural products, signs indicating the name of the
owner or occupant and the product sold, provided that the total
sign area shall not exceed 16 square feet.
(7) Open house signs (on- and off-premises). There shall be a maximum
of one on-premises open house sign for each property line of street
frontage.
(a) A maximum of two off-premises directional open house signs
shall be permitted for each home or development.
(b) Signs shall not exceed four square feet per side, and may not
be illuminated.
(c) Off-premises directional signs must have permission in
advance from the property owner where the sign is to be
placed. Signs cannot be placed in the legal right-of-way.
(d) Freestanding open house and directional signs shall not
exceed a height of six feet.
(e) All open house signs are allowed only on the day of the showing
and must be taken down immediately after the showing.
(8) Signs which advertise public auctions for the disposal of real
estate, property, or merchandise.
(a) Signs shall not exceed nine square feet in area, at a maximum
height of six feet, and shall be placed only on the property
where the stated auction is being conducted.
(b) Signs may be erected not earlier than 60 days prior to the
advertised auction, and shall be removed within 10 days after
the auction.
(9) Political signs. Political signs may be erected not earlier than 15
days before the date of the election. All political signs shall be
removed within seven days after the election date.
§ 680-177 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-177
1:762
(10) Special event signs or banners. Special event signs or banners for
public or quasi-public events shall comply with the following
standards:
(a) Regulations for all public event signs or banners. Signs or
banners shall not be posted earlier than one month prior to the
event and must be removed with seven days after the day of
the event.
(b) Special event banners.
[1] Such banners shall be affixed to a building or some other
appropriate sturdy structure.
[2] The permitted size and height of any street banner shall be
determined on a case-by-case basis by the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer. The highest point of any special
event banner sign shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
[3] If the banner is to be strung across a state-owned road, the
sponsoring organization must receive necessary approvals
from the PennDOT.
(c) Special event signs. Off-premises directional signs not
exceeding 10 square feet in area and six feet in height shall be
permitted for any special event, provided that permission has
been obtained from the property owner where the sign is to be
placed.
(11) Official street and traffic signs and any signs required by law.
(12) Incidental signs for the convenience and safety of the public (for
example, signs identifying parking areas, telephones, restrooms,
loading docks, etc.), provided that they contain no advertising.
C. No sign shall be placed in such a position as to endanger traffic on a
street by obscuring a clear view or by confusion with official street
signs or signals.
D. No sign, other than official municipal street or directional signs, street
banner signs, or political signs shall be erected or maintained within
the legal street right-of-way.
E. No sign shall be erected or maintained so as to prevent free ingress and
egress to or from any door, window, or fire escape.
F. No sign shall be placed on utility poles.
G. Property owners shall assume the cost of relocating any sign within the
ultimate right-of-way of a street which is widened.
H. All signs shall be constructed of durable materials and shall be
maintained in good condition and repair at all times.
§ 680-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-177
1:763
I. Illumination standards.
(1) Signs may be illuminated, unless otherwise specified herein.
Illumination of any sign shall be so shielded that the source of the
light shall not be visible from any point off the lot on which the sign
is erected and so that only the sign is directly illuminated. No more
than 1/2 footcandle of light shall be detectable along the boundary
of any adjacent property. Illumination of signs shall be subject to
the National Electrical Code.
(2) The source of light must be concealed by translucent covers.
J. Sign location requirements. No freestanding sign can occupy a
designated parking area or intended parking area, walkway, cartway,
driveway, or area designated for any other use.
K. Any sign which does not so conform with the provisions of this section
at the time of adoption of the chapter is hereby declared a
nonconforming sign.
L. Removal of signs.
(1) The Borough shall have the authority to require the removal and/or
demolition of signs under the following circumstances:
(a) When it is determined that the sign has deteriorated to the
point of becoming a danger to the public.
(b) When a sign is erected without an approved sign permit.
(c) When a sign is erected which does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
(d) A nonconforming sign which has not been removed or brought
into conformity pursuant to § 680-184 of this article.
(2) In all of the above circumstances, the removal procedure will be
initiated by a letter to the owner or lessee by the Zoning Officer
requiring the removal of such sign within 30 days.
(3) Owner or lessee's remedial action for each circumstance.
(a) Deteriorated/hazardous sign: Rehabilitation/repair of sign
within 30 days.
(b) No sign permit: Obtain permit within 30 days.
(c) Prohibited sign or nonconforming sign: Required to be brought
into conformity pursuant to § 680-184B of this article.
M. Interior signs. Any sign located entirely within an enclosed building is
exempt from the standards of this chapter, provided its location does
not pose a safety risk or hazard.
§ 680-177 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-177
1:764
§ 680-178. Signs permitted in residential districts.
The following number and types of signs are permitted for any one lot
located in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts:
§ 680-179. Signs permitted in MSC, R-O, V-1 and V-2 districts.
The following number and types of signs are permitted for any one lot
located in the MSC, R-O, V-1 and V-2 Districts:
N. Development sign. A ground-mounted freestanding sign identifying the
name of a residential development. Such a sign cannot exceed 50
square feet.
O. Unless otherwise described in this article, the maximum height of any
sign shall not exceed 25 feet, including balloons used as signs.
A. Any sign permitted in § 680-177B of this article.
B. Professional, accessory use, home occupation or name signs on the
same lot with, and indicating the name, profession, or activity of the
occupant of the dwelling, provided that the area of any one side shall
not exceed two square feet, and provided that not more than one such
sign shall be erected for each permitted use or dwelling. Unless
otherwise described in this article, the maximum height of any sign in a
residential district shall not exceed six feet.
A. Any sign permitted in § 680-177B of this article.
B. Residential uses. Residential uses are allowed any of the signs
permitted in § 680-178 of this article. Unless otherwise described in
this article, the maximum height of any sign for a residential use shall
not exceed six feet.
C. Commercial or other nonresidential uses. The following signs are
permitted:
(1) One freestanding business or identification sign per street frontage
or building, if more than one principal building is on a lot.
(2) One of the following types of signs for each side of the building
which faces a street or a parking lot located on the same property:
(a) Awning sign.
(b) Identification sign.
(c) Marquee sign.
(d) Painted wall sign.
(e) Parallel wall sign.
(f) Window sign.
§ 680-177 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-179
1:765
(g) Projecting wall sign.
(3) One of the following types of temporary signs:
(a) Portable signs.
(b) Special event signs or banners.
(c) Window signs.
D. Dimensional standards for signs in the MSC, VI, V2 and R-O districts.
(1) Total signage for any nonresidential use: 35 square feet to be
divided up between one or more signs.
(2) Additionally, window signs are permitted, provided they do not
exceed 30% of the glazed area of any window which faces a public
street.
(3) Properties with multiple tenants are allowed one directory sign
which must be mounted on the building and each tenant is allowed
a sign of no more than three square feet with the total sign area not
to exceed 24 square feet.
(4) No projecting sign shall project more than seven feet from the
surface to which it is mounted, nor project over the wall, roofline,
or surface to which it is mounted.
(5) The outermost portion of a projecting sign shall project no closer
than five feet from a curbline or shoulder of a public street.
(6) There shall be a minimum clearance of 10 feet between the bottom
of the projecting sign and a public sidewalk or walkway.
(7) No sign shall be placed within five feet of a property line.
(8) Special event signs, banners, portable signs or commemorative
flags for businesses announcing a grand opening, going out of
business sale or other special promotional event shall comply with
the following standards:
(a) The property or business shall display only one special event
sign, banner, portable sign or commemorative flag at any one
time.
(b) A special event sign, banner or commemorative flag for a
business shall be displayed no more than four times during the
calendar year for periods of time not exceeding 30 calendar
days. Portable signs may be displayed for a period of time not
exceeding 60 days per calendar year.
(9) Unless otherwise described in this article, the maximum height of
any sign in a nonresidential district shall not exceed the following:
(a) For freestanding signs: 10 feet.
§ 680-179 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-179
1:766
§ 680-180. Signs permitted in GC, C-O, and M&I Districts.
Regardless of those signs permitted under § 680-177B, the following
number and type of signs are permitted for any one lot or building located
in the GC, C-O, and M&I Districts:
§ 680-181. Signs permitted in SC Shopping Center District.
The following number and type of signs are permitted for any one lot or
building located in the SC District:
(b) Wall height for wall signs, measured on the wall upon which
the sign is placed: 75% to parapet or roofline, but no greater
than 12 feet high.
A. Any sign permitted in § 680-177B of this article.
B. Any applicable sign permitted in § 680-179 of this article.
C. Gas stations are allowed one additional freestanding sign per street
frontage for advertising gas prices, provided this sign is attached to a
freestanding sign and does not exceed 16 square feet.
D. Dimensional standards for signs for uses other than a convenience store
in the GC, C-O, and M&I Districts. [Amended 6-7-2017 by Ord. No.
583]
E. Shopping centers are permitted one freestanding center sign, provided
it does not exceed 70 square feet per side and is not more than 25 feet
in height.
F. A convenience store shall be permitted the following signage: [Added
6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 583]
(1) One freestanding sign per driveway which shall not exceed 18 feet
in height and may contain:
(a) Seventy-five square feet for gas pricing which may be
internally illuminated and changed remotely by computer.
(b) Thirty-two square feet of signage other than the gas pricing.
(2) Gas canopies are permitted one sign which shall not exceed 38
square feet.
(3) Business signs may be installed on no more than two walls. The
square footage per wall shall not exceed 50 square feet which may
be shared between or among one or more signs.
A. Any sign permitted in § 680-177B of this article.
B. Any applicable sign permitted in § 680-180 of this article.
§ 680-179 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-181
1:767
§ 680-182. Signs permitted for Institutional Overlay District.
§ 680-183. Off-premises advertising signs.
Off-premises advertising signs are permitted only in the M&I District as a
special exception pursuant to the special exception regulations, § 680-20 of
this chapter, and the following:
C. Center sign. One freestanding center sign, not to exceed 150 square
feet per side. This sign may not exceed 25 feet in height.
D. Individual industrial businesses are permitted wall signs, window signs,
projecting signs and awning signs, provided they meet the following:
(1) Storefronts up to 30 feet: 35 square feet, to be divided up between
one or more signs.
(2) Storefronts over 30 feet: 50 square feet, to be divided up between
one or more signs.
(3) Stores containing over 20,000 square feet but not more than
35,000 square feet: 80 square feet, to be divided up between one or
more signs.
(4) Stores over 35,000 square feet: 100 square feet, to be divided up
between one or more signs.
(5) Stores who do not front on a public street are allowed one
additional freestanding or wall sign, provided it does not exceed 15
square feet and is placed on the shopping center's property.
(6) Every business is also entitled to the signs and dimensional
requirements permitted in § 680-180B, D, and E.
(7) Projecting or hanging signs shall be at least eight feet above the
sidewalk, not project more than seven feet from the wall of a
building and shall be located so it does not interfere with any
pedestrian or traffic movements.
A. Any sign permitted in § 680-177B of this article.
B. One freestanding or wall sign per street frontage, provided that it does
not exceed 55 square feet and in the case of a freestanding sign, 10 feet
in height.
C. Identification signs for an individual building are exempt from this
article provided they are attached or adjacent to the building they
identify.
A. If the provisions with respect to location, use, size or height of signs are
more restrictive in the building code adopted by the Collegeville
Borough or any Acts of Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
§ 680-181 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-183
1:768
§ 680-184. Nonconforming signs.
Department of Transportation, those restrictions shall take precedence
over the regulations and conditions as set forth in this chapter.
B. An off-premises advertising sign may be double faced with two
advertising surfaces. However, both surfaces shall be the same size and
shape, and the total length of the sign structure shall not exceed 20 feet
and the total height of the copy areas shall not exceed 18 feet, with a
total copy area not exceeding 100 square feet.
C. Off-premises advertising signs may not be attached or painted on a
building.
D. Off-premises advertising signs shall be located 15 feet from the ultimate
right-of-way, or 20 feet from any property line.
E. An open space of not less than four feet shall be maintained between
the lower edge of the off-premises advertising sign display surface and
the ground.
F. No portion of the supporting structure shall be visible above any
advertising display area.
G. No off-premises advertising sign shall be located closer than 500 feet to
the nearest off-premises sign on the same side of the roadway,
regardless of the size of the sign.
H. No off-premises advertising sign shall be allowed within 100 feet of the
nearest public or private elementary, middle, or high school or religious
institution.
I. All off-premises advertising signs shall be erected on permanent
footings or support structures designed by a registered structural
engineer.
J. The applicant for any sign permit shall present a written statement
from the owner of the property, that the applicant has the right to use
the property to erect a sign as well as maintain the sign during the time
that the sign is erected. The owner must further verify in writing that it
will, at its sole cost and expense, cause the sign to be removed at such
time as there is no further use of the sign.
A. Signs legally in existence at the time of the adoption of this article
which do not conform with the requirements of this article shall be
considered nonconforming signs.
B. All such nonconforming signs shall be removed or altered so as to be in
conformity with the standards contained herein at such time when:
(1) Collegeville Borough approves an application for a sign permit in
cases where the nonconforming sign is to be significantly altered.
Changes to the sign copy or the replacement of a sign panel of an
§ 680-183 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-184
1:769
existing establishment's nonconforming sign shall not be
considered a significant alteration. If more than 50% of a sign is
damaged, it shall be repaired to conform with this article.
(2) The property in which the nonconforming sign is located undergoes
a change of land use requiring the issuance of either a use and
occupancy permit or a change of use and occupancy permit by
Collegeville Borough.
C. To determine the legal status of existing signs, in each of the two cases
listed in Subsection B, the applicant shall submit the following
information to the Borough Zoning Officer:
(1) Type(s) of existing sign(s) located on the property.
(2) The area and height of all signs.
(3) For freestanding signs, the distance the outermost portion of the
sign is set back from the legal right-of-way.
(4) Type of sign illumination.
(5) The material of which the sign is constructed.
(6) The building length along public street frontage.
D. Prior to the events listed in Subsection B, nonconforming signs may be
repainted, repaired up to 50%, the sign copy may be changed, or sign
panels may be replaced, provided that such actions do not increase the
dimensions of the existing sign, nor in any way increase the extent of
the sign's nonconformity.
E. Under the following conditions, nonconforming signs shall be exempt
from the provisions of Subsection B:
(1) The nonconforming sign possesses documented historic value.
(2) The nonconforming sign is of a unique nature or type by virtue of
its architectural value or design.
(3) For a change of owner when a business name is retained.
§ 680-184 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-184
1:770
ARTICLE XXIV
Institutional District
§ 680-185. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the declaration of legislative intent and community
development objectives contained in Article I of this chapter, the specific
intent of this district is:
§ 680-186. Permitted uses.
A. To permit institutional uses on appropriate properties in the Borough,
with locational, dimensional, and development standards specific to the
type of use proposed.
B. To provide design and regulatory standards for institutional facilities
which will minimize any adverse impacts (such as noise, glare, and
pollution) on surrounding properties.
C. To control traffic generated by institutional uses.
D. To ensure that institutional uses will be designed to be adequately
served by public safety and emergency management services.
A. Class 1 Neighborhood Level uses.
(1) Place of worship, including associated residences but excluding
schools or monasteries.
(2) Public library, museum, gallery, or historic site.
(3) Cemetery, graveyard, mausoleum, provided no graves, burial
vaults, etc., are located within 40 feet of a property line.
(4) Emergency service institution, firehouse, ambulance station, or
police station.
(5) Active recreation areas, provided that they are an accessory use to
a place or worship.
B. Class 2 Community Level uses.
(1) School, public or private, sectarian or nonsectarian, elementary or
secondary, excluding a college or university.
(2) Places of worship in conjunction with a school and/or convent,
monastery.
(3) Active recreation areas, provided that they are an accessory use to
a school or place of worship.
C. Class 3 Regional Level uses.
(1) Medical, surgical, and rehabilitation hospital.
§ 680-185 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-186
1:771
§ 680-187. Conditional uses. [Amended 3-7-2007 by Ord. No. 526]
§ 680-188. Dimensional standards.
(2) College or university.
(3) Active recreation areas, provided that they are an accessory use to
a college or university.
A. All permitted uses shall require conditional use approval when the
following is involved:
(1) Class 1 Neighborhood Level.
(a) The construction of a building or structure that exceeds 3,000
square feet.
(b) The construction of an addition to an existing building or
structure that exceeds 1,000 square feet.
(2) Class 2 Community Level.
(a) The construction of a building or structure that exceeds 3,000
square feet.
(b) The construction of an addition to an existing building or
structure that exceeds 1,000 square feet.
(3) Class 3 Regional Level.
(a) The construction of a building or structure that exceeds 3,000
square feet. However, if the building or structure is identified
on a master plan that has been approved by Borough Council,
at a public hearing after review by the Borough's Planning
Commission and any other agency or consultant deemed
necessary by Council, then conditional use is not required.
(b) The construction of an addition to an existing building or
structure that exceeds 1,000 square feet. However, if the
addition to this building or structure is identified on a master
plan that has been approved by Borough Council, at a public
hearing after review by the Borough's Planning Commission
and any other agency or consultant deemed necessary by
Council, then conditional use is not required.
(c) The construction of a student residence hall.
B. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements of § 680-189 of this
article and § 680-55 of this chapter.
A. Each class of use shall comply with the following dimensional
regulations:
§ 680-186 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-188
1:772
Class 1 Uses Class 2 Uses Class 3 Uses
Minimum lot size 2 acres 8 acres 20 acres
Maximum total
building coverage
20% — —
Maximum total
impervious coverage
35% 40% 35%
Minimum building
setback from any
property line
30 feet 60 feet 150 feet(1)
Minimum parking and
service area setback
15 feet 30 feet 75 feet
NOTES:
(1) For any building over 40 feet in height, buildings are allowed up to
a height of 60 feet provided that for every five feet over 40 feet,
they are set back an additional 10 feet beyond the required 150
feet. Architectural features, such as clock towers or mechanical or
utility features are allowed an additional 20 feet in height (to 80
feet), provided these areas are not intended for human occupancy.
B. Building or structure height.
(1) All Class 1 uses: 35 feet; however, steeples or bell towers are
allowed to exceed this by 20 feet, provided that they contain no
habitable/usable space.
(2) All Class 2 uses: 35 feet; however, steeples or bell towers are
allowed to exceed this by 20 feet, provided that they contain no
habitable/usable space.
(3) All Class 3 uses: 40 feet; however buildings are allowed to exceed
this requirement by 20 feet (to 60 feet), provided that for every five
feet over 40 feet, they are set back an additional 10 feet from any
property line. Architectural features, such as clock towers or
mechanical or utility features are allowed an additional 20 feet in
height (to 80 feet), provided these areas are not intended for
human occupancy and are designed to be architecturally
compatible with the building.
C. Recreation areas.
(1) All recreation areas shall have the following setback from any
property line:
(a) Class 1 use: 20 feet.
(b) Class 2 use: 65 feet.
(c) Class 3 use: 100 feet.
§ 680-188 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-188
1:773
§ 680-189. Development regulations.
§ 680-190. Conditional use regulations.
All classes of uses shall meet the following:
(2) Borough Council may require that this setback contain buffer
landscaping. This landscaping shall contain, at least, a mix of
conifers and deciduous shrubs and trees.
A. Classes 1 and 2 uses must have access to a road of collector status or
greater.
B. Class 3 uses must have access to a road of primary arterial status or
greater.
C. All classes of uses.
(1) All development shall comply with the parking and loading
requirements of Article IX and the sign regulations of Article XXIII
of this chapter.
(2) All uses shall be connected to the Borough by a safe and convenient
pedestrian circulation system.
(3) Service and loading areas, dumpsters, and similar site elements
shall not be located within the view of a public street, and shall be
adequately screened from view.
(4) Increased planting buffers, wooden fences, or other measures may
be required by Borough Council to minimize potential conflicts, or
to reduce anticipated levels of noise caused by the following:
loading docks, trash receptacles, parking lots, service driveways,
active recreation areas or large nonresidential buildings adjacent
to neighborhoods or open space areas without adequate buffering.
A. Borough Council may require a traffic impact study, pursuant to
§ 680-59 of this chapter.
B. All buildings shall avoid a long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls or
roof planes. In keeping with the character of the Borough of
Collegeville, the scale and massing of the structure shall be designed to
create a structure that is in keeping with the traditional appearance of
Collegeville and the region. Architectural features such as staggered
setbacks, bay windows, gables, dormers, decorative parapets or
chimneys, and various types of wall facings may be used to achieve this.
§ 680-188 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-190
1:774
ARTICLE XXV
Floodplain Conservation District
[Amended 3-2-2016 by Ord. No. 578]
§ 680-191. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,238 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of Collegeville Borough does hereby order
as follows.
§ 680-192. General provisions.
A. Intent. The intent of this article is to:
(1) Protect areas of the floodplain necessary to contain floodwaters.
(2) Permit only those uses in the floodplain that are compatible with
preserving natural conditions and stream flow.
(3) Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community
by preventing development in areas prone to flooding.
(4) Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in
order to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
(5) Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
(6) Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units, and its residents, by preventing excessive
development in areas subject to flooding.
(7) Comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements.
B. Applicability. The Floodplain Conservation District is defined and
established as a district applicable to those areas of the Borough
subject to inundation by the waters of the one-hundred-year flood as
delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Montgomery
County, Pennsylvania, as prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, dated March 2, 2016, and subsequent revisions
thereto. Said floodplain areas shall consist of the following specific
areas:
(1) Zones A and AE identified on the effective FIRM or identified after
the FIRM effective date through the letter of map revision (LOMR)
process.
238. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 680-191 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-192
1:775
(2) Soils with a frequency of flooding of 1% or greater per year, as
delineated by the Natural Resources Conservation Service, United
States Department of Agriculture Web-Based Soil Survey (available
online at http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/), including the
following soils:
(a) Bowmansville (Bo).
(b) Knauers (Bo).
(c) Gilbraltar (Gc).
(d) Hatboro (Ha).
(e) Rowland (Rt).
(f) Rowland (RwA).
(g) Rowland (RwB).
(h) Urban Land Occasionally Flooded (UIA).
(3) In lieu of the above, Collegeville Borough may require the applicant
to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be
undertaken only by professional engineers or others of
demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical
methods used correctly reflect currently accepted technical
concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted
in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by the
Borough.
(4) The Floodplain Conservation District shall be delineated according
to FEMA's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Collegeville
Borough, which is hereby made a part of this article, and additional
area based on soils as described in this article. The FIRM is
available for inspection at the Borough office.
(5) The Floodplain Conservation District shall be deemed an overlay on
any zoning district now or hereafter applicable to any lot.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any
construction or development anywhere within Collegeville Borough
unless a permit has been obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator.
(7) A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures.
C. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article supersedes any other
conflicting provisions which may be in effect in the Floodplain
Conservation District. However, any other ordinance provisions shall
remain in full force and effect to the extent that those provisions are
§ 680-192 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-192
1:776
§ 680-193. Definitions.
more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the provisions
of this article, the more restrictive shall apply.
D. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase of this article shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such a decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
the article, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this
purpose the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be
severable.
E. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(1) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods
may occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by
debris. This article does not imply that areas outside the Floodplain
Conservation District, or that land uses permitted within such
areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
(2) This article shall not create liability on the part of Collegeville
Borough or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
A. General. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in
this article shall be interpreted so as to give this article its most
reasonable application.
B. Specific definitions.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundredyear
flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zone AE that indicates the water
surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The
BFE is also shown on the FIS profile, and can be determined for Zone A
floodplains.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
§ 680-192 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-193
1:777
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to subdivision of land,
construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion, or
alteration of buildings or other structures, the placement of
manufactured homes, streets and other paving, utilities, fill, grading
and excavation, mining, dredging, drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXISTING STRUCTURE/EXISTING CONSTRUCTION — A structure for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction
of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The Official Map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards
and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood
Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse, and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
§ 680-193 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-193
1:778
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.
FLOODWAY FRINGE — That part of the floodplain adjacent to and
extending from the floodway and subject to inundation by the onehundred-
year flood.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirements of this article.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission (PHMC) as meeting the criteria for individual
listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Pennsylvania
Historical and Museum Commission (PHMC) as contributing to the
historical significance of a National Register historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the PHMC to be eligible to
qualify for listing in the National Register; or
(2)
Designated as historic by a municipal ordinance:
Identified individually or as part of a local historic district by
a zoning ordinance under the authority of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code;239 or
(a)
Located in a local historic district that has been certified by the
Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission as meeting
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Historic District Act.240
(b)
(3)
239. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
240. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 8001 et seq.
§ 680-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-193
1:779
and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition, or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall
minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this article and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. Any
construction started after February 15, 1980, and before the effective
start date of this article is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time
the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within
180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
ONE HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also referred to
as the "one-percent frequency flood," or the "base flood," as defined by
FEMA in the Flood Insurance Study for Collegeville Borough.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after February 15, 1980, and, as
such, would be required to be compliant with the regulations of the
NFIP.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred on or before February 15, 1980, and,
as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations of
the NFIP.
§ 680-193 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-193
1:780
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — A census tract or group of census tracts
eligible for the Montgomery County Revitalization Program and
identified in the adopted municipal revitalization plan.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The regulatory flood elevation
is the elevation to which development is regulated for purposes of
elevation and/or dry floodproofing. It is equal to the base flood elevation
(BFE) plus a freeboard of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A or AE.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and
subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing parks,
when such development is located in all, or a designated portion of, a
floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within
12 months after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time
extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction
of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck;
(3)
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
(4)
§ 680-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-193
1:781
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage (or repetitive loss when a repetitive
loss provision is used) regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local
code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions. For alteration of historic structures, see
§ 680-195D(5).
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building
code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable
to new construction in all municipalities whether administered by the
municipality, a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry.
Applicable to residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted
the International Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building
Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction standard applicable with
the state floodplain construction. For coordination purposes, references
to the above are made specifically to various sections of the IRC and the
IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
§ 680-193 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-193
1:782
§ 680-194. Identification of floodplain areas.
required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4),
or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
A. Identification.
(1) The Floodplain Conservation District shall be any areas of
Collegeville Borough classified as special flood hazard areas
(SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated March 2, 2016 and
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or
the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
(2) The Floodplain Conservation District shall also include areas with
soils listed in this article, along with any community identified flood
hazard areas.
(3) The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent
revisions and amendments are hereby adopted by Collegeville
Borough and declared to be a part of this article.
B. Description and special requirements of the Floodplain Conservation
District. The Floodplain Conservation District shall consist of the
following specific areas/districts:
(1) The AE Floodway Area shall be those areas identified as floodway
within Zone AE on the FIRM as well as those floodway areas which
have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those floodplain areas where no floodway has been
identified in the FIS. The floodway represents the channel of a
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing
the water surface elevation by more than one foot at any point.
(a) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill,
new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development shall be permitted unless it has been
demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(b) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
§ 680-193 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-194
1:783
(2) The AE Area shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(a) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development would not, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE than
one foot at any point.
(b) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection regional
office.
(3) The A Area/District shall be the areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no onepercent-
annual-chance flood elevations have been provided. For
these areas, elevation and floodway information from other federal,
state, or other acceptable source shall be used when available.
Where other acceptable information is not available, the elevation
shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on the
boundary of the Floodplain Conservation District which is nearest
the construction site. In lieu of the above, the municipality may
require the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or
others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review
by the municipality.
(4) Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas
where Collegeville Borough has identified local flood hazard or
ponding areas, as delineated and adopted on a Local Flood Hazard
Map using best available topographic data and locally derived
information such as flood of record, historic high water marks, soils
or approximate study methodologies.
C. Changes in identification of area. The Floodplain Conservation District
may be revised or modified by Borough Council where studies or
information provided by a qualified agency or person documents the
need for such revision. However, prior to any such change, approval
must be obtained from FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but
not later than six months after the date such information becomes
available, a community shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting
technical or scientific data.
§ 680-194 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-194
1:784
§ 680-195. Uses permitted in Floodplain Conservation District.
D. Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any identified
floodplain boundary arise, an initial determination shall be made by the
Collegeville Planning Commission and any party aggrieved by this
decision or determination may appeal to Borough Council. The burden
of proof shall be on the appellant.
E. Corporate boundary changes. Prior to development occurring in areas
where annexation or other corporate boundary changes are proposed
or have occurred, the community shall review flood hazard data
affecting the lands subject to boundary changes. The community shall
adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in areas subject to annexation
or corporate boundary changes which meet or exceed those in 44 CFR
60.3.
A. Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted by right in
the Floodplain Conservation District in compliance with the
requirements of this section:
(1) Up to half of any required yard setback area on an individual
residential lot may extend into the Floodplain Conservation
District.
(2) Open space uses that are primarily passive in character shall be
permitted to extend into the floodplain, including:
(a) Wildlife sanctuaries, nature preserves, forest preserves,
fishing areas, passive areas of public and private parklands,
and reforestation.
(b) Stream bank stabilization.
(3) Forestry operations reviewed by the Montgomery County
Conservation District.
(4) The following floodplain crossings are permitted, provided
disturbance to any existing woodlands and degradation of water
quality are minimized to the greatest extent practicable:
(a) Agricultural crossings by farm vehicles and livestock.
(b) Driveways serving single-family detached dwelling units,
roadways, recreational trails, railroads, and utilities.
(5) Agricultural uses conducted in compliance with methods
prescribed in the latest version of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Manual. In the event that the municipality has a Riparian Corridor
Conservation District or similar regulation, the more restrictive
regulation shall apply.
§ 680-194 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-195
1:785
(6) Public sewer and/or water lines and public utility transmission lines
running along the corridor.
B. Uses prohibited in the floodplain conservation district. Any use or
activity not authorized within § 680-195A, herein, shall be prohibited
within the Floodplain Conservation District and the following activities
and facilities are specifically prohibited:
(1) No new construction, alteration, or improvement of buildings and
any other type of permanent structure, including fences, shall be
permitted in the floodway or the one-hundred-year floodplain.
(2) New construction of buildings or placement of fill within the onehundred-
year floodplain is prohibited.
(3) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse.
(4) Clearing of all existing vegetation, except where such clearing is
necessary to prepare land for a use permitted under § 680-195A,
herein, and where the effects of these actions are mitigated by
reestablishment of vegetation.
(5) Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other chemicals in
excess of prescribed industry standards.
(6) Roads or driveways, except where permitted as corridor crossings
in compliance with § 680-195A, herein.
(7) Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area not designed to
accommodate adequately the type and volume.
(8) Parking lots.
(9) Subsurface sewage disposal areas.
(10) Sod farming.
(11) Stormwater basins, including necessary berms and outfall
facilities.
C. Nonconforming structures and uses in the Floodplain District. The
provisions of this article do not require any changes or improvements to
be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an
improvement is made to any existing structure, the provisions of
§ 680-195D of this article and Article VII shall apply.
D. Improvements to existing structures in the Floodplain Conservation
District. The following provisions shall apply whenever any
improvement is made to an existing structure located within any
Floodplain Conservation District:
§ 680-195 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-195
1:786
§ 680-196. Variances.
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any floodway area that would cause any increase in
the elevation of the base flood elevation.
(2) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any AE Floodway Area, as defined in § 680-194B,
that would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(3) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
undertaken in the direction of the stream bank.
(4) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of
any kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this article.
(5) Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would
constitute a substantial improvement as defined in this article must
comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause
removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained
from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation
Officer. Any exemption from the ordinance requirements will be the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(6) The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
(7) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
article.
A. General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this article
would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder,
developer or landowner, Collegeville Borough may, upon request, grant
relief from the strict application of the requirements.
B. Variance procedures and conditions.
(1) For a use other than those permitted in § 680-195, an application
seeking approval by variance shall be forwarded to the Zoning
Hearing Board along with required studies or information and the
findings of the Zoning Officer.
§ 680-195 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-196
1:787
(2) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
(3) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that
would, together with all other existing and anticipated
development, increase the BFE more than one foot at any point.
(4) No variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements
pertaining specifically to development regulated by § 680-198D
(pertaining to special technical requirements for activities
requiring a special permit) or to development which may endanger
human life [§ 680-197C(1)].
C. Special requirements for subdivisions. All subdivision proposals and
development proposals containing at least 50 lots or at least five acres,
whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas where base flood elevation
data are not available shall be supported by hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analyses that determine base flood elevations and floodway
information. The analyses shall be prepared by a licensed professional
engineer in a format required by FEMA for a conditional letter of map
revision or letter of map revision.
D. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(1) Within the Floodplain Conservation District, manufactured homes
shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from
the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
(2) Where permitted by variance within the Floodplain Conservation
District, all manufactured homes, and any improvements thereto,
shall be:
(a) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(b) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation;
(c) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement; and
(d) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the base flood elevation.
(3) Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance
with the manufacturer's installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009
International Residential Building Code or the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development's Permanent
Foundations for Manufactured Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or
latest revision thereto, shall apply and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401
through 405.
§ 680-196 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-196
1:788
(4) Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto
and 34 Pa. Code, as amended where appropriate and/or applicable
to units where the manufacturer's standards for anchoring cannot
be provided or were not established for the proposed installation.
E. Special requirements for recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles in
Zone AE must either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(3) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in
§ 680-196D.
F. Variance conditions.
(1) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(2) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach
the reasonable conditions and safeguards outlined herein. These
conditions and safeguards are necessary in order to protect the
public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the
municipality.
(3) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
notify the applicant, in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(4) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause, including:
[1] That there are unique physical circumstances or
conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or
shallowness of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is
due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of the
zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which
the property is located.
[2] That because of such physical circumstances or
conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be
developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the
zoning ordinance and that the authorization of a variance
§ 680-196 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-196
1:789
§ 680-197. Technical provisions for granting a variance.
is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
[3] That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by
the appellant.
[4] That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(5) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by Collegeville Borough. In addition, a report of all
variances granted during the year shall be included in the biennial
report to FEMA.
A. General. In granting any variance, Collegeville Borough shall attach the
following technical provisions to the proposal for which the variance
has been granted. These conditions and safeguards are necessary in
order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of
the municipality.
(1) Pertaining to the alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(a) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities
which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
Borough, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
(b) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the
activity will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of
the watercourse in any way.
§ 680-196 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-197
1:790
(c) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development shall be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
(2) The Borough shall require technical or scientific data to be
submitted to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) within six
months of the completion of any new construction, development, or
other activity resulting in changes in the BFE. A LOMR or
conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is required for:
(a) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(b) Any development occurring in Zone AE without a designated
floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot in the
base flood elevation; or
(c) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited
to installing culverts and bridges).
(3) Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed by
variance within any Floodplain Conservation District shall be
undertaken in strict compliance with the provisions contained in
this article and any other applicable codes, ordinances and
regulations. In addition, when such development is proposed within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse, a permit shall be obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection regional office.
B. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
(1) Residential structures.
(a) In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to,
or above, the regulatory flood elevation. The design and
construction standards and specifications contained in the
2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the 2009
International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be used.
(b) In A Zones where there are no base flood elevations specified
on the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to,
or above, the regulatory flood elevation determined in
accordance with § 680-194B(4) of this article.
(c) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most
§ 680-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-197
1:791
recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
(2) Nonresidential structures.
(a) In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the
space enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
[1] Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
and
[2] Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.
(b) In A Zones where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or
completely floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation determined in accordance with § 680-194B(4) of this
article.
(c) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the WI or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or with some
other equivalent standard. All plans and specifications for such
floodproofing shall be accompanied by a statement certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect which states
that the proposed design and methods of construction are in
conformance with the above referenced standards.
(d) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in
the 2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most
recent revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be used.
(3) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area other
than a basement, shall be designed and constructed to allow
for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose
§ 680-197 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-197
1:792
of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term
"fully enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces.
(b) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building
need not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall
comply, at a minimum, with the following requirements:
(a) The structure shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to
the storage of tools, material, and equipment related to the
principal use or activity.
(b) Floor area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
(c) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(d) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(e) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the
regulatory flood elevation.
(f) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(g) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(h) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation
or movement and shall be designed to automatically provide
for the entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
[1] A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
space.
§ 680-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-197
1:793
[2] The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
[3] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Special technical requirements.
(1) Development which may endanger human life. In accordance with
the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,241 and the
regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or
substantially improved structure which will be used for the
production or storage of any of the following dangerous materials
or substances, or will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply of more than 550 gallons, or other
comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises, or will involve the production, storage,
or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject to
the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
241. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 680-197 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-197
1:794
(p) Sulfur and sulfur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(2) Any structure of the kind described in Subsection C(1), above, shall
be prohibited within any floodway area. Where permitted by
variance within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved residential structure shall be elevated to
remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with § 680-197B.
(3) Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in § 680-197C(1), above,
shall be prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from
the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
(4) Where permitted by a variance within any identified floodplain
area, any new or substantially improved structure of the kind
described in § 680-197C(1), above, shall be built in accordance with
§ 680-197B, including:
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely
dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation; and
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood elevation.
(c) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" (United States Army Corps of Engineers, June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
watertight standard.
D. Design and construction standards. The following minimum standards
shall apply for all construction and development proposed within any
Floodplain Conservation District:
(1) Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only—sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
§ 680-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-197
1:795
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to
and approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
(2) Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
(3) Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(a) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer
facilities and systems shall be located, designed and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages and the
infiltration of floodwaters.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(c) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any Floodplain Conservation District except in strict
compliance with all state and local regulations for such
systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located so
as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it, during a
flood.
(d) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA
No. 348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages,
and the International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be
utilized.
(4) Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
(5) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
(6) Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life,
and not listed in § 680-197C(1), Development which may endanger
human life, shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood
elevation and/or floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
(7) Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
§ 680-197 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-197
1:796
(8) Anchoring.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(b) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(9) Floors, walls and ceilings.
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the
flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing
structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be designed and constructed of materials that are "waterresistant"
and will withstand inundation.
(d) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
"water-resistant" material.
(10) Paints and adhesives.
(a) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of "marine" or "water-resistant" quality.
(b) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(c) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a "marine" or "water-resistant" paint or other
finishing material.
(11) Electrical components.
(a) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above
the base flood elevation.
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(12) Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory
flood elevation.
§ 680-197 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-197
1:797
§ 680-198. Activities requiring special permits.
(13) Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
(14) Uniform Construction Code coordination. The Standards and
Specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405),
as amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply
to the above and other sections and subsections of this article, to
the extent that they are more restrictive and/or supplement the
requirements of this article.
(a) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402,
and Appendix G.
(b) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the
latest edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R323,
Appendix AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. General. In accordance with the administrative regulations
promulgated by the Department of Community and Economic
Development to implement the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act,242 the activities indicated in § 680-198A(1) and (2) shall be
prohibited within any Floodplain Conservation District unless a special
permit has been issued by Collegeville Borough. In order to apply for a
special permit, a variance must first be obtained, as outlined in
§ 680-196.
(1) The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(a) Hospitals.
(b) Nursing homes.
(c) Jails or prisons.
(2) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
B. Application requirements for special permits. Applicants for special
permits shall provide five copies of the following items:
242. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 680-197 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-198
1:798
(1) A written request, including a completed special permit application
form.
(2) A small scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
(3) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date;
(b) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(c) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways,
and parking areas, with information concerning widths,
pavement types and construction, and elevations;
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural
and man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed
activity or development;
(f) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and
spot elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and
information concerning the flow of water, including direction
and velocities;
(g) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and
any other improvements; and
(h) Any other information which the municipality considers
necessary for adequate review of the application.
(4) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing
the following:
(a) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building
elevations, as appropriate;
(b) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any
other floor;
(c) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors
associated with the base flood elevation;
§ 680-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-198
1:799
(d) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(e) Cross section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(f) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways, including existing and proposed grades; and
(g) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
(5) The following data and documentation:
(a) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he
represents;
(b) Certification from a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect that the proposed
construction has been adequately designed to protect against
damage from the base flood elevation;
(c) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the
development during the course of a base flood elevation,
including a statement concerning the effects such pollution
may have on human life;
(d) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the effects the proposed
development will have on base flood elevation elevations and
flows;
(e) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete
and accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose
buoyant materials or debris that may possibly exist or be
located on the site below the base flood elevation and the
effects such materials and debris may have on base flood
elevation elevations and flows;
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development;"
§ 680-198 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-198
1:800
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control;
(h) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a
permit for any activity regulated by the Department of
Environmental Protection under Section 302 of Act
1978-166;243 and
(i) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which
the site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of
a base flood.
C. Application review procedures. Upon receipt of an application for a
special permit by Collegeville Borough, the following procedures shall
apply in addition to those of § 680-192.
(1) Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying
documentation shall be forwarded to the County Planning
Commission by registered or certified mail for its review and
recommendations. Copies of the application shall also be
forwarded to the Collegeville Planning Commission and
Collegeville Engineer for review and comment.
(2) If an application is received that is incomplete, Collegeville
Borough shall notify the applicant, in writing, stating in what
respect the application is deficient.
(3) If Collegeville Borough decides to disapprove an application, it
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval.
(4) If Collegeville Borough approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent
information, with the Department of Community and Economic
Development, by registered or certified mail, within five working
days after the date of approval.
(5) Before issuing the special permit, Collegeville Borough shall allow
the Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days
after receipt of the notification by the Department to review the
application and decision made by Collegeville Borough.
(6) If Collegeville Borough does not receive any communication from
the Department of Community and Economic Development during
the thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the
applicant.
243. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.302.
§ 680-198 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-198
1:801
§ 680-199. Administration.
(7) If the Department of Community and Economic Development
should decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify
Collegeville Borough and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons
for the disapproval, and Collegeville Borough shall not issue the
special permit.
D. Special technical requirements.
(1) In addition to the requirements of § 680-197 of this article, the
following minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed
development requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict
between any of the following requirements and those in § 680-197
of this article or in any other code, ordinance, or regulation, the
more restrictive provision shall apply.
(2) No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can
be determined that the structure or activity will be located,
constructed and maintained in a manner which will:
(a) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and
any occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new
structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so that:
[1] The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood elevation without any lateral movement or damage to
either the structure itself, or to any of its equipment or
contents below the BFE;
[2] The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation; and
[3] The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any
time during the base flood elevation.
(b) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
(3) All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications,
who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect
currently accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses,
computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a
thorough technical review by Collegeville Borough and the
Department of Community and Economic Development.
A. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Borough Manager or
his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
article and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 680-198 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-199
1:802
B. Permits required. A permit shall be required before any construction or
development is undertaken within the Floodplain Conservation District.
In the case of a proposed hospital, nursing home, jail, prison, or
manufactured home park, the permit referred to here would be the
special permit of § 680-198.
C. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
(1) The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has
been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be
in conformance with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other
necessary government permits required by state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the
Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as
amended); the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as
amended);244 and the United States Clean Water Act, Section 404,
33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued until this determination
has been made.
(3) In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the history of
repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss issues can
be addressed before the permit is issued.
(4) During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or
other authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine
that the work is progressing in compliance with the information
provided on the permit application and with all applicable
municipal laws and ordinances. The Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections during and upon completion of the work
as are necessary.
(5) In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator
shall have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises
or development in the Floodplain Conservation District, upon
presentation of proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to
enforce the provisions of this article.
(6) In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work
does not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws
and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator
shall revoke the permit and report such fact to Borough Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
244. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq. 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq., and 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.,
respectively.
§ 680-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-199
1:803
(7) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated
with the requirements of this article, including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
(8) The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest revisions
thereof.
D. Application procedures and requirements.
(1) Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by Collegeville
Borough. Such application shall contain the following:
(a) Name and address of applicant.
(b) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(c) Name and address of contractor.
(d) Site location, including address.
(e) Listing of other permits or variances required.
(f) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost,
including a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value
of the building before the flood damage occurred where
appropriate.
(2) If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any Floodplain Conservation District, applicants for
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient
detail and clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to
determine that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage and conform to the requirements of this and all
other applicable codes and ordinances.
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(d) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
(e) Building materials will be flood-resistant.
(f) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been
used.
§ 680-199 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-199
1:804
(g) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed
and/or located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
(3) Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any
other pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(a) A completed permit application form.
(b) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of
one inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
[1] North arrow, scale, and date;
[2] Topographic contour lines, if available;
[3] The location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, and other improvements, including the location
of any existing or proposed subdivision and development;
[4] The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
[5] The location of any existing bodies of water or
watercourses, the Floodplain Conservation District, and, if
available, information pertaining to the floodway, and the
flow of water, including direction and velocities.
(c) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at a scale of one inch being equal to 100
feet or less showing the following:
[1] The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed
building based upon North American Vertical Datum of
1988;
[2] The elevation of the base flood;
[3] Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34
Pa. Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(d) The following data and documentation:
[1] If available, information concerning flood depths,
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
factors associated with a base flood elevation, and detailed
information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
[2] Documentation, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of
any proposed development within an AE Area/District
without floodway when combined with all other existing
§ 680-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-199
1:805
and anticipated development, will not increase the base
flood elevation more than one foot at any point.
[3] A document, certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, which states that the proposed
construction or development has been adequately
designed to withstand the pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces associated with the base flood elevation.
Such statement shall include a description of the type and
extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
[4] Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 680-197D(6), Storage, and Development which may
endanger human life,245 including:
[a] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 680-197C(1) and
§ 680-197D(6) which are intended to be used,
produced, stored or otherwise maintained on site, and
[b] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or
spills of the dangerous materials or substances listed
in § 680-197C(1) during a base flood.
[5] The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's Planning Module for Land
Development.
[6] Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan
meeting the requirements of the Department of
Environmental Protection, to implement and maintain
erosion and sedimentation control.
(e) Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee,
payable to the municipality based upon the estimated cost of
the proposed construction as determined by the Floodplain
Administrator.
E. Review by County Conservation District. A copy of all applications and
plans for any proposed construction or development in any Floodplain
Conservation District to be considered for approval shall be submitted
by the Floodplain Administrator to the County Conservation District for
review and comment prior to the issuance of a permit. The
recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by
the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into the
proposed plan.
245. Editor's Note: See § 680-197C(1).
§ 680-199 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-199
1:806
F. Review of application by others. A copy of all plans and applications for
any proposed construction or development in any Floodplain
Conservation District to be considered for approval may be submitted
by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate agencies and/
or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal Engineer, etc.) for
review and comment.
G. Changes. After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain
Administrator, no changes of any kind shall be made to the application,
permit or any of the plans, specifications or other documents submitted
with the application without the written consent or approval of the
Floodplain Administrator. Requests for any such change shall be in
writing, and shall be submitted by the applicant to Floodplain
Administrator for consideration.
H. Placards. In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
issue a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the
time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of
the permit, the date of its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
I. Start of construction.
(1) Work on the proposed construction shall begin within 180 days
after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall expire
unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The term, "start of construction" shall be understood
as defined in § 680-193B of this article.
(2) Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is
submitted by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and
reasonable cause for the Floodplain Administrator to approve such
a request.
J. Enforcement.
(1) Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized municipal representative determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this article, or of any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such
alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(a) Be in writing;
(b) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(c) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for
the performance of any act it requires;
(d) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case
may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall
§ 680-199 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-199
1:807
be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or
agent when a copy thereof has been served with such notice
by any other method authorized or required by the laws of this
state; and
(e) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this article.
(2) Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this article or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall pay a fine to Collegeville Borough of not less than $25 nor
more than $600 plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above
penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action
in equity for the proper enforcement of this article. The imposition
of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this
article shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it
to continue and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations and noncompliance within a reasonable
time. Any development initiated or any structure or building
constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated, in
noncompliance with this article may be declared by the Borough
Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
K. Appeals.
(1) Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of
this article may appeal to the Borough Council. Such appeal must
be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination
or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
(2) Upon receipt of such appeal the Borough Council shall set a time
and place, within not less than 10 or not more than 30 days, for the
purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at
which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
(3) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough Council may
seek relief there from by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of
this state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act.246
246. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 680-199 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-199
1:808
ARTICLE XXVI
SSC Steep Slope Conservation District
§ 680-200. Declaration of legislative intent.
In expansion of the statement of community development objectives found
in Article I of this chapter, the specific intent of the Steep Slope
Conservation (SSC) District is to:
A. To combine with other zoning requirements, as an overlay, certain
restrictions for steep slope areas to promote the general health, safety,
and welfare of the residents of the Borough of Collegeville.
B. To prevent inappropriate development of steep slope areas, in order to
avoid potential dangers for human usage caused by erosion, stream
siltation, soil failure leading to structural collapse or damage, and/or
unsanitary conditions and associated hazards.
C. To minimize danger to public health and safety by promoting safe and
sanitary drainage.
D. To permit only those uses that are compatible with development of
steep slope areas in order to avoid accelerated erosion, soil failure,
accelerated seepage, or other conditions which may create a danger to
life and/or property.
E. To permit only those uses in steep slope areas that are compatible with
the preservation of existing natural features, including vegetative
cover, by restricting the grade of steep slope areas.
F. To promote the ecological balance among those natural system
elements (such as wildlife, vegetation, and aquatic life) that could be
adversely affected by inappropriate development of steep slope areas.
G. To prevent development that would cause excessive erosion and
siltation, and a resultant reduction in the water-carrying capacity of the
watercourses which flow through or around the Borough with the
consequences of increased flood crests and flood hazards within the
Borough and to both upriver and downriver municipalities.
H. To prevent landowners in the Borough and/or other municipalities from
the possible harmful effects of inappropriate grading and development
on steep slope areas.
I. To protect the entire Borough from inappropriate development on steep
slope areas, which could have an effect upon subsequent expenditures
for public works and disaster relief and, thus, adversely affect the
economic well-being of the Borough.
J. To promote the provision of safe and reliable accessways, parking areas
and utility systems serving developments on or around steep slope
areas, where most sensitive grading and siting is essential.
§ 680-200 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-200
1:809
§ 680-201. Definition and establishment.
§ 680-202. SSC District overlay concept.
The SSC District shall be deemed to be an overlay on any zoning district(s)
now or hereafter enacted to regulate the use of land in the Borough of
Collegeville.
K. To assist in the implementation of pertinent state laws concerning
erosion and sediment control practices, including but not limited to
Clean Streams Law, P.L. 1987,247 and any subsequent amendments
thereto, as administered by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PADEP) and the Montgomery County
Conservation District.
A. The SSC District is defined and established as those areas of the
Borough having steep slopes, as defined in Article II of this chapter.
B. Dispute procedures. Should any dispute arise as to the applicability of
the SSC District regulations, the following procedures shall apply:
(1) Any party aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Officer, either
because of an interpretation of the exact location of the SSC
District boundary or because criteria used in delineating the
boundary as set forth in Subsection A of this section is or has
become incorrect because of changes due to natural or other
causes, may appeal said decision to the Zoning Hearing Board as
provided for in Article IV of this chapter.
(2) The burden of proving the incorrectness of the Zoning Officer's
decision shall be on the applicant.
A. The SSC District shall have no effect on the permitted uses in the
underlying zoning district(s), except where said uses intended to be
located within the boundaries of the SSC District, and defined herein,
are in conflict with the permitted uses set forth in this article.
B. In those areas of the Borough of Collegeville where the SSC District
applies, the requirements of the SSC District shall supersede the
requirements of the underlying zoning district(s).
C. Should the SSC District boundaries be revised as a result of legislative
or administrative actions or judicial decision, the zoning requirements
applicable to the area in question shall revert to the requirements of the
underlying zoning district(s) without consideration to this article.
D. Should the zoning classification(s) of any parcel or any part thereof on
which the SSC District is an overlay be changed as a result of legislative
or administrative actions or judicial decision, such change(s) in
classification shall have no effect on boundaries of the SSC District,
247. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 680-200 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-202
1:810
§ 680-203. Land use and development regulations.
On those lands having a slope of 15% or more, as defined in Article II, the
SSC District shall apply and only those uses permitted in §§ 680-204 and
680-205 shall be permitted. Furthermore, all applications for development
of said areas as permitted in § 680-205 shall be accompanied by an erosion
and sediment control plan notwithstanding the minimum acreage
requirements of the Clean Streams Law, P.L. 1987,248 and any subsequent
amendments thereto. The plan shall comply with the erosion and sediment
control practices set forth in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual of PADEP, 1990, as well as other recognized conservation
practices.
§ 680-204. Conservation uses permitted.
The following uses and no other shall be permitted without the submission
of an erosion and sediment control plan:
unless an amendment to said boundaries was included as part of the
proceedings from which the subsequent change(s) originated.
A. In evaluating any proposed development plan, the erosion and sediment
control plan and any additional information submitted by the applicant
in support of the application, the Borough Planning Commission, the
Borough Engineer, and the Borough Council (where appropriate) shall
consider the following factors:
(1) The percentage of slope on the site.
(2) The extent and proposed disturbance of the existing vegetative
cover on the site.
(3) The soil types and underlying geology of the site.
(4) The length and extent of the slope both on the site in question and
on adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site.
(5) Evidence that the proposed development, any impervious ground
cover and the resultant disturbance to the land and existing
vegetative cover will not cause excessive runoff and/or related
environmental problems.
(6) The standards contained in Chapter 600, Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, §§ 600-30 and 600-31. [Amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II)]
A. Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserve, arboretum, and passive
recreation areas, including parks, but excluding enclosed structures.
248. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 680-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-204
1:811
§ 680-205. Uses permitted in areas of precautionary slope
permitted by conditional use.
The following uses are permitted by conditional use in areas of
precautionary slopes upon submission of an erosion and sediment pollution
control plan and supporting evidence as set forth in § 680-208:
B. Game farm or hunting preserve to the protection and propagation of
wildlife but excluding enclosed structures.
C. Forestry and reforestation in accordance with recognized soil
conservation practices, as contained in the Natural Resources
Conservation Service's Technical Guide.
D. Pasture and controlled grazing of animals in accordance with
recognized soil conservation practices, as contained in the Natural
Resources Conservation Service's Technical Guide.
E. Recreation uses, such as parks, with such activities as hiking, bicycling,
and bridle trails, camps, picnic areas, but excluding enclosed
structures.
F. Outdoor plant nursery or orchard in accordance with recognized soil
conservation practices as contained in the Natural Resources
Conservation Service's Technical Guide.
G. Cultivation and harvesting of crops in accordance with recognized soil
conservation practices, as contained in the Natural Resources
Conservation Service's Technical Guide.
H. Nonstructural accessory uses (except swimming pools), necessary for
the operation and maintenance of the above-permitted uses.
I. Similar uses to the above which are in compliance with the intent of this
article.
A. Front, side and rear yard and required lot area in the underlying zoning
district(s), provided that such yards are not to be used for an on-site
sewage disposal system, unless the said system meets the applicable
requirements of § 680-205D.
B. Sealed public water supply wells with the approval of PADEP.
C. Sanitary or storm sewers and stormwater detention basin with the
approval of the Borough Engineer and PADEP, as applicable.
D. Underground utility transmission lines. On-site sewer disposal systems,
when constructed in compliance with the Act 208 amendments to Act
537, the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.249
249. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 680-204 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-205
1:812
§ 680-206. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in the SSC District:
§ 680-207. Steep slopes provisions not applicable to lots in single
and separate ownership.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to lots which were held in single
and separate ownership as of the effective date of this article, unless and
until such lots become the subject of a subdivision or land development
application, in which event, the provisions of this article shall apply to
such subdivision and land development. Development of land with slopes in
excess of 15% on lots in single and separate ownership after the effective
date of this article, which are not the subject of a subdivision or land
development application or the issuance of a granting permit on terms
determined by the Borough Engineer, are not affected by this chapter.
§ 680-208. Administration.
Administration of this article is governed by Article III of this chapter. In
addition, the following requirements shall apply:
E. Extractive uses and barrow pits, when permitted in the underlying
zoning district(s), and when operated in accordance with recognized
soil conservation practices, as specified by PADEP.
F. Roads, access driveways, and parking facilities, when no viable
alternative is feasible, upon the determination of the Borough.
G. Similar uses to the above which are in compliance with the intent of this
article.
A. Freestanding structures, buildings and retaining walls, or swimming
pools, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the Borough Council
that the proposal will be sound from architectural, engineering and
environmental perspectives, the proposal will have no adverse impacts
on the health, safety, and welfare of the community, and there are no
viable alternatives. If the applicant can so demonstrate, the use may be
permitted by conditional use (§ 680-205, above).
B. The filling or removal of topsoil except when related to an activity
related to an approved special exception use.
C. Solid waste disposal or recycling uses.
D. Junkyards or other outdoor storage uses.
A. Application procedures. Before a permit is issued for any construction
or land disturbance activity on land within or affecting the SSC District,
the following material, in full or in pertinent parts, shall be submitted
for review by the Borough:
§ 680-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-208
1:813
(1) An earthmoving plan of the property which indicates existing
grades with contour lines at two-foot intervals and proposed grades
within the area of any proposed activity, disturbance, or
construction. All areas of prohibitive and/or precautionary slope
shall be shaded accordingly.
(2) A site plan indicating existing and proposed structures, other
impervious surfaces, storm drainage facilities and retaining walls.
The site plan also shall locate and identify existing vegetation and
ground cover within areas of prohibitive and precautionary slopes,
as well as proposed landscaping material to be installed.
(3) Architectural plans, elevations, and sections.
(4) A statement, signed and sealed by a registered architect or
engineer, explaining the building methods to be used in overcoming
foundation and other structural problems created by slope
conditions, preserving the natural watersheds and preventing soil
erosion and excessive surface water runoff to neighboring
properties and/or streets.
(5) Plan, profile, and typical cross-section of any proposed street,
emergency access or driveway within areas of steep slopes, with
the seal of a registered professional engineer thereon.
(6) A statement, signed by the owner or future occupant at the time of
subdivision, land development or building permit application, that
there is a full understanding of any difficulties associated with
access stemming from steep slopes. No zoning permit shall be
issued by the Zoning Officer, and no conditional use shall be
granted by the Borough Council, without the Borough Engineer's
review of this material and his recommendations thereon.
B. Standards and criteria for review of conditional use applications. In
evaluating any application for conditional use within areas of steep
slopes, the Borough Council shall determine consistency of the proposal
with the following:
(1) Disturbance to particularly sensitive features on the site shall be
minimized; special emphasis in planning for the site should be
given to the protection of:
(a) The steepest areas of slope, i.e., those approaching 25%.
(b) Soils with seasonal high water table.
(c) Underlying geology which comprises, or contributes to, a
major groundwater resource, including the flow of existing
springs.
(2) Disturbance shall be minimized where the length or area of steep
slope, both on the site and on adjacent lands within 200 feet of the
slope, is extensive.
§ 680-208 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-208
1:814
(3) The proposed development, any impervious ground cover and the
resultant disturbance to the land and existing vegetative cover will
not cause runoff and/or related environmental problems off the
site.
(4) Removal of, or disturbance to, existing vegetation on the site shall
be minimized. The proposed impacts on existing vegetation shall be
evaluated in terms of the potentially detrimental effects on slope
stability, transportation and recharge of stormwater, aesthetic and
traditional characters of the landscape, and existing drainage
patterns. Mitigation measures may be required by Borough Council
as it deems appropriate.
(5) Important visual qualities of the site shall, to the maximum extent
feasible, be retained; in addition to vegetation, these may include
hilltops/ridgelines, rock outcroppings and the natural terrain and
contours of the site.
(6) Road construction shall follow the natural topography, with cuts
and grading minimized.
(7) Innovative, imaginative building techniques that are well-situated
to slope conditions, shall be encouraged, consistent with other
applicable codes and regulations.
(8) The equilibrium of the slope, as characterized by the existing
interrelationships among the soil, water, and vegetation, shall be
disturbed as little as possible.
C. Uses and/or structures rendered nonconforming by the adoption of this
district. Following the adoption of this article, any use or structure
which is situated within the boundaries of the SSC District and which
does not conform to the permitted uses specified in §§ 680-204 and
680-205 of this article shall become a nonconforming use or structure,
regardless of its conformance to the district in which it is located
without consideration of this article. The expansion or continuance of
said nonconforming use or structure shall be governed by the
requirements of Article VII of this chapter. However, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall also ensure that the standards contained in
Subsection B of this section are applied to the expansion or continuance
of said nonconforming use or structure.
§ 680-208 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-208
1:815

ARTICLE XXVII
Small Wind Energy, Solar, and Geothermal Systems
[Added 5-4-2011 by Ord. No. 548]
§ 680-209. Legislative intent.
§ 680-210. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANNULAR SPACE — The space between the casing or well screen and the
wall of the borehole or between drilling pipe and casing or between two
separate strings of casing.
BOREHOLE — A hole drilled or bored into the earth, usually for exploratory
or economic purposes; a hole into which casing, screen, and other materials
may be installed to construct a well.
CASING — An impervious, durable pipe placed in a borehole to prevent
the walls of the borehole from caving, and to seal off surface drainage or
undesirable water, gas, or other fluids and prevent entrance into the well.
CLOSED-LOOP GEOTHERMAL BOREHOLE — A boring(s) drilled to
facilitate the installation of a pipe loop for a ground source heat pump
system whether circulating water, heat transfer fluid, or refrigerant using
direct exchange.
CLOSED-LOOP GEOTHERMAL HEATING/COOLING SYSTEM — A closed or
sealed system designed to heat and/or cool a dwelling or building which
circulates water, heat transfer fluid or refrigerant through underground
loops. The loops are installed either in closed-loop boreholes or horizontally
in trenches or ponds and exchange heat with the ground.
GEOTHERMAL HEATING/COOLING SYSTEM — A mechanism for heat
exchange which consists of the following basic elements: underground
loops of piping, heat transfer fluid, a heat pump, and air distribution system.
GEOTHERMAL WELL — A well(s) installed for the purpose of heating and/
or cooling the dwelling or building on a property.
A. The purpose of this article is to promote the use of solar energy and to
provide for the land development, installation and construction of
alternative energy systems in Collegeville Borough, subject to
reasonable conditions that will protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
B. This article also seeks to conserve and enhance property values with
the appropriate and reasonable installation of alternative energy
systems on structures and property lots.
C. The regulations and standards contained in this article are intended to
promote alternative energy usage while preserving the distinctive look
of the community and historic character of Collegeville Borough.
§ 680-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-210
1:817
GEOTHERMAL WELL INSTALLATION CONTRACTOR — Any individual in
immediate supervision of and/or responsible for the drilling of boreholes
used for the purpose of geothermal heating and/or cooling of a dwelling
or building. This individual is responsible for, among other things, boring,
closed-loop geothermal pipe installation, and grouting of boreholes.
HEAT EXCHANGER — A device, usually consisting of coils of pipe that
transfers heat from one medium to another; for example, from water to air
or water to water.
HEAT TRANSFER FLUID — Any liquid used specifically for the purpose of
transferring thermal energy from its source to another location.
OFF-GRID — That which is not connected to the public electric utility.
ON-GRID — That which is connected to the public electric utility.
OPEN-LOOP GEOTHERMAL HEATING/COOLING SYSTEM — An open or
unsealed system designed to heat and/or cool a building which uses a
ground water supply well to extract groundwater which is passed through a
heat pump and into any discharge well or other area.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS — Any device, structure or electronics
that converts wind energy into usable electrical energy through the use of
a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics.
SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT — Any device, structure or electronics that
converts solar energy into usable electrical energy, or uses solar energy to
heat liquids or produces hot air or performs any similar function through
the use of solar panels.
SOLAR PANEL — A device containing one or more receptive cells equal to
or greater than two square feet, the purpose of which is to convert solar
energy into electrical or thermal energy.
WIND TURBINE — A wind turbine is a machine which converts the kinetic
energy in wind into electricity.
§ 680-211. General regulations for small wind energy systems.
A. Conditional use. Small wind energy systems, including but not limited
to roof installation, off-grid installation, and on-grid installation shall be
allowed as a conditional use. The Borough shall consider the following
conditions when allowing for the installation of small wind energy
systems:
(1) Foundation analysis. Foundations plans and analysis shall be
submitted by a certified engineer for the installation of any tower
taller than 35 feet.
(2) Plot plan. As part of the conditional use application, a plot plan
shall be submitted. The plot plan shall identify the property lines,
lot area, and location of existing, natural or man-made features,
location of where the proposed small wind energy system is to be
§ 680-210 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-211
1:818
located, and the setbacks from the property lines, public rights-ofway,
and overhead public utility lines.
B. Compliance with regulations. A small wind energy system shall comply
with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. The system shall
comply with the National Electrical Code and the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code. For installations subject to Federal Aviation
Administration regulations, all lighting, construction, alteration, height
requirements, and maintenance shall be conducted in accordance with
the regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration. A building
permit or zoning permit shall be submitted to the Borough for review to
document the structural integrity of the foundation, base, tower, and all
appurtenant structures. All information submitted to the Borough shall
be sealed by a certified licensed professional engineer in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and subject to review and approval by
the Borough Engineer and Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Environmental consideration. Small wind energy systems shall not be
installed in any area designated as floodplain, riparian corridor, both
zone 1 and zone 2, wetlands, or steep slopes over 25%.
D. Setbacks. The setback of the small wind energy system shall be
measured from the base of the tower to the nearest property line, public
right-of-way, overhead public utility lines, and other wind turbine
towers a distance of 1.1 times the height of the tower or the highest
point of the wind turbine rotor plane, whichever is higher.
E. Utility notification. No on-grid small wind energy system shall be
installed until evidence has been given to the Borough that the electric
utility company has been notified and has approved the installation of a
small wind energy system.
F. Maintenance, repair, and replacement. The property owner of the small
wind energy system shall be responsible to maintain the small wind
energy system in good operating condition. Such maintenance shall
include, but not be limited to, painting, structural integrity of the
foundation and support structure, the wind turbine, and associated
equipment.
G. Accessory use. Any small wind energy systems shall be considered an
accessory use to the principal building.
H. All equipment for the small wind energy system shall be located on the
same lot as the principal use.
I. Small wind energy systems and associated facilities shall not be used
for telecommunication antennas or telecommunication equipment.
J. There shall be no small wind energy systems allowed in the following:
§ 680-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-211
1:819
(1) Front yard. The front yard shall be measured from the front wall of
a principal structure to the street for which the front wall is
oriented.
(2) Easements.
(3) Street-facing side yard. Street-facing side yard shall be measured
in the same manner as the front yard for the purposes of this
section.
K. All wiring between the wind turbine and any structure shall be buried
blow the surface of the ground.
L. There shall be no more than two freestanding wind turbines allowed
per site. Any additional freestanding wind turbines may be allowed
upon approval by Borough Council, upon recommendation of the
Borough Planning Commission.
M. The design, color and other visual features of small wind energy
systems shall be white, off-white, gray, black or any other color as
approved by Borough Council upon recommendation of the Borough
Planning Commission.
N. All signs, other than the manufacturer's or installer's identification,
appropriate warning signs, or owner identification on a wind generator,
tower, building, or other structure associated with a small wind energy
system shall be prohibited.
O. The area around the tower shall be fenced to prevent humans or
animals from climbing the tower. Any climbing foot pegs or rungs less
than 12 feet above ground level shall be removed or secured to prevent
unauthorized climbing of the tower. All fences shall be installed per
§ 680-51A(1), Fences, of this chapter. [Amended at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
P. The tower height shall be a maximum of 150 feet measured from the
surface of the ground to the highest point of the wind turbine at its
maximum vertical height or highest point of the tower, whichever is
higher. Use of guy wires is prohibited.
Q. Noise and shadow flicker. The regulations set forth within this article
will apply as follows:
(1) Noise. The audible sound from a small wind energy system shall not
exceed 60 dBA, as measured at the property line.
(2) Shadow flicker. The owner of the small wind energy system should
make every attempt to minimize shadow flicker on any adjacent
property.
R. Insurance. Evidence of homeowners' insurance in the amount of
$300,000 for general liability shall be provided to the Borough.
Evidence of the current insurance policy shall be sent to the Borough
§ 680-211 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-211
1:820
§ 680-212. General regulations for solar energy equipment.
each year. The homeowners' policy shall not exclude coverage for small
wind energy systems.
S. Abandonment. If a small wind energy system is inoperable for six
consecutive months, the owner shall be notified. Within three months of
receiving the notice, the owner shall either restore the system to
operating condition or remove it, at the owner's expense.
T. Small wind energy systems may not be artificially lighted, except to
comply with Federal Aviation Administration requirements.
U. Rooftop installation. The installation of a small wind energy system on a
new or existing structure shall be allowed only if the following
standards are met:
(1) The structure can safely support the small wind energy system. The
applicant shall submit sealed documentation to the Borough from a
Pennsylvania-registered design professional certifying that the
structure can handle the additional load(s).
(2) The height of the small wind energy system shall be no higher than
50 feet measured from the surface of the roof to the highest vertical
point of the small wind energy system.
(3) The clearance from the surface of the roof shall be a minimum of 10
feet to the lowest vertical point of the wind turbine except when an
enclosed blade tip system is used. When an enclosed blade system
is used, the system shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's specifications.
(4) There shall be no more than two wind turbines for any site one acre
or less. An additional wind turbine shall be allowed for each
additional half acre.
(5) Setback of the wind turbine shall be measured from the nearest
property line, public right-of-way, and overhead public utility lines a
distance of 1 1/2 times the length from the mounting point on the
structure to the highest vertical point of the wind turbine.
(6) Guy wires may be used and shall be attached to the structure.
A. Setbacks. The setbacks of the solar energy equipment shall comply with
all the setback requirements for accessory structures within the
applicable zoning district.
B. Utility notification. No on-grid solar energy equipment shall be installed
until evidence has been given to Collegeville that the electric utility
company has been notified and has approved the installation of a small
wind energy system and/or solar energy equipment.
§ 680-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-212
1:821
C. Maintenance, repair, and replacement. The property owner of the solar
energy equipment shall be responsible to maintain the solar energy
equipment in good operating condition. Such maintenance shall
include, but not be limited to, painting, structural integrity of the
foundation and support structure, solar panels, and associated
equipment.
D. Accessory use. Solar energy equipment shall be permitted as an
accessory use in any zoning district upon receipt of a permit from the
Zoning Officer.
(1) Exclusions from zoning permit requirement:
(a) The installation of one solar panel with a total area of less than
two square feet.
(b) Repair and replacement of existing solar energy equipment,
provided that there is no expansion of the size or coverage area
of the solar energy equipment.
(2) An applicant who seeks to install solar energy equipment shall
submit an application as provided by the Borough. The application
shall include photographs of the existing conditions of the property
as well as renderings of the proposed solar energy equipment.
E. General standards.
(1) All equipment for the solar energy equipment shall be located on
the same lot as the principal use.
(2) All requirements set forth within the Pennsylvania Uniform
Construction Code.
(3) Solar energy equipment may not be artificially lighted.
(4) Solar energy equipment that uses reflective materials to generate
heat or electricity shall not be permitted.
(5) Solar energy equipment shall be mounted on a roof, or as an
integral part of a structure, such as roof shingles or windows, that
also produce electricity. Ground-mounted solar equipment shall
only be permitted if all roof-mounted solar equipment would be
ineffective. It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate
that roof-mounted solar equipment would be ineffective or
impossible.
(6) The following rules shall apply to the installation of solar panels:
(a) Solar energy equipment, whether roof or ground-mounted,
shall not be conspicuous from adjacent streets. For example,
solar panels directly facing adjacent streets will be considered
to be conspicuous.
§ 680-212 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-212
1:822
§ 680-213. General regulations for geothermal heating/cooling
systems.
(b) Solar energy equipment, whether roof- or ground-mounted
shall be located in the least visibly obtrusive location where
panels would be functional.
(c) Roof-mounted solar energy equipment shall be located on a
rear- or side-facing roof, as seen from the fronting street.
(d) There shall be no solar energy equipment placed on a front- or
street-facing roof unless the applicant can demonstrate that no
other such installation would be effective or is impossible. A
side-facing roof that faces an adjacent street will be considered
a front-facing roof for the purposes of this section with the
same restrictions.
(e) Roof-mounted solar energy equipment shall be installed in the
plane of the roof (flush mounted) or made a part of the roof
design (capping or framing is compatible with the color of the
roof or structure).
(f) Roof-mounted solar energy equipment shall not project
vertically above the peak of the roof to which it is attached, or
project vertically more than six feet above a flat roof.
(g) If the solar equipment is mounted on the ground, the maximum
height of the solar panels shall be no higher than 10 feet from
the surface of the ground.
(h) Ground-mounted solar equipment shall not be permitted in any
front or street-facing yard as established by § 680-211J of this
article.
(i) Ground-mounted solar equipment shall be screened from view
from neighboring residential properties with vegetation or
fencing. Vegetation shall conform to the standards of § 600-53
of Chapter 600, Subdivision and Land Development. The
Borough may waive or reduce these standards if it can be
demonstrated by the applicant that lesser plantings or existing
vegetation adequately screen the solar equipment.
(j) All exterior electrical and/or plumbing lines must be painted in
a color scheme that matches as closely as reasonably possible
the color of the structure and the materials adjacent to the
lines.
(k) Nonfunctioning solar energy equipment shall be repaired or
replaced within six months of becoming nonfunctional.
§ 680-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-213
1:823
A. Accessory use. Geothermal heating/cooling system equipment shall be
permitted as an accessory use in any zoning district upon receipt of a
permit from the Zoning Officer.
(1) Permits. No person shall install, construct, drill, or excavate to
facilitate the construction or installation of a geothermal heating/
cooling system for use as a heating and/or cooling system for a
structure, residential or nonresidential within the Borough without
first obtaining a geothermal heating/cooling system permit from
the Borough. No person shall drill or excavate to repair or modify
or to facilitate the repair or modification of a ground source heat
pump system in the Borough without first obtaining a ground
source heat pump permit.
(2) Fees. All applicants for ground source heat pump permits shall pay
all fees for application and inspection as established by resolution
by Borough Council, from time to time. No application shall be
considered complete and processing of said application shall not
begin until the fee is paid.
(3) The installation specifications and drawings for the geothermal
heating/cooling system shall be submitted to and approved by the
Borough as conforming to industry installation standards, as same
may be amended and updated from time to time.
B. Isolation distances. The installation of closed-loop geothermal
boreholes shall strictly observe the following minimum isolation
distances (setbacks). Any proposed deviation from the following
isolation distances prescribed below must be approved by the Borough
with reasons stated for the deviation.
Pollution Source
Minimum Isolation
Distance
(feet)
Delineated wetlands, floodplains, lakes,
ponds, or other surface waters
10
Storm drains, retention/detention basins,
and similar stormwater facilities
10
Subsurface sewage absorption areas,
elevated sand mounds, cesspools, sewage
seepage pits
50
Septic tanks, aerobic tanks, sewage pump
tanks and holding tanks
25
Preparation area or storage area of
hazardous spray materials, fertilizers,
chemicals, or salt piles
5
§ 680-213 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-213
1:824
Pollution Source
Minimum Isolation
Distance
(feet)
Surface or subsurface containers or tanks
of greater than 1,000 gal. used for storage
of materials that cannot be properly
disposed of by passage through the soil.
This includes, but is not limited to, gasoline
and all other petroleum products.
300
(If borehole is grouted and cased inside
and out)
(150)
Surface or subsurface containers or tanks
of less than 1,000 gal. used for storage of
materials that cannot be properly disposed
of by passage through the soil. This
includes, but is not limited to gasoline and
all other petroleum products. For example,
the type of tank used in homes for storing
oil for heating purposes.
30
Identified NPL site (Superfund) plume area 300
Property lines and all rights-of-way and
easements
10
Any other source or potential source of
pollution
As approved by the
Borough
C. General standards.
(1) Closed-loop systems. All geothermal heating/cooling systems shall
be closed-loop systems. No open-loop systems shall be permitted.
(2) All equipment for the geothermal heating/cooling system shall be
located on the same lot as the principal use.
(3) All plumbing equipment and connections to geothermal heating/
cooling system equipment shall be placed underground. All other
equipment shall be placed entirely within the primary structure, as
conforms to industry standards.
(4) Casings. Casings may be necessary to hold the closed-loop
geothermal borehole open during the drilling process. Casings may
be left in the closed-loop borehole at the discretion of the well
contractor. When a casing is used, grouting the annular space is
required. Grout shall be mixed, pumped and placed in accordance
with industry standards. Acceptable grout materials are as follows:
(a) Neat cement (no more than six gallons of water per ninetyfour-
pound bag of cement).
§ 680-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-213
1:825
(b) High solids clay bentonite grout (not bentonite gel).
(c) A material approved in writing for use by the Borough
Engineer.
(5) Closed-loop geothermal boreholes shall be located, drilled and
finished in a manner that will protect the borehole structure from
damage from surface activities or other natural occurrences so that
the quality of local groundwater cannot be affected.
(6) The geothermal well installation contractor shall be responsible for
insuring that the borehole is drilled in the permitted location.
Deviation from the permitted location must receive prior written
approval from the Borough. The geothermal well installation
contractor shall be responsible for drilling the borehole and the
final backfilling and grouting after the closed-loop pipe loop has
been installed.
(7) All geothermal heating/cooling systems in areas underlain by
carbonate bedrock must be vertical loop systems. If the closed-loop
geothermal borehole penetrates bedrock, it must be grouted from a
depth of 15 feet into the bedrock to the top of the borehole. Outside
carbonate bedrock areas, either vertical or horizontal closed-loop
geothermal heating/cooling systems may be used, subject to the
review and approval of the plans by the Borough.
(8) No geothermal heating/cooling system shall be connected in any
way to any sanitary or stormwater sewage disposal system.
(9) The piping for geothermal heating/cooling systems must be made
of polyethylene or polybutylene or a material approved by the
Borough Engineer.
(10) The pipe loop is to be installed by a geothermal well installation
contractor who is certified in the proper method of heat fusion
specified by the pipe manufacturer. The geothermal well
installation contractor shall be responsible for insuring that the
pipe loop is installed in accordance with the specifications of the
geothermal heating/cooling system manufacturer, the pipe
manufacturer, and that the borehole is properly backfilled.
Backfilling shall be according to the specifications of the
geothermal heating/cooling system equipment manufacturer. When
sand is the specified backfill material, the borehole shall be
constructed in the same manner as a water supply well. A casing is
required to be used and the annular space is required to be
grouted.
(11) Only water or fluids conforming to industry standards may be used
as the circulating fluid for geothermal heating/cooling systems,
unless a similar fluid is approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 680-213 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-213
1:826
(12)Well installation. The geothermal well installation contractor shall
provide to the Borough before activation of the ground source heat
pump the following:
(a) Accurate written records and a written geologic log.
(b) Accurate records with respect to grouting for each well.
(c) As-built plans and related documentation for each system and
well location. Trace wire shall also be provided to identify the
location of all wells and piping.
(d) Written documentation of the geothermal heating/cooling
system testing and certification.
(e) Written plan for the operation of the geothermal heating/
cooling system (which meets the specifications of the
manufacturer of the system equipment).
(13) Maintenance of geothermal heating/cooling system.
(a) All geothermal heating/cooling systems shall be properly
maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's
specifications and any regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and/or any federal
regulations.
(b) Any owner of a lot upon which a geothermal heating/cooling
system is installed shall be responsible for maintaining the
system.
(c) If a geothermal heating/cooling system malfunctions, the
person responsible for the maintenance of the system shall
take all action necessary to repair, modify, or alter the system
to eliminate the malfunction within three months of the
malfunction.
(d) Any geothermal heating/cooling system leaks or releases will
be reported by the applicant (and subsequent owners) to the
Borough with 24 hours of the discovery of same, and the
applicant (and subsequent owners) covenants and agrees to
take all appropriate action to minimize any fluid release to the
ground and promptly repair any system leak.
(e) In the event of the proposed discontinuance of the geothermal
heating/cooling system, a system closure plan will be prepared
and submitted to the Borough for its removal.
(f) If a geothermal heating/cooling system is inoperable for six
consecutive months, the owner shall be notified. Within three
months of receiving the notice, the owner shall either restore
the system to operating condition or remove it, at the owner's
expense. The heat transfer fluid must be removed by a
§ 680-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 680-213
1:827
displacement with grout. The top of the borehole must be
uncovered and capped with grout.
§ 680-213 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § 680-213
1:828
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1985 Code to 2018 Code
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
NLP = New legislation is pending.
N/A = Not applicable; no legislation existed in the prior publication
Chapter/Title From 1985 Code Location in 2018 Code
Part 1, Introduction
Ch. 1, Use and Construction of the Code
Sections 1-1001, 1-1003 through 1-1007,
and 1-1009
NLP
Sections 1-1002 and 1-1008 Ch. 1, Art. I
Part 2, Administration and Government
Ch. 1, Elected Officials
Art. A, Compensation of Elected Officers
(Reserved)
N/A
Art. B, Council Organization and
Procedures
Ch. 11, Art. I
Ch. 2, Appointed Officials
Art. A, Borough Manager Ch. 126
Art. B, Other Appointed Officials
(Reserved)
N/A
Ch. 3, Authorities, Boards and Commissions
Art. A, Authorities Ch. 25, Art. I
Art. B, Planning Commission
Sections 2-3011 through 2-3014 Ch. 154, Art. I
Section 2-3015 Ch. 154, Art. II
Art. C, Shade Tree Commission Ch. 184
Art. D, Central Perkiomen Valley Regional
Planning Commission
Superseded by Ord. No.
512
Ch. 4, Pensions, Retirement and Social
Security
Art. A, Social Security for Employees and
Officers
NCM
Art. B, Firemen's Relief Ch. 147, Art. I
§ 680-213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:829
Chapter/Title From 1985 Code Location in 2018 Code
Art. C, Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System
Superseded by Ord. Nos.
487 and 557
Art. D, Police Pensions Repealed by Ord. No. 540
Ch. 5, Employee Regulations and Benefits
(Reserved)
N/A
Ch. 6, Intergovernmental Cooperation NCM
Part 3, Financial Administration
Ch. 1, General Provisions
Section 3-1001 Ch. 196, Art. I
Section 3-1002 Ch. 612, Art. II
Sections 3-1003 through 3-1005 Ch. 18
Ch. 2, Taxation
Art. A, Real Estate Tax NCM
Art. B, Amusement Device Tax Ch. 612, Art. III
Art. C, Earned Income and Net Profits
Sections 3-2041 through 3-2060 Ch. 612, Art. I
Sections 3-2061 through 3-2075 NCM
Art. D, Real Estate Transfer Tax Ch. 612, Art. IV
Art. E, Emergency and Municipal Services
Tax
Repealed by Ord. No. 532
Ch. 3, Investments Ch. 120
Part 4, Franchises
Ch. 1, Electric NCM
Ch. 2, Gas NCM
Ch. 3, Sewer
Sections 4-3001 and 4-3002 Ch. 25, Art. II
Section 4-3003 Ch. 550, Art. III
Ch. 4, Telephone NCM
Ch. 5, Television Ch. 259
Part 5, Health and Sanitation
Ch. 1, Administration (Reserved) N/A
Ch. 2, Abandoned Articles Superseded by Ord. No.
552
Ch. 3, Animals and Fowl
Art. A, Animal Control Officer Ch. 230, Art. II
Art. B, Restrictions on Keeping Certain
Animals
Ch. 230, Art. III
§ DT-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § DT-1
1:830
Chapter/Title From 1985 Code Location in 2018 Code
Art. C, Riding and Driving Horses and
Horse-Drawn Vehicles
Ch. 230, Art. I
Art. D, Curbing of Dogs Ch. 230, Art. IV
Ch. 4, Grass, Weeds, and Other Vegetation Ch. 667
Ch. 5, Individual and Community Sewage
Systems
Ch. 550, Art. II
Ch. 6, Solid Waste
Art. A, Borough-Administered Solid Waste
Collection and Disposal
Ch. 565, Art. I
Art. B, Waste Reduction and Recycling Ch. 565, Art. II
Art. C, Western Montgomery County Waste
Flow System
Ch. 565, Art. III
Part 6, Licenses, Permits and General
Business Regulations
Ch. 1, Code Enforcement and Building
Regulations
Art. A, Uniform Construction Code Ch. 270
Art. B, Flood Damage Controls
Subarticle 1, Flood Damage Control
Regulations
Ch. 345, Art. I
Subarticle 2, Supplemental Provisions
and Definitions
Ch. 345, Art. II
Art. C, Plumbing Code Ch. 472, Art. II
Art. D, Water Conservation Plumbing
Fixtures
Ch. 472, Art. I
Art. E, Fire Prevention Code Ch. 330
Art. F, Property Maintenance Code Ch. 495, Art. I
Ch. 2, Business Licensing and Regulation
Art. A, Public Amusements and Gatherings Ch. 222
Art. B, Blasting Operations and Use of
Explosives
Ch. 241
Art. C, Outside Storage of Motor Vehicles Ch. 648
Art. D, Rental Dwelling Occupancy Ch. 523, Art. I
Art. E, Self-Service Gasoline Stations Ch. 537
Art. F, Solicitations: Religious and
Charitable
Superseded by Ord. No.
547
Art. G, House-to-House Solicitors and
Vendors; Street Vendors
Superseded by Ord. No.
547
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:831
Chapter/Title From 1985 Code Location in 2018 Code
Art. H, Poles, Wires, Cables and Manhole
Covers
Ch. 481
Art. I, Group Residence Facilities Ch. 353
Art. J, Newsboxes, Kiosks, and Dispensers Ch. 419
Part 7, Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Ch. 1, Motor Vehicles
Art. A, General Regulations Ch. 640
Art. B, Traffic Regulations Ch. 640
Art. C, Parking Regulations Ch. 640
Art. D, Parking: Fire Lanes and Temporary
Fire Regulations
Ch. 321
Art. E, On-Street Metered Parking
(Reserved)
N/A
Art. F, Off-Street Metered Parking
(Reserved)
N/A
Art. G, Off-Street Unmetered Parking
(Reserved)
N/A
Ch. 2, Pedalcycles Ch. 640
Ch. 3, Pedestrians Ch. 640
Part 8, Offenses and Nuisances
Ch. 1, Offenses
Art. A, Tampering with or Injury to
Property
Ch. 502
Art. B, Weapons and Missiles Ch. 313
Art. C, Curfew for Minors Ch. 279
Art. D, Transportation and Use of
Alcoholic Beverages
Ch. 215
Ch. 2, Nuisances Ch. 427
Ch. 3, Sexual Offender Residency
Restrictions
Repealed by Ord. No. 551
Part 9, Parks and Recreation
Ch. 1, Establishment and Naming of Parks
and Recreation Places (Reserved)
N/A
Ch. 2, Rules and Regulations for Parks and
Recreation Places
Ch. 449
Part 10, Public Safety
Ch. 1, Fire Prevention, Fire Protection and
Fire-Damaged Structures
§ DT-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § DT-1
1:832
Chapter/Title From 1985 Code Location in 2018 Code
Art. A, Fire Prevention Ch. 337
Art. B, Fire Protection Ch. 73
Art. C, Fire-Damaged Structures Ch. 367, Art. I
Art. D, Emergency Cost Reimbursement Ch. 367, Art. II
Ch. 2, Police Protection
Art. A, Establishment and Organization of
Police Department
Ch. 161, Art. I
Art. B, Police Cooperative Agreements NCM
Part 11, Public Services and Improvements
Ch. 1, Sanitary Sewers
Art. A, Definitions Ch. 550, Art. I
Art. B, Use of Public Sewers Required Ch. 550, Art. I
Art. C, Building Sewers and Connections Ch. 550, Art. I
Art. D, Rules and Regulations Governing
Building Sewers and Connections to
Sewers
Ch. 550, Art. I
Art. E, Enforcement and Purpose Ch. 550, Art. I
Art. F, Direct and Indirect Contributions
Into Wastewater Collection and Treatment
System; Enforcement, Administration and
Permits
Superseded by Ord. No.
536
Ch. 2, Water Supply Ch. 659
Part 12, Streets and Sidewalks
Ch. 1, Streets NCM
Ch. 2, Sidewalks
Art. A, Sidewalk and Curb Location,
Construction and Repair
Ch. 592, Art. I
Art. B, Snow and Ice on Sidewalks Ch. 592, Art. II
Ch. 3, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. A, Openings and Excavations Within
Street Right of Way
Ch. 592, Art. III
Art. B, Trees and Shrubs Along Streets
and Sidewalks
Ch. 621
Part 13, Subdivision and Land Development Ch. 600
Part 14, Zoning Ch. 680
Appendix
I-A. Maximum Speed Limits on Streets Ch. 640
I-B. Traffic Signal Locations Ch. 640
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:833
Chapter/Title From 1985 Code Location in 2018 Code
I-C. Intersections Where Turns Prohibited on
Red Signal
Ch. 640
I-D. One-Way Streets Ch. 640
I-E. Intersections Where Turns Prohibited or
Restricted
Ch. 640
I-F. No-Passing Zones Ch. 640
I-G. Through Highways Ch. 640
I-H. Stop Intersections Ch. 640
I-I. Yield-Right-of-Way Intersections Ch. 640
I-J. Streets Where Vehicle Weight Limits in
Force
Ch. 640
I-K. Streets Where Truck Traffic is
Restricted
Ch. 640
I-L. Snow and Ice Emergency Routes Ch. 640
II-A. Locations Where Parking is Prohibited
at All Times
Ch. 640
II-B. Locations Where Parking is Prohibited
Certain Days and Hours
Ch. 640
II-C. Locations Where Parking Time is
Limited Certain Days and Hours
Ch. 640
II-D. Special Purpose Parking Zones Ch. 640
III-A. On-Street Metered Parking Zones N/A
III-B. Off-Street Metered Parking Zones N/A
III-C. Off-Street Unmetered Parking Zones N/A
IV-A. Sidewalks Where Riding and Parking
Pedalcycles is Prohibited
Ch. 640
IV-B. Pedestrian Crossing Signals Ch. 640
IV-C. Pedestrian Crossing Restrictions Ch. 640
V. Agreements and Contracts N/A, consisted of a listing
of legislation
VI, Boundary Changes N/A, consisted of a listing
of legislation
VII, Fiscal Affairs N/A, consisted of a listing
of legislation
VIII, Governmental and Intergovernmental
Affairs
N/A, consisted of a listing
of legislation
IX, Plan Approval N/A, consisted of a listing
of legislation
§ DT-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § DT-1
1:834
Chapter/Title From 1985 Code Location in 2018 Code
X, Public Property N/A, consisted of a listing
of legislation
XI, Sewers and Sewage Disposal N/A, consisted of a listing
of legislation
XII, Streets and Sidewalks N/A, consisted of a listing
of legislation
XIII, Water System N/A, consisted of a listing
of legislation
XIV, Watercourses (Reserved) N/A
XV, Zoning Amendments (Reserved) N/A
XVI, Zoning, Prior Ordinances N/A, consisted of a listing
of legislation
XVII - XX (Reserved) N/A
XXI, Ordinances, Resolutions, and Parts of
Ordinances Repealed by Code-Adopting
Ordinance
N/A
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
528 4-4-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 640
529 6-6-2007 Intergovernmental
cooperation: Central
Perkiomen Valley
Regional Planning
Commission matters
and ICIA
NCM
530 Not adopted
531 6-6-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 680
532 11-7-2007 Taxation: local
services tax
Ch. 612, Art. V
533 11-7-2007 Tax rate for 2008 NCM
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:835
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
534 Not adopted
535 3-5-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 640
536 9-3-2008 Sewers: wastewater
pretreatment
Ch. 550, Art. IV
537 3-4-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 680
537A 12-3-2008 Tax rate for 2009 NCM
538 8-5-2009 Intergovernmental
agreement: negotiate
model agreement with
Comcast Cable
Communications
NCM
539 12-2-2009 Tax rate for 2010 NCM
540 1-4-2010 Pensions: Police
Retirement Plan
Ch. 147, Art. II
541 2-3-2010 Pensions: Police
Retirement Plan
amendment
NCM
542 10-6-2010 Pensions: Police
Retirement Plan
amendment
NCM
543 12-1-2010 Tax rate for 2011 NCM
544 12-1-2010 Vacant buildings Ch. 248
545 1-5-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 680
546 2-2-2011 Franchise agreement:
Comcast of Southeast
Pennsylvania, LLC
NCM
547 4-6-2011 Peddling and
soliciting; transient
vendors
Ch. 461
548 5-4-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 680
549 5-4-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 640
550 6-1-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 680
551 10-5-2011 Sex offender
residency restrictions
repealer
Repealer only
552 11-2-2011 Property
maintenance: storage
of junked or discarded
articles
Ch. 495, Art. II
§ DL-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:836
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
553 12-7-2011 Tax rate for 2012 NCM
554 12-5-2012 Tax rate for 2013 NCM
555 1-3-2013 Municipal claims and
liens
Ch. 401
556 2-6-2013 Water amendment Ch. 659
557 5-1-2013 Pensions: Municipal
Pension Plan
Ch. 147, Art. III
558 7-3-2013 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
559 7-3-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 680
560 11-6-2013 Peddling and
soliciting; transient
vendors amendment
Ch. 461
561 11-6-2013 Fire lanes amendment Ch. 321
562 11-6-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 640
563 12-4-2013 Tax rate for 2014 NCM
564 12-4-2013 Intermunicipal
agreement for water
NCM
565 12-30-2013 Intermunicipal
agreement for water
NCM
566 2-5-2014 Accepting dedication
of right-of-way
NCM
567 3-5-2014 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 600
568 3-5-2014 Stormwater
management
Ch. 580
569 7-9-2014 Subdivision and land
development
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 600; Ch. 680
570 12-3-2014 Tax rate for 2015 NCM
571 5-6-2015 Water amendment Ch. 659
572 8-5-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 640
573 8-5-2015 Accepting dedication
of right-of-way
NCM
574 12-2-2015 Borrowing for capital
projects
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:837
Ord. No. Adoption Date Subject Disposition
575 12-2-2015 Tax rate for 2016 NCM
576 12-2-2015 Sewers: wastewater
pretreatment
amendment; water
amendment
Ch. 550, Art. IV; Ch.
659
577 12-2-2015 Accepting dedication
of right-of-way
NCM
578 3-2-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 680
579 8-3-2016 Incurring nonelectoral
debt
NCM
580 12-7-2016 Tax rate for 2017 NCM
581 1-4-2017 Intergovernmental
cooperation:
Montgomery County
SWAT - Western
Region
NCM
582 6-7-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 640
583 6-7-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 680
584 11-1-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 680
585 12-6-2017 Tax Rate for 2018;
Appropriation
NCM
586 4-4-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 680
587 4-4-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 640
588 7-7-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 640
589 9-5-2018 General Provisions:
Adoption of Code
Ch. 1, Art. II
590 9-5-2018 Intergovernmental
Agreement
NCM
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
591 10-3-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 640 2
592 12-5-2018 Tax Rate NCM 2
593 3-20-2019 Animals: Control of
Animal Defecation on
Public and Private
Property
Ch. 230, Art.
V
2
§ DL-1 COLLEGEVILLE CODE § DL-1
1:838
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
594 3-20-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 659 2
595 6-5-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 659 2
596 7-10-2019 Intergovernment Real
Property Conveyances
NCM 2
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:839